Pro file BHARTI KHER

QUEEN OFTHE BINDIS
Her use of the stick-on bindi is the stuff of legend. Bharti Kher now forays into new territory, brand promotions.
By S. Kalidas

harti Kher, the bindi queen, has had an elephantine success. No, we are not going to count the zeros on the latest auction price of her most wondrous sculpture of an elephant collapsed on the floor with sperm shaped bindis covering its skin titled The Skin Speaks a Language Not Its Own. What is of more significance is the process of her arrival on the contemporary global art circuit over the last couple of years with much acclaimed exhibitions in New York (Jack Shainman Gallery 2009), New Delhi (Nature Morte 2010), London (Hauser & Wirth 2011) and Paris (Gallerie Perrotin 2011). And with celebrity comes commerce: recently Absolut vodka has roped her in to make a limited edition of bindi-studded bottles to help promote the brand. British by birth and upbringing and Indian by choice and marriage, at 42 Kher has emerged as one of India's most enigmatic conceptual artists. But this no-nonsense woman of art is not easy to slot. Most widely known for her use of the ubiquitous industrially produced stick-it-on bindi in a wide range of ways and works, Kher's eclectic imagination spans and references a wide range of art historical contexts-- from 15th century Dutch painters to surrealism and Dada--and materialises in sculptures of animal forms of

B

macabre beauty or in arrangements of objects, usually furniture, tea sets and clothes, in installations of uneasy and precarious disquiet. Trained as a painter in London and Newcastle, Kher arrived in India in 1992 within two years of her BA degree. "I was 23 and needed to get away, be on my own... and find my voice in a sense," she says, as we stroll up and down the three flights of her factory-turnedstudio in Gurgaon's Udyog Vihar. "I was always disciplined about work but needed the opportunity and space to grow as an artist, and India provided me that springboard," she says recalling her early years. Actually, it provided a lot more than just that. It not only gave her a springboard as an artist but it also gave her a husband. "I first saw her at the Garhi Studios in south Delhi one afternoon and from that moment I knew I had to marry her," says Subodh Gupta, her much celebrated artist husband. Their worlds could not have been more different at that point in time: Kher's parents were rich Punjabi immigrants to Britain and she had a privileged upbringing. Gupta, by contrast, was the archetypal struggling artist from a small town in Bihar but bursting with talent. They were married within a year. And with marriage came the bindi and the children: son Omi and daughter Lola. Though she never wears the bindi herself, Kher was intrigued by the

BHARTI KHER AT HER STUDIO IN GURGAON
VIKRAM SHARMA /www.indiatodayimages.com

socio-cultural dynamic between its religious/ritual significance and its mass commoditisation on one hand, and on the other, saw the myriad possibilities of its use in making artworks. Over time, the humble bindi became for Kher paint, brush and palette. "I look everywhere and copy everyone. I am like a magpie that takes what it needs and turns an old shiny button into a beacon," she declares in

an interview. In Kher's hands, the bindi evolved into both a language and a `mark', a Kherism. Leaving aside her recent bindi works, there are at least two or three more distinct streams of works that complete her opus. One is figurative drawing or sculpture as seen in the macabre beauty of her humanoid and animal forms. This is best found in works like The Hunter and The Prophet

where the cat woman in mini-skirt and high boots displays a skinned carcass as trophy. There are also Arione and Arione's Sister--space-age humanoid women. Then there is her grotesque menagerie of machine and mammalian hybrids like the vacuum cleaner-thatbecomes-a-dog in Hungry Dogs Eat Dirty Pudding. Besides, there is the stream of works that comprise bindi-laid animal sculptures like Rudolf

I look everywhere and copy everyone. I am like a magpie that takes what it needs and turns an old shiny button into a beacon.
60
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

and Bambi (and now the much famous bindi-studded elephant). Kher is also a scenographer of sorts. She makes what I like to read as her mise-en-scènes. These are elaborately constructed installations using props like furniture, cutlery, teapots and cups, newspapers and clothing. Her earlier tea ceremonies comprised a table laid out with lace crochet table cloth and china for tea with snacks made in ceramic. But wait. In a cup, there is hair; the teapot is encrusted with old dentures; the chairs are balanced on stacked newspapers and there is broken china to top the cake. These installation works like Another Strange Encounter and The Girl with the Hairy Lip Said No have a mysterious eeriness that call to my mind Agatha Christie novels. So who would she rather be--Miss Marple or Lady Macbeth? "Probably both, by turns," she laughs. Her more recent installations have elaborately crafted wood chambers and staircases tied together sometimes, sometimes lazily piled or sometimes carefully placed, sometimes as if defying gravity. But all strung with a sari sometimes twisted and roped, sometimes formally hung out. There is this piece from her last show in Paris that was titled The Night She Left, it comprised a staircase across which a sari is laid out, twisted taut. So is there a conscious engagement with femininity in all or most of Kher's works? Perhaps yes but she says she has never considered herself a feminist. "I have not read Germaine Greer as yet," she dryly remarks. But Kher is a reader. And a reader of a most eclectic and disparate assortment of books, magazines and journals. So engaging with texts has also been one of her vocations. A most evolved example of this is seen in her recent work titled Sing To Them That Will Listen. The work comprises a Tibetan singing bowl filled with rice grains, each engraved with words taken from matrimonial advertisements published in newspapers on the day she was born. The Bindi Queen can turn witchgoddess with a flick of her imaginative wand. More power to her mind. 

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

