Nei ghbours PAKISTAN

BENAZIR'S SUPPORTERS AT HER FOURTH DEATH ANNIVERSARY, IN ISLAMABAD
AP

WHERE ARE BENAZIR'S KILLERS?
The beloved PPP leader's loyalists seethe at her husband's failure to find her assassins
idway through President Asif Ali Zardari's speech on December 27 to observe the fourth death anniversary of the assassination of his wife Benazir Bhutto, a Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) activist slashed himself with a blade. The activist, Abdul Ghafoor Memon, 35, succumbed to his injuries in hospital, but his taunts before the thousands of mourners in Bhutto's hometown, Garhi Khuda Bakhsh in Larkana, Sindh, are probably echoing in Zardari's ears. "Despite a PPP government, Benazir's murderers have not been arrested. It's time to meet her in heaven and narrate how Zardari is not arresting her killers," Memon screamed. Anger and frustration have crept into the ranks of the PPP, many of whom say their government has done nothing to track down Bhutto's killers. The police arrested seven people--two police officers and five militants, including Sher Zaman, Aitzaz Shah, Hasnain

M

Gull and Rafaqat Hussain. An anti-terrorism court on November 5, 2010, indicted all of them. Currently, the two police officers are out on bail. The five militants are still in jail in Rawalpindi. A Scotland Yard forensic team, called in by then president Pervez Musharraf in January 2008, attributed the cause of death to blunt force trauma. Bhutto was tossed by the force of an explosion at her December 27, 2007 rally in Sindh and her head hit the sunroof of the vehicle she was in. A UN report released on July 1, 2009, following an investigation at the Pakistan government's request, held the government responsible for providing insufficient and ineffective security to Bhutto. The investigation failed to identify the masterminds behind the assassination but concluded that her death could have been avoided had proper security measures been in place. The report questioned the actions of the Pakistani Police and

" It's amazing that the PPP, despite all the mandate and power, has yet to identify and arrest the killers of Bhutto. They aren't interested in solving this mystery." NAWAZ SHARIF, FORMER PRIME MINISTER

claimed they lied to the Scotland Yard forensic team assisting the probe. Interior Minister Rehman Malik, a former Bhutto aide, has parroted the view held by Musharraf's government, blaming Pakistani Taliban leader Baitullah Mehsud for Bhutto's assassination. Mehsud, killed in a US drone strike in August 2009, denied it, citing a tribal code that prohibits them from attacking women. Nothing substantive has emerged to prove the theory. Pakistan's political circles are surprised at the way Bhutto's widower husband tried to shift blame. Zardari, who calls the shots in the PPP as cochairman, lashed out at the higher judiciary for the delay in the proceedings of her murder case. Opposition Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz) leader Nawaz Sharif is drawing political mileage from the issue. "It's amazing that the PPP, despite all the mandate and power, has yet to identify and arrest Bhutto's killers. They aren't interested in solving this mystery," he said in Lahore. At a rally in the PPP heartland of Larkana in Sindh in the last week of December, Sharif promised to arrest Bhutto's killers if he came to power. That would be ironic. by Qaswar Abbas

NEW

