Int erview

PRANAB MUKHERJEE
and doing the best we can. We have tried to liberalise FDI in retail and would like to build the required consensus to implement it. Similarly, we hope to follow on our legislative initiatives in the financial sector. We have introduced the new manufacturing policy which has to be given the required thrust. We will bridge policy and regulatory gaps. With better macroeconomic environment, all these steps will help in boosting investors' confidence. Q. Would you agree that the Government has not done enough to invest in agriculture and boost supply? A. First, you must recognise that agriculture is a state subject. We can, at best, only facilitate the process. Having said that, I would like to draw the attention to the measures that have been announced in the last two Union Budgets. States have to come forward and draw benefit from the initiatives launched by the Centre in order to better manage our food supply chain. Major initiatives launched through the Union Budgets of 2010-11 and 2011-12 include extension of the green revolution to the eastern region of the country, enhancing production of edible oils, pulses, milk, coarse cereals and vegetable production, among others. That these measures have had positive impact can be seen from the inflation figures for cereals and pulses over the last two years. Q. What is your assessment of the economic scenario in Europe and the US? How worried should India be about an adverse fallout in 2012? A. The slowdown in US and the sovereign debt crises in the Eurozone area will have some impact on India's shortterm prospects. These would be mainly through slowdown in global trade and uncertainty in capital flows. However, our economic fundamentals, including the recent diversifications in our export baskets and export destinations, should help us manage these global consequences. Our domestic growth drivers are largely intact, growth in consumption demand is being sustained around 6 per cent, though we would like to see some improvement in corporate investments in the coming months. That should happen with inflation moderating and the monetary policy becoming accommodative. Q. Is the Congress party convinced about the need for economic reform? What is your message to those who doubt the process of reforms in the Congress? Will you reach out to the BJP and other opposition parties? A. Congress party stands for reforms that strengthen our economic fundamentals for sustaining high growth and inclusive development over the medium- to long-term. In a democracy, we have to respect the mandate given to us by the public. If this mandate is to build a consensus, then so be it, even if it takes time. I have great faith in our institutions and the parliamentary practices that we have built over the years. I am hopeful that we will make progress when we get the opportunity to work together with colleagues across the party line. Q. What is your message to consumers and business as we enter 2012? A. The New Year is here, it will bring happiness and prosperity to all. 

"NewYear will bring happiness"
The vital indicators of the Indian economy suggest that it is in poor health at the start of 2012 but Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee remains optimistic about a turnaround this year. Mukherjee answers questions from Deputy Editor DHIRAJ NAYYAR where he defends the Government's willingness to reform and blames an adverse external environment for many of the economy's problems. Q. Economic growth slowed sharply in 2011. Are you more optimistic about 2012? A. Yes. I expect the domestic factors to contribute to a better growth performance. Both investment demand and consumption demand should improve as monetary policy becomes accommodative with inflation declining to more acceptable levels. If external factors also contribute favourably, we should rapidly recover the loss in growth momentum seen in the current year. Q. There is a view that policy paralysis has hobbled investment sentiment. Outward FDI from India in 2011 is much higher than inward FDI. Your response? A. I do not agree with this view. A growth of 7 to 7.5 per cent in the current global context is not bad at all by any standards. Indeed, we should take pride in the strong fundamentals of our economy and that we continue to be among the top fast-growing economies in the world. There has been some slowdown in investment growth. It is because of weak global cues, tight monetary policy and on account of some domestic uncertainty. We are committed to pursuing reforms and we should be able to make progress in enacting the required legislations underpinning policy action in certain sectors as soon as the current circumstances permit us to take the next steps. As regards FDI, the available statistics show that during the period April-September 2010, the FDI inflows were $11 billion (Rs 55,000 crore), whereas for the same period in 2011, the figure is $25.8 billion (Rs 1,29,000 crore). The net FDI inflows were $7.2 billion (Rs 36,000 crore) in AprilJune 2011 for which the data is currently available. Q. Are you satisfied with the RBI's management of inflation and the exchange rate? A. For the most part of 2010-11 and 2011-12, inflation has remained persistently much above acceptable levels and the RBI's comfort zone. As a result, over the past 20 months, the RBI has raised policy interest rates with a view to give a strong signal to moderate inflation and check inflationary expectations. Medium-term concerns on growth require that we bring it down to a more acceptable level at the earliest. The exchange rate fluctuations seen in the past few months is primarily due to developments in the Eurozone countries which has seen US dollar gain ground against most currencies. RBI's approach has been to allow the markets to determine the exchange rate while intervening only to manage unusual volatility. I support this approach. We need to allow the exchange rate movements to absorb the shocks emanating from the external sector, while maintaining a stable reserve position to improve market confidence in the domestic economy. Q. The corporate sector is worried about its foreign debt obligations after the 20 per cent decline in the rupee. Are their concerns justified? A. Yes, to some extent, in the short-term. I am confident that progress in the resolution of the Eurozone sovereign debt issues and the strength of our economic fundamentals should see the rupee recover ground in the coming months. Q. The fiscal deficit for 2011-12 is estimated to be 1 percentage point higher than you had estimated in your Budget speech. Is this a worry? The last two years of a government's term in office usually involve high spending. How will you rein it in? A. First of all, it would not be correct to say that estimated fiscal deficit is higher by 1 percentage point as the fiscal year is not yet over. Yes, there are some concerns on the possible slippage in our indicated fiscal balance for 2011-12. However, I am committed to pursuing the path of fiscal consolidation and we will strive to do our best in the coming months and years through better revenue mobilisation and expenditure rationalisation. Q. Even other macroeconomic indicators are a problem, like the growing current account deficit. There is an impression that the macroeconomy is being mismanaged. How concerned are you? A. We must recognise that in a globalised world, we cannot remain insulated from external developments. India's trade performance in the current year has been robust, surpassing pre-crisis export levels and pre-crisis export growth trends. We have diversified our export baskets and our export destinations. In the first half of the year 2011-12, growth in exports was 52 per cent and in imports by 32.4 per cent. But slowdown in the global trade will also affect us and even put some pressure on the current account balance. However, I do not foresee any financing concerns. Inflation is moderating and indications are that growth is likely to pick up in the remaining period of this year. The macroeconomic variables will hopefully be better in the second half of the year than in the first half. Q. What are your priorities for 2012? A. Recovering the growth momentum with better price stability. Q. Do you think the finance ministry can do more to inspire confidence and boost investor sentiment? A. We are monitoring the situation

"

"

We should take pride that we continue to be among the top fast-growing economies in the world.

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

27

