Signature
R O U G H

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

HOLLYWOOD'S NEW BEST FRIEND
n January last year, The New York Times wrote a story about how Manmohan Singh I was lauded abroad and besieged at home. Even as late as December, when his decision on FDI in retail was being criticised by his own party for "bad timing", the newspaper called him a modernist. In October, the Blavatnik School of Governance at Oxford was telling us how he was a "visionary" and "an inspiration to our endeavours". The Government carefully gathers these scraps and carries them like badges of honour. Privately, every minister will say how they cannot understand why the Indian media is so "negative", when growth is 8 per cent, when a big ticket social reform is underway, and when Indian entrepreneurs are seemingly taking over the world. Screaming anchors, skeptical editors and Anna wannabes cannot seem to understand the plain truth according to them. That the narrative of India still holds a powerful attraction. At least for the outside world. Sadly, only Hollywood is listening to them. The latest surprise global blockbuster in a year of doom and gloom has a starring role for an energetic India. The climax of Mission: Impossible - Ghost Protocol takes place in a Mumbai car park, where one BMW crashes into another. A critical scene takes place at a party, again in Mumbai, where a telecommunications tycoon--who hasn't heard of 2G and who's made money because he bought a defunct Russian military satellite--flounces about selecting mobiles from an array on a silver tray, drinking vast amounts of champagne and inviting Western women to see his erotic paintings. When Tom Cruise's car hits the streets of Mumbai, it doesn't run over the tired, the hungry or poor but competes for space with brightly dressed men and women going about what appears to be festive business. Of course, that's because it's not shot in actual Mumbai. The king of the dark world, Michael Winterbottom, has made a new Hollywood movie Trishna, which sets off the rise of the poor Indian heroine (it's based on Thomas Hardy's late 19th century novel Tess of the D'Urbervilles) against the ultra modern world of luxe hospitality and louche Bollywood. It's the same for Cities, yet another big Hollywood movie featuring Anil Kapoor which is based in three great financial centres of the world, London, New York and Mumbai. India the unchanging is being seen as the land of mobility and opportunity. Once adored only by genteel Indophiles, it is now the land for careerists. The soft power is now hard cash. Is it the Anil Ambani effect? The Americans are rarely rude to those who fund their movies. Ever since Ambani bailed out America's most successful commercial filmmaker Steven Spielberg, cash-strapped Hollywood studios like MGM have been eyeing India. The sense of the nation abroad is quite different from how the nation perceives itself at home. The Government would like to shoot the media. So would its friends. As the august Amartya Sen said: "The gains of those who have done well are, of course, positive achievements, and there is nothing wrong in celebrating their better lives. But an exaggerated concentration on their lives, fed partly by media interest, gives an unreal picture of the rosiness of what is happening to Indians in general, and this does not help a broader public dialogue." Luckily for the Government, the Tom Cruises of the world are not going by what the Government does. They're going by what the Government says. 

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

AMERICANS ARE RARELY RUDE TO THOSE WHO FUND THEIR MOVIES. EVER SINCE ANIL AMBANI BAILED OUT AMERICA'S MOST SUCCESSFUL COMMERCIAL FILMMAKER STEVEN SPIELBERG, CASH-STRAPPED HOLLYWOOD STUDIOS LIKE MGM HAVE BEEN EYEING INDIA.

SIGNPOSTS
HONOURED India-born Venkatraman Ramakrishnan,58, whose pioneering work in molecular biology won him the 2009 Nobel Prize in

chemistry, has been honoured with a knighthood from Buckingham Palace in a rare recognition of achievements by foreigners based in Britain. BOOKED Rajesh Choudhary, recipient of an Arjuna Award and winner of bronze medals in sailing at the 2002 Busan

and 2006 Doha Asian Games, for allegedly murdering his wife Bandana. An FIR against Rajesh and six others, including his mother, was lodged by Bandana's brother. CLEARED Direct investment by foreign nationals in the Indian stock market, in a bid to attract

more funds and reduce market volatility. RESIGNED WHATMORE Dav Whatmore, as Kolkata Knight Riders' coach, in order to join as the Pakistan cricket team's national coach.

RAMAKRISHNAN

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

17

NEW

