SIMPLY DELHI

Elsewhere KOLKATA The Kolkata Store
A showcase of Bengal and its crafts, the store houses water-colour paintings, postcards, landscape portraits, notebooks, and shirts. The products here have drawings of cityscapes by artist Samir Biswas which capture the essence of Kolkata. Other products on offer include decorative pieces in terracotta, and dokra (a metal craft). Where: City Centre, Salt Lake Tel: 09903090424 Cost: Postcards for Rs 10 and T-shirts for Rs 240.

Out and About
BANGALORE

HEADING OUT? THEN TRY THESE PLACES

PUNJAB Virasat-e-Khalsa
When in Punjab, visit Virasat-e-Khalsa, a Rs 350-crore museum which depicts the history and culture of Punjab. Built on 100 acres, it includes elements like phulkari, miniature art, puppets, embroideries and appliqué work that reflect the essence of Punjab. The museum provides a stunning panoramic view of a day's life in Punjab and the struggles faced by the last five gurus in establishing the Panth. Audio guides are available in Hindi, English and Punjabi. Where: Anandpur Sahib, Rupnagar District virasatekhalsa.in

PUNE Kayani Bakery
Your trip to Pune is incomplete if you don't taste Kayani's famous Shrewsbury biscuits (buttery and sweet). It's one of the few places where you are likely to see customers even at 7 am. Also try their flaky khaari, sourdough bread and nankhatai. Where: 6, Dr Koyaji Road, East Street, Camp, Opposite Victory Cinema, MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com Camp Tel: 020 26360517
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Angsana
Once you are done with your day, unwind at Angsana spa. Go for their authentic Thai massage, Angsana massage or Fusion massage (combination of Thai and Swedish massage techniques). There are also relaxation areas where you can recline in lounge chairs while sipping some jasmine tea. Where: UB City, Vittal Mallaya Road Tel: 080 28468892 angsana.com
SANJAY RAMACHANDRAN

VIKRAM SHARMAwww.indiatodayimages.com

MUMBAI The Big Nasty!
Nibble on a Goan Roast Beef sandwich or fish and chips, roast beef chilli or spicy cocktail sausages here. More than others, snack lovers will enjoy this place. The burgers here move quickly, and are bigger than average. One can pick from burgers like Chicken Chettinad, Falafel, and Hell's Angel (with spicy shredded chicken). These are fresh and filling, with a good portion of meat, veggies and cheese. Where: Second Floor, Shatranj Napoli Building, Union Park, Carter Road, Bandra West Average meal for two: Rs 1,200 inclusive of taxes

HYDERABAD Elahe
Go to Elahe for your stock of Indian ethnic wear. The store houses anarkalis by Manish Malhotra, as well as wedding wear by Pallavi Jaikishan and Sabyasachi Mukherjee. Besides bridal ghaghras, you will also find dupattas and saris in classy ikat inspired designs and prints. Where: Milestone 476, Road No 10, Banjara Hills Tel: 040 23350130
A PRABHAKAR RAO

Attic Olive Beach
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Karachi Fruit Biscuits
their two in-house brands Half-Full, and Him and Her & the Apple, products here are also sourced from design houses such as Happily Unmarried, Quirkbox, and No Hasties. Where: 5/5 Grants Building, first floor, Arthur Bunder Road. Tel 022 32169292 attic.in Cost: Bags for Rs 1,500 and trunks for Rs 5,000 The unique fruit biscuits of Karachi Bakery have, over the years, become a part of Hyderabad's culture. The bakery was set up opposite the Mozzam Jahi Market building by a Sindhi family that migrated from Pakistan in the late 1940s. Although there are others who try and replicate these biscuits, none are as popular. Where: Nampally, Mozamjahi Market Tel: 040 24603502
JANUARY 2012 N SIMPLY DELHI

Enjoy a romantic evening at Olive Beach. Try their sangrias with the Wine Cured Grape and Goat Cheese Salad or Lamb Chop Souvlaki (marinated in olive oil, garlic and rosemary). Where: 16 Wood Street, Ashoknagar, Richmond Town Tel: 080 41128400 olivebarandkitchen. Average meal for two: Rs 2,000 plus taxes (excluding drinks)
s-42
SIMPLY DELHI N JANUARY 2012

If you're in the mood for some retail therapy, stop by at Attic to pick up colourful lamps, wooden cabinets, fancy gifts as well as home décor items. Other products include printed pillows, mugs and framed film posters. Besides

s-43

