SIMPLY DELHI

Theatre

Curtain raiser
A sneak peek into the 14th Bharat Rang Mahotsav

hen acclaimed playwright Girish Karnad staged his play Nagamandala at the National School of Drama (NSD) in 1999, it was impossible to conceive that the festival for which the play was an opening act, would progress to become one of Asia's largest theatre festivals in little over a decade. The Bharat Rang Mahotsav, NSD's annual theatre festival (January 822) has not only become an integral part of the theatre world's calendar but has also become a permanent fixture in the city's cultural scene. Staging over 88 productions from across the world, along with many theatrebased events, this year's festival promises to be bigger and better. "The festival began as an exercise in showcasing theatre productions for students at NSD," says Sameera Zaidi, festival consultant and coordinator. "It has steadily developed since then to become what it is today," she adds. The crowd keeps increasing with each year, and its not just theatre aficionados but also general public who look forward to this festival. This year, the primary focus is a Tagore retrospective, commemorating the bard's 150th birth anniversary. Apart from the productions

W

relating to this, the festival will also showcase plays from many of the SAARC countries, South Africa, China, Turkey, the United Kingdom and three productions from Poland. This Mahotsav also acts as a stage for Indian talent to showcase their work with many quality productions. "For regional artists such as us, the NSD festival provides a national platform," says Srijith Sundaram, director of the Tamil play Molagaapodi (meaning chili powder). The festival commences with Manipuri maestro Ratan Thiyam's The King of Dark Chamber-Raja (by invitation only), following which there will be more than six shows, some of them running simultaneously, at different venues everyday. The plays are spread across eight venues within the NSD campus, and around the Mandi House area. Booking tickets in advance is recommended since the shows tend to get sold out pretty quickly. Bookings open on January 5th Tickets at: Rs 50 upward Where: National School of Drama, Bahawalpur House, Bhagwandas Road Tel: 23383420; nsdtheatrefest.com
I by

Highlights
JANUARY 9 Grotowski--An attempt to retreat Director Tomasz Rodowicz, Poland Language Polish (with English subtitles) At Kamani Auditorium Timing 7 pm JANUARY 10 Khud and Khuda Director KN Panikkar Language Multilingual At Sammukh Auditorium Timing 6 pm JANUARY 12 Taramandal Bahumukh Director Neel Chaudhuri Language English, Hindi and Bengali At Meghdoot Auditorium Timing 5 pm JANUARY 16 Molagaapodi Director Srijith Sundaram Language Tamil At Meghdoot Auditorium Timing 5.30 pm JANUARY 20 The Little Prince Director Arash Absalan, Afghanistan Language Dari At Meghdoot Auditorium Timing 5 pm

Sibi Arasu

s-28

SIMPLY DELHI N JANUARY 2012

