Nation

MARTIAL ARTS
A NEW RAILWAYTRACK AT MAZAR-I-SHARIF IN AFGHANISTAN

WARRIORS WITH A SHOW CAUSE
Videos of Sikh youths doing a modern-day Gatka have gone viral on the Internet
rom the dusty bylanes of Tarn Taran in Punjab, a group of Sikh youths has emerged as the new Internet sensation. Videos of them doing extreme stunts on reality TV shows have gone viral, with eight million hits on YouTube alone. Bir Khalsa--a group of 250 Sikh youths between nine and 28 years of age--has reinvented the Gatka, a Sikh martial art from the time of the sixth Sikh guru, Guru Hargobind, involving the use of sticks and swords. The group has taken it to a whole new level. Weary of repetitive routines at village fairs that made them local celebrities but failed to generate any income, the group, started 18 years ago, recently decided to shed the traditional costume for military-style fatigues. The change into a Punjabi version of GI Joe appears to have paid

The new 900-km railway line from Hajigak in Afghanistan to Chah Bahar port in Iran

F

off and the group's Power of the Khalsa video is currently vying for eyeballs with the Tanglish Kolaveri Di. The makeover goes beyond the cosmetic. Unlike traditional Gatka, they do death-defying routines--with members plunging through thousands of tubelights and shattering blocks on a partner's skull. In a particularly terrifying act, three men are placed between beds of six-inch nails while others hammer on them. The troupe's 31-year-old leader and chief trainer Kanwaljit Singh, who took over in 1996 from founder Amarjit Singh who left to join the Punjab Roadways, says, "The new act and combat gear gives the boys a younger, more universal look." He adds, "The idea is to draw young men away from drugs to a healthy life." A seven-minute video of the

BIR KHALSA'S TRANSFORMATION INTO A PUNJABI VERSION OF GI JOE APPEARS TO HAVE PAID OFF. ITS YOUTUBE VIDEO REGISTERED EIGHT MILLION HITS.

group's performance at Eenadu TV's talent show in Hyderabad telecast in October got over 6.4 million views within four days of it being posted across Chinese sites Youku, Tudou and Sina Weibo. Accolades go beyond the cyber world. The group was second runnerup on India's Got Talent on the Colors channel in September 2010 and bagged the top spot on Eenadu TV's version of the contest a year later. Bir Khalsa's success has attracted many to Gatka. "Tarn Taran already has 35 new groups," says Harinder Singh, 38, who manages the group's publicity. Fame has brought with it invitations to events across the country. The group has just returned from a multicity tour and is now training hard for the Baisakhi fair in Toronto, in April. So, are the blood and guts for real? "One hundred per cent," says Kanwaljit. "This is not like WWE wrestling. Our swords have the sharpest edges. And, the boys do get hurt," he adds proudly. by Asit Jolly
BIR KHALSA PERFORMS AT THE ETV AWARDS IN OCTOBER

AFGHANISTAN

HAJIGAK

IRAN
ZAHEDAN PAKISTAN CHAH BAHAR
Arabian Sea
Photograph by AP, Photomontage by SAURABH SINGH

INDIA

GEOPOLITICS

ON THE RIGHTTRACK
O
n November 26, an Indian delegation landed in Iran on a hushhush visit to hold discussions on a 900-km railway project that will traverse through Afghanistan and end at Iran's Chah Bahar port. The team of top diplomats, railway and shipping officials was there to examine the project's feasibility. A day after, the Afghan Government has picked an Indian consortium for the $10 billion (Rs 50,000 crore) project to tap the iron ore deposits in the Hajigak region. In addition to the railway line, an Indo-Iranian effort will upgrade Chah Bahar port, quadrupling its cargo capacity to 8 million tonnes. The project will give India access to Asia's largest iron ore deposits in Afghanistan's Bamiyan province, bypassing Pakistan. The US Geological Survey says Afghanistan sits atop at least $1 trillion in mineral wealth concentrated in Wardak and Bamiyan provinces. Copper deposits at Aynak are already being developed by the Chinese and Hajigak's iron ore mines could enter production by 2016. The consortium, led by Steel Authority of India Limited, includes National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, the largest iron ore miner in the country, as well as private sector steel companies. The blocks B, C and D for which the Indian consortium has won rights have iron ore reserves of 1.3 billion tonnes. The deal surpasses the $4 billion contract signed by China for copper four years ago. Beyond the scramble for mineral wealth, the railway line is part of a strategic story unfolding in the region. The Chinese started work on Gwadar port in Pakistan in March 2002, four months after the US ordered its troops into Afghanistan to oust the Taliban. The village lies in Pakistan's Balochistan province. "The port project set off alarm bells in India which already feels encircled by China on three sides: Myanmar, Tibet, and Pakistan. To counter Sino-Pak collaboration, India has brought Afghanistan and Iran into an economic and strategic alliance," says Tarique Niazi of the University of Wisconsin, Eau Claire, who specialises in resource-based conflicts. While

India seeks to counter the Sino-Pakistan alliance through deals with Kabul and Tehran
India plans to develop Chah Bahar port as a counter to Gwadar, Afghanistan, a land-locked country, will get access to the sea, cutting dependence on Pakistan. An internal Ministry of External Affairs note emphasises the project's importance. "Given the rich mineral resources of Afghanistan, the bid acquires great importance." M.K. Bhadrakumar, a former career diplomat who served in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Moscow, argues that the project is predicated on a broad strategic understanding with Iran. "What is needed is the requisite political will to deeply engage Iran in a major regional project in defiance of the US `containment' strategy," he says. "I prefer to keep my fingers crossed, given the massive erosion that took place in the last five-six years in the bilateral understanding with Iran on the one side and the pronounced inclination to harmonise our policies with the US regional strategies on the other. Needless to say, Israel will be seething, too, if India actually goes ahead with this project," he adds. by Shafi Rahman

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

