COVER STORY

OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2011

GLORYAND GUTTER
SACHIN TENDULKAR

It was Anna Hazare's year but a much-loved cricketer, a flamboyant showman, an unyielding judge and a concrete sprawl housing VIP inmates almost beat him in the art of soaking up the spotlight.

VIJAY MALLYA

BROKE BUTNOTBENT
e is famous for his wealth, and envied for his expensive flamboyance. And the proverbial King of Good Times knows how to spend, on lavish parties, expensive yachts or a Formula 1 team. It is therefore incongruous to see Vijay Mallya run out of cash. Strictly speaking, it was his airline Kingfisher that ran out of money in 2011, but it bankrupted his reputation as an able businessman. The man who hunted publicity began to escape the limelight. After six straight years of not making an annual profit, Kingfisher began to asphyxiate the life out of his profitable liquor business in 2011. The market capitalisation of Mallya's vast business empire has halved in 12 months. His personal wealth has declined from over Rs 21,000 crore to around Rs 11,600 crore. Kingfisher lost more than Rs 700 crore between April and September 2011. Its aircraft were routinely grounded because the company could not pay for fuel or airport charges. Staff and customers deserted. Mallya's refusal to recognise a flaw in his business model has not helped the airline. He abolished his low-cost arm Kingfisher Red when everyone else was moving to that segment. The maverick insists he can resurrect Kingfisher by swimming against the tide. Without some incredible luck, he could drown. by Dhiraj Nayyar

H

POWER OFMINUS ONE

O

ne century would have catapulted him to yet another never-to-be-broken record. One century could have made him India's newsmaker of the year. His legion of fans craved and prayed for it every time Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar, the god of cricket, stepped out to bat. Alas! It was not to be. As the Men in Blue chugged towards a Qantas flight for the series against Australia, a placard at the Chennai airport read: Sachin: Now or Never. The message reflected the mind of exasperated fans and their hope from the world's most worshipped cricketer. Throughout 2011, Tendulkar tried hard to score his 100th ton to complete what he calls his "last wish". The year-long delay was agonising for his fans. Coronation moments came and went as he failed in the World Cup final at Mumbai and then at the Lord's Test in July. Back home, he glimpsed it twice from a distance during the recent West Indies series. His closest was a nerve-wracking 94 at Mumbai, where the organisers had already announced plans to produce 100 Tendulkar-mint gold coins to honour the legend. It is not just a century. Riding on the success in the series was an estimated Rs 200 crore, the sum total of the money riding on eight brands promoted by Tendulkar. Products with Tendulkar's centurion signature are ready for sale. Also waiting are multi-crore advertising campaigns. The IndiaAustralia series broadcasters, ESPN Star Sports, are hoping for it to happen Down Under and have already christened the series Agneepath, meaning The Path of Fire. An outof-form Australia has given Tendulkar's fans renewed hope of imminent celebrations.
by Shantanu Guha Ray

GETTY IMAGES

OM PRAKASH SAINI

TOUGH JUSTICE
he court of Special CBI Judge Om Prakash Saini witnessed high-voltage drama through the year. Hope and despair, smiles and tears--they all crowded the courtroom at Patiala House where he heard the 2G case. Saini, 57, is responsible for sending the largest number of VVIPs accused in the 2G case to Tihar Jail, including DMK leader and Rajya Sabha MP Kanimozhi, corporate czars and senior bureaucrats. Former telecom minister A. Raja, the main accused in the case, did not apply for bail. Saini granted bail only to two of the 14 accused and that too after the Supreme Court (SC) and Delhi High Court had set the precedent. "Persons involved in such offences, particularly those who continue to reap the benefits of the crime committed by them, do not deserve any indulgence; and any sympathy to them is not only misplaced but also

T

Fans,media,corporates all prayed but the ton of tons remained elusive for the Master Blaster.
AP PHOTO

against the larger interest of the society,'' he said. The scathing comment surprised many. The no-nonsense man from Haryana is believed to have extensively studied telecom and spectrum to be able to do justice to the case. Known for his perseverance, Saini was handpicked to handle the 2G trial after an SC bench comprising Justices G.S. Singhvi and A.K. Ganguly asked the Government to set up a special court to deal with the case. On March 28, Saini was designated to hear the case. Till then, Saini had heard cases related to the Commonwealth Games, putting behind bars Suresh Kalmadi's five aides including Lalit Bhanot and V.K. Verma. He also denied bail to NALCO Chairman A.K. Srivastava, accused in a corruption case. The coming year too promises to be eventful for Saini with more VIPs trooping into his court. He has taken cognisance of the CBI chargesheet against the Essar group, issuing summons to its promoters Anshuman and Ravi Ruia, and also to Loop Telecom promoters. They have to appear before his court on January 27, 2012. Trained as a sub-inspector with the Delhi Police, Saini knows how to keep the bigwigs on their toes. by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

28

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

COVER STORY

OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2011

TIHAR JAIL

CAPITALPUNISHMENT
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

grey, concrete sprawl, spread over 400 acres, housing 12,300 prisoners. It is in the heart of Delhi, but could have been on a different planet as far as the Capital's political and business VIPs were concerned. Until this year. In 2011, a series of scandals turned Tihar into the jailhouse of the privileged, and made it the most famous prison in the world. Suave CEOs accustomed to airbrushed lives displayed in pages of glossy magazines were kept awake at night by the cries of criminals being beaten by jail officials in the next ward. Rodents, spiders and mosquitoes attacked executives more used to flying business class. And once powerful party bosses were reduced to being ridiculed for pleading dementia and questioned for having a cup of tea in the jail superintendent's office. Tihar became a symbol of accountability amidst the corruption of 2011. As celebrities brought attention to its closedknit space, it also became a metaphor for other ills in society, where the poor have no voice, no hope, no freedom. Seventyfive per cent of Tihar Jail inmates are undertrials, still awaiting conviction. Most are impoverished: they arrived with less than a shirt on their backs, as much victims of the environment as their own petty venality. Under the redoubtable Neeraj Kumar, who took over as director general of prisons on November 22, 2010, Tihar has seen an array of high profile prisoners, beginning with former telecom minister A. Raja who was taken from Patiala House courts on February 2. The parade of the rich and resourceful continues. Asked where he will house the new accused in the third CBI chargesheet in the 2G scam, Kumar laughs: "Don't worry. We'll find space for them." There is not much laughter within the impenetrable walls of Tihar though. It sees human nature at its rawest. A woman who is not ashamed of having killed her husband, says "He deserved it," without a tear. A young boy in the adolescents' jail learning the alphabet, is happy that he is wearing clean clothes for the first time in his life. A man, convicted for carrying narcotics, complains of not being allowed to pray by gangs. It is a place where reality is stark, unemotional and unrelenting. It is also a place for salvation, some of it well advertised: Suraj, the painter of kitschy canvases; Kobad

A

Ashram or asylum? Ask the rich and resourceful who crowded Tihar's wards in the year gone by.

Ghandy, the Communist philosopher and accidental guru of millionaire businessmen. It is a place that reminds people of the value of liberty. It is easy to get distracted by the sight of linen-clad Jessica Lal-killer Manu Sharma playing benign Chief Financial Officer in Jail No. 2's factory and former municipal councilor Sharda Jain, convicted of killing a colleague, smiling almost shyly as she works on the sewing machine in Jail No. 6. It is more difficult to celebrate the spirit of the nameless many who get up every day at 5 a.m., have their two pieces of bread, do their menial tasks, wait for visits of loved ones whom they cannot touch or feel across the vistors' barrier, and watch TV at full volume along with 40 other sweaty bodies in barracks till it's lights out at 8 p.m. Simply because there is nothing else to do. Sudheendra Kulkarni, who spent 52 days inside Tihar on a political charge, says prison sensitises people, binding them together in communal suffering. It can also brutalise them, denying them a future for ever. Indeed, it can be an ashram, as much as it can be an asylum. For every Kanimozhi who gets bail and a heroine's welcome organised by a doting father, there is a young man who cannot even remember what life outside Tihar's walls was like. Perhaps for him, as for the three lakh prisoners across India, it's just as well. by Kaveree Bamzai

30

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

