COVER STORY

NEWSMAKER 2011

ANNA HAZARE

HOPE

OFTHE

HOPELESS
In a year that witnessed the serial blasts of reputations, it took the audacity of a moral warrior from the rural remoteness of India to inspire a new iconography of heroism
By S. Prasannarajan

H

ope is a repudiation of today's desperation and a celebration of tomorrow's opportunities. Hope is the father of change. It shapes the dreams of the disillusioned. It is the power of the betrayed. In the histories of national freedom, it is hope that fuels dissent, and mobilises the voiceless against the lies of the state. In India 2011, hope wore a Gandhi topi. It fasted, dared the stormtroopers of a paranoid state, went to jail, awakened the middle class from its cozy stupor, brought the young and the idealistic to the mean streets of politics, and shook the foundations of a corrupt regime that kept changing its fig leaf in its anxiety to curtain shame. Hope became Anna Hazare in the year India's scandals boiled over into popular rage. This portly satyagrahi from the Maharashtrian village of Ralegan Siddhi walked into the consciousness of India at a
T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

COVER STORY

NEWSMAKER 2011
A BOY OFFERS SWEETS TO A PORTRAIT OF ANNA HAZARE IN AHMEDABAD

HIS EXPERIMENTS WITH TRUTH
For Anna Hazare, an indefinite fast is an effective protest mechanism
HAZARE AS AN ARMYJAWAN

1963
Recruited as a driver in the army. Had a miraculous escape during the 1965 Indo-Pak war. Took voluntary retirement in 1975 and returned to Ralegan Siddhi. Decided to work towards transforming the village.

April 2011
Began a hunger strike on April 5. Ended it on April 9 after his proposal for a joint team to draft the Lokpal Bill was accepted.
SOME FEASTING AFTER FASTING

HAZARE AT AN ANTI-CORRUPTION PROTEST IN 1991

Launched a movement for enacting RTI Act. He went on a fast-unto-death at Azad Maidan in Mumbai in July 2003.After 12 days, the president signed on the RTI Act and Maharashtra implemented it with effect from 2002. The same Act served as the base for national RTI Act in 2005.

1997-2003

August 2006
Began a fast-unto-death on August 9 in Alandi against exclusion of file notings under RTI. Ended fast on August 19 after the Union Government agreed to revoke amendment to law.

August 16,2011
Rejecting the Government's version of the Lokpal Bill, he went on a fast from August 16. Ended it on August 28 after Parliament adopted a motion.

HAZARE IN UNIFORM

1989-1997
in Bhingar near AhmedJune 15,1937 Born nagar, in Maharashtra.The eldest of seven children of Baburao Hazare. In 1952, his family moved to Ralegan Siddhi. He left school in Class VII and started selling flowers in Mumbai.
REUTERS

HAZARE IN HIS VILLAGE

November 2009
Began agitation for the Jan Lokpal Bill at a meeting in Parel, Mumbai.Stir gained momentum with a 60-city rally on January 30, 2011, and one at Ramlila Maidan on February 27, 2011.

Undertook a fast in 1989 to protest against erratic power supply.Went on a fast to protest against graft under Sharad Pawar in 1994.Was jailed in 1997 but released after a day.

August 2003
Forced the then Maharashtra CM Sushilkumar Shinde to form a commission to probe four NCP ministers; three were indicted.

December 16,2011
Announced that if the Lokpal Bill was not passed during the winter session of Parliament, he would go on a three-day fast in Mumbai from December 27.

time when the country was on the verge of abandoning hope and taking refuge in fatal stoicism. Between the dubious multi-crore 2G spectrum deal and the scandalous preparations for the Commonwealth Games, the overwhelming banality of corruption became the defining character of the UPA Government. A few went to jail, but India recognised them for what they had become: scapegoats. The highest echelon of the regime remained immune to accountability. As the stench pervaded the nation, Hazare thrust himself to the centrestage as Citizen Outraged. He led the uprising against the citadel on Raisina Hill as Citizen Rearmed. The discredited Government thought arrogance was an adequate response to dissent. India, the world's most volatile democracy, also has the most evolved civil society in Asia,

and it has been consistently unforgiving to rulers swayed by totalitarian temptations. Parliament is the highest shrine of a civil society and Hazare, as a pilgrim let down by the gods of democracy, took his war to the sanctum sanctorum. His argument was moral, his method was Gandhian, though, as he repeatedly accepted, he was no Mahatma. He wanted Parliament to legislate an honest mechanism which incorporated the popular will to fight the cancer of corruption. The government resisted the intrusion of the outsider--for a while and at a heavy cost. The sweep and scope of a Jan Lokpal, a people's ombudsman, as envisaged by Hazare and his comrades in India Against Corruption (IAC) was a nightmare for the UPA. The Government has enough reason to shield the corrupt rather than punish them: the guilty are

from its fold. A war against corruption meant a war on the regime itself; so, obviously, the Government opened hostilities against the inconvenient messenger. But Hazare under attack spawned a multitude of Hazares across the country, in towns and villages, spanning gender, class and age. When the street embraced the romance of `we-are-all-Anna-Hazare-today', Delhi trembled, the fig leaves fell, and a triangulating regime lost the argument. Anna's movement did not defy Parliament; it sought to enlarge and empower institutions to curb corruption. Indians were inspired by a 74-year-old man, a former driver in the Indian Army. The fierceness of his commitment was only matched by his perseverance. Even when faced with a volcanic street, the Government seems more interested in containing Hazare than

curbing corruption. The draft Lokpal Bill, put together by the UPA's wily legal brains (Kapil Sibal, P. Chidambaram and Salman Khurshid), is a partial submission, full of deviations that could weaken its ability. A wider section of the lower bureaucracy will come under the Lokpal but the central investigating agency, the CBI, will continue to be the handmaiden of the Government. This is a rebuff to Hazare, who wants the agency under the control of the Lokpal. The principal Opposition party, BJP, wants CBI to be autonomous. Even

though the Prime Minister is included in the ambit, enough escape routes have been left open in the name of national security. Even in this moment of seeming surrender, honour is not a virtue visible in South Block. If Hazare is an open book, the UPA Government is a secret text about survival. Hazare's response is in character: to up the ante. When INDIA TODAY caught up with him on a wintry evening in Delhi's Maharashtra Sadan, the only sign of change was the choice of his cap: the trademark white cotton Gandhi topi

When the street erupted to the romance of we-are-all-Anna-Hazare-today,Delhi trembled, the fig leaves fell,and a triangulating regime lost its argument.ALokpal became inevitable.
NEW

was replaced by a blue woollen one. Anna could take on the frozen conscience of the ruling establishment, but the December chill of Delhi was a bit too much. Still, the feisty tormentor of a beleaguered UPA wouldn't give in to the vagaries of weather: "Look at me, do I look ill?" Indeed, there was no heater in his room, though there were two in the visitor's room, full of volunteers and sundry worshippers of the saint who shook the state. In the course of the interview, he played down his own legend. "Mujhe Gandhi ke saath mat jodo (Don't make me a Gandhi)," he said (see interview). It was Vivekananda who taught him that "inner happiness comes from duty". Gandhi was a later influence. He deployed the Gandhian weapon of satyagraha against the power of a crooked state. He set the power of hunger against the hunger for power. In

20

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

NEW

COVER STORY

NEWSMAKER 2011
many ways, his moral system, conditioned by the discipline of the barrack and wisdom of the countryside, is in some conflict with the aspirations and attitudes of the metropolitan youth who have become his fan club. In time, the contradictions will emerge. In rural Ralegan, the Hazare country, he has declared war on vices such as drinking. There is a frightening simplicity--and clarity--about Hazare's idea of a perfect state with a few lofty men as arbiters. The moral dictatorship of the wisest has no patience for debate or consensus. The so-called Team Anna, a group of self-righteous Sancho Panzas, are not exactly the ideal ambassadors of a civil society; the power of protest and primetime exposure has already given them a false sense of invincibility. Hazare is the mascot; they provide the script that sustains the aura. What makes their text of redemption, personified by the Gandhian, acHAZARE WITH AYOUNG FAN

INTERVIEW

"If CBI was under Lokp al,Chidambaram would be in jail"
Despite his Gandhian cap and series of fasts, Anna Hazare says it is wrong to compare him with the Father of the Nation. His anti-corruption movement has voiced the collective frustration of the people. In between fasts and ultimatums, Hazare tells Senior Editor PRIYA SAHGAL why he will never compromise with politicians: Q. How do you explain your rockstar like appeal ? A. Rockstar? (Looks puzzled.) Q. Hero... A. (Laughs and shakes his head.) Yeh hero ki baat alag hai (I am no hero). The social work that I have done and my sangharsh (struggle) is what appeals to the people. Q. The Government has met some of your demands. Will you compromise on anything? A. Who has agreed to anything? It's been a year since we have been fighting. Throughout, they've been saying `Yes, we will bring a strong Lokpal, an effective bill', but they have done nothing about it. There are three main issues: the Lokayukta bill, Citizens' Charter and lower bureaucracy. The Pantpradhanji (Prime Minister) gave me a written assurance that I should give up my fast (in August) as Parliament has unanimously passed a resolution agreeing to these three. So I gave up my fast. But they are yet to declare this bill a kanoon (law). It is an insult to Parliament... They also should include judiciary under Lokpal. Q. Then what about the Judicial Accountability Bill? A. I have no objections to a separate bill. But it should be a strong bill. If the Government has prepared the draft, it will not be a strong bill. Just as we had a joint committee for Lokpal with MPs and civil society, there should be one for this too. They also want to bring a separate whistleblower act. Where is the harm in bringing this under Lokpal? They want to separate all the main points from Lokpal by making weak laws for each issue. This will break Lokpal into many pieces. And who will control all these laws? The Government? We want the Government to get out of these things... like the CBI. The CBI is under the control of the Government, which is why corruption has increased. Today, if the CBI was under Lokpal, then P. Chidambaram would be in jail. He is only free because the Government controls CBI. Q. Which minister is the most supportive of your demands? A. To an extent--not completely-- Salman Khurshid did support us. Q. Who is the biggest villain against the Lokpal? A. Yeh kya naam hain uska (What is his name)... Kapil Sibal. He was against it from the beginning. He behaved as if we were asking a favour for ourselves. Arre, it's the duty of the Government to frame good laws. But when a good law like the Lokpal is framed, you don't support it. Unka neeyat saaf nahin hai, sarkar ki (The Government's intentions aren't honest). Q. Aren't you being totally uncompromising? A. We've told them, `Let's sit faceto-face and talk.' They are not ready. Q. They did that in the drafting committee, didn't they? A. Yes we talked, but what happened? They did a U-turn. Q. What about your own committee? It's said you are a puppet in the hands of Arvind Kejriwal and Co. A. Yeh barabar nahin hai (It's not true at all). Q. Are you not pressured by the others in your team? A. Yeh mere baal dhoop se nahin pakey hain (My hair hasn't turned white just from the sun). I sent six ministers packing in Maharashtra, and 400-plus officers... (laughs).
T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

Anna Hazare deployed satyagraha against the power of a crooked state.He set the power of hunger against the hunger for power.
22
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

Q. How is all this going to end? A. Agar voh nahin karte toh hamari tayyari hai (If the Government does not pass our bill, then we are ready). Q. Is the fire fizzling out of your anti-corruption movement? A. (His eyes flash and he waves his hand) Did you not see? When I was sitting at Jantar Mantar, did you not see the public there? You will see on 27th (December) when our fast begins. We will show you how many people go to jail as part our `Jail bharo andolan'. You will see then (smiles proudly). The Government will see then whether people are lessening or increasing. Don't believe what the Government is saying. Q. Why are you personally targeting Rahul and Sonia Gandhi A. It's not personal. We are going to protest outside all the MPs houses. I will go and protest outside theirs. Q. Sonia Gandhi had a tough time getting her Food Security Bill through the Cabinet. A. Those who run the Government should realise they are sevaks (servants), not the maalik (owners). The public is the maalik that has sent these sevaks to Government. Q. You have attacked Sharad Pawar even more than Rahul Gandhi. Yet he has been winning all the local elections in your own state even after your campaign began. A. Why are you using the word attack? Q. Why did you ask, "Only one slap?" That's not very Gandhian, is it? A. I have explained in my blog why I said this. (He said the reason for the slap should be examined). Q. How do you explain Pawar's win in Maharashtra

local polls despite your fast? A. What do I have to do with that? My work is to tell the public what is the truth and what is a lie. Elections are not my concern. Let the public choose whom they like. Q. Are people not listening to you? Your constant refrain is that men like Pawar are not good, yet the aam aadmi chooses to vote for him. A. I never said he is not good. I only said why just one slap. I never said he is bad, don't vote for him. Q. Then how do you explain Team Anna's campaign in Hisar? A. (Smiles.) Inko ek namoona

dikhana tha ki hum log virodh karne se aap ki seat ja sakti hai (We wanted to show the Congress that if you oppose us, you may lose your seat). Q. What about Uttar Pradesh? A. I will campaign in all five states during elections. Q. Against Congress? A. I will tell them to vote against all those who oppose (Jan) Lokpal. Q. Mayawati supports your version of Lokpal but is her image on corruption better than Congress's? A. Our main issue is a strong Lokpal. All those who oppose it should not be sent back to Parliament.
Full text of the interview, visit www.indiatoday.in/anna-interview

NEW

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

COVER STORY

NEWSMAKER 2011
AP

COUNTER PUNCH
Fed up of being targeted by Anna Hazare, the ruling class hits back
Anna Hazare is a good, well-meaning person who is surrounded by ambitious, publicity hungry self-seekers.
DIGVIJAYA SINGH Congress General Secretary

PROPHETATHOME
R
alegan Siddhi's only square teems with excited villagers. They gather every morning to read newspapers and discuss the headlines. The all-party meeting convened by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to discuss the Lokpal Bill and the Congress's victory in the elections to four municipal councils in Maharashtra's Ahmednagar district, in which Ralegan Siddhi falls, are hot topics of discussion when this correspondent reached Anna Hazare's model village on December 15. The villagers are hopeful that Parliament will pass an "acceptable" Lokpal Bill and there will be no need for any further agitation. However, they are leaving nothing to chance. They pray at Yadavbaba temple, Hazare's home since 1975, every morning for his success. "The Government has cheated Anna on the Lokpal Bill thrice. They should show some responsibility this time," says Jaysinh Mapari, sarpanch of the village, and adds, "If Anna announces another agitation, we will take out marches in the morning and hold candlelight vigils in the evening. We will sit on demonstrations and take out morchas to the tehsil office." A favourable response to Hazare's protest at Jantar Mantar in Delhi on December 11 has eased villagers' worries about whether the agitation will get the same response it got in August, especially with all the negative publicity about members of Team Anna. "The negative publicity has not affected our morale. We know Anna's intentions are clean," says Annasaheb Kale, principal of Sant Nilobarai Vidyalaya. Kale is a little frustrated over the Congress's victory in the municipal council elections in the district. "Sometimes I feel Anna is fighting a lone battle. The election result shows that no one can win the election without money and muscle power."

As Hazare's fight against corruption enters its last lap, his hometown cheers him on
Most villagers are unconvinced about the financial misdeeds that Hazare's aides, Arvind Kejriwal and Kiran Bedi, are accused of. Their faith arises from their confidence in Hazare's choice of friends. "Anna must have scrutinised Kejriwal and Bedi before inducting them into his team. If he finds them capable of wrongdoing he will sack them immediately," says Sangita Ugale, who runs a small eatery in Ralegan Siddhi. The repeated agitations have not tired villagers. Vimala Rokde, a sweeper, says she will participate in any agitation led by Hazare. "I am not tired of agitations. Anna's word is final for me. Whenever he gives a call for an agitation, I will respond to him." The Intelligence Bureau's (IB) report that four attempts have been made on Hazare has left Balasaheb Wagh, a school teacher, worried. "Thousands of people come to Ralegan Siddhi from all over the country to see his work. They expect him to talk to them in person. There is a need for some restrictions," says Wagh. Hazare passes his younger brother Maruti's home almost daily but has not visited him since 1975 as he does not want to get bogged down in family affairs. This has not reduced Maruti's affection for him. "If Anna decides to relaunch the agitation in Mumbai, not only me but the entire village will go there to express solidarity," says Maruti, who sold flowers in Mumbai's eastern suburb of Mulund before returning to Ralegan Siddhi 20 years ago. Anil Sharma, Hazare's aide in his NGO Bhrashtachar Virodhi Andolan, believes the IB report is a gimmick. "The Government is still in shock after Anna's previous agitation. It wants to keep him out of Delhi," he says. But they all agree Hazare cannot be limited by borders. by Kiran Tare
To read more about Ralegan Siddhi, go to www.indiatoday.in/ralegan

Mr Hazare has said 180 goons are sitting in Parliament. It is disrespect of Parliament. He should take his words back.
LALU PRASAD YADAV Rashtriya Janata Dal President

ANNA HAZARE (CENTRE) WITH HIS TEAM AT A PRESS CONFERENCE IN NEW DELHI

By supporting the physical assault on me, Anna Hazare has given a new definition to Gandhism and non-violence.
SHARAD PAWAR Union Agriculture Minister

An unelected person outside Parliament is demanding that if there is any law against corruption, it should be mine or else I will go on fast.
KAPIL SIBAL Union Telecom Minister

ceptable to the hopeless majority that lives outside Lutyens' Delhi is the political context. In a year that witnessed the serial blasts of reputations, Anna alone stood tall as the inspiration for a new iconography of heroism. Sonia Gandhi took the lead in the war against Hazare, bringing out her heaviest firepower. Courtiers of 10 Janpath were mobilised to sabotage Hazare's movement. It would be their Bill or nothing else. While the much eulogised moderniser-prime minister turned out to be a shade too tolerant of colleagues, Hazare soared above the sleaze of Delhi. When the ventriloquism of Manmohan Singh failed to restore faith in the ruling class, the folksy gospel of Hazare swayed the mind of India. When the smarmy interlocutors of the Government tried their lawyerly arguments, Hazare, with the purity of his purpose and the integrity of his character, won India. Hazare brought streetfighter chic back to politics. His combatant was worthy of his wrath: a Government, frightened but vengeful, that would go a long way to silence the man who shattered its comfort zone. The midnight knocks on the door of his apartment or a stint in Tihar Jail did not

silence Hazare. They only added to the legend of the rebel. As the year of infamy draws to a close, the rage of Hazare has already changed the politics of India--and enlarged the idealism of a generation. He frightened the political class, and thereby reduced the distance between ruler and ruled. Hazare shifted the centre of political gravity: the prime minister is now in office, not in power. Hazare's own strength derives directly from the anger and aspirations of a people let down by a regime that has made corruption its official religion. In a country that is growing demographically younger, it took the audacity of a moral warrior from the remoteness of rural India to make the urban youth stakeholders in politics. Hazare brought We the People to the vanguard of a freedom movement through the politics of conscience. Anna Hazare is INDIA TODAY'S Newsmaker of the Year because the velocity of his rage shattered the cynicism of rulers and restored hope among the ruled. The struggle of Citizen Hazare has redeemed Indian democracy, and empowered the hopeless for a generation. with Priya Sahgal
Check on iPad for the moving cover

Anna Hazare has not met his younger brother since 1975 as he doesn't want to be distracted byfamilyties.
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

VILLAGERS GATHER AT THE SQUARE IN RALEGAN SIDDHI

24

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

25

NEW

NEW

