Na tion GUJARAT

FREEDOM FROM CHINA
A month after Narendra Modi's visit, China releases 13 of 22 Indians accused of smuggling

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

T

he release of 13 Gujarati traders, accused of smuggling diamonds worth $7.3 million from Hong Kong to mainland China, by a Chinese court on December 7, is an indication of an entente developing between the two countries. A pleasant change from the normally strained relations between the two neighbours. Besides, other Indians accused in the case have been given light sentences. A relieved Dineshbhai Navadia, president of the Gujarat Diamond Traders Association, says, "The period of uncertainty and trauma for the traders has ended." Dineshbhai Shah, whose son Parth is among those released, says, "After two years of sleepless nights it has been a great relief for my family. The Indian Government has worked very hard. Narendra Modi's diplomacy also helped the cause." According to Shah, the traders were treated very well by the Chinese authorities during their imprisonment at the Shanghai Detention Centre. "We have noted the judgment... 13 of them will be deported from China and will return to India," said an official spokesperson for the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA). A Shenzhen court released 11 of

the 22 Indian traders and awarded the rest sentences of up to six years imprisonment. Apart from the 11, two more were set free as they had already served their sentence. The released traders were not acquitted but let off lightly with fines and ordered to be deported since the court found the gravity of their crime "less than others". The Indian traders may have got away with a slap on the wrist when compared to sentences handed down to citizens of other countries accused in the same case as well as in similar cases. Simon, one of the three Chinese accused in the same case, was given 10 years in jail, while an Australian accused in a similar case was sentenced to 12 years in jail. The judgment is the result of some serious diplomatic follow-up by India.

THE RELEASED DIAMOND TRADERS (LEFT); PARENTS OF TWO OF THE FREED MEN WAIT FOR THEIR CHILDREN TO RETURN

THE SENTENCES GIVEN TO THE INDIANS ARE MUCH LIGHTER THAN THOSE HANDED DOWN TO CITIZENS OF OTHER COUNTRIES INVOLVED IN SIMILAR CASES.

The MEA had been building pressure on the Chinese over the issue since the arrests were effected two years ago. Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi's improved trade relations with China also helped. He took up the issue with the Chinese authorities. He put pressure on them for a speedy trial of the detainees, against whom charges had not been framed till March 2011, more than a year after their arrest. Modi pursued the issue when Chinese Ambassador to India Zhang Yang met him in Gandhinagar in August and took it up again during Chinese ViceMinister Al Ping's visit to Gandhinagar in October. That Modi's tactics worked is borne out by the fact that the judgment comes a month after his visit to China in November. The traders, who had set up diamond units in Shenzhen province bordering Hong Kong, were apprehended in early 2010. Their arrest came after a Chinese trader alleged that many Indians were smuggling diamonds from Hong Kong into China. A probe led to the arrest of 22 Indians and three locals. by Uday Mahurkar

48

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

