ACHUTHANANDAN ( FAR LEFT) AND VIJAYAN (RIGHT) AT A CPI(M) MEET IN THIRUVANANTHAPURAM

Nation KERALA

LEFTWITH NO ROLE
A poor run in CPI(M) internal polls may mean the end of Achuthanandan's political career
eteran Marxist leader and former chief minister of Kerala, V.S. Achuthanandan, 88, is rapidly losing ground in the CPI(M). In the organisational polls--which began on December 15, 2011 and will end on January 15, 2012--his supporters have lost elections to all but one district committee out of 14, to the camp led by State Secretary and his bête noir Pinarayi Vijayan, 67. This comes ahead of the state conference to be held from February 7 in Thiruvananthapuram and the 20th party congress in April at Kozhikode. The leader's only hope of retaining a foothold in the party depends on whether he is reinstated to the Politburo. He was dropped in 2009 for openly criticising the state leadership. The Vijayan camp has been successful in the polls due to its control over grassroots-level committees. "It was done through a carrot and stick strategy. Opponents are either threatened or given offers to switch sides," says Appukkuttan Vallikkunnu, a political observer. Thus, Achuthanandan is left with a truncated side as many loyalists have jumped ship in

V

the past few years. "What is going on in the name of election is suppression of dissent and minority opinion," says a Achuthanandan camp member. Vijayan disagrees. "We are now close to a point when factionalism will almost completely be rooted out." The Congress, on the other hand, is happy to see the decline of the veteran leader. "It is the end of Achuthanandan in the CPI(M)," says Ramesh Chennithala, president, Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee. Achuthanandan's image as a crusader against corruption has also taken a beating in recent days after charges of graft were levelled against his son V.A. Arunkumar in October. The allegations have led to disaffection within his camp. Achuthanandan had to face criticism from delegates at various district conferences over his handling of opposition from within the party. Vijayan slammed Achuthanandan at the Kollam district meeting on January 4 for pointing fingers at him in the Rs 350-crore SNC Lavalin scam even after the party's central leadership had exonerated him. Vijayan is an accused in the case being probed by

"This is the end of V.S. Achuthanandan's dominance in the affairs of the Kerala unit of the CPI(M)."
RAMESH CHENNITHALA, President, Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee

the CBI. The case is related to irregularities in the contract awarded to Canadian firm Lavalin for building of a hydropower station in the state. The contract was given while Vijayan was power minister in the LDF government during 1996-2001. The conferences virtually became a slugfest between the two warring factions, with both holding the other responsible for the party's loss in the 2011 Assemby elections. Achuthanandan's camp too levelled charges of corruption and sexual misconduct against Vijayan and his camp. For instance, at the Ernakulam district conference on January 7, both sides sparred over a video that allegedly featured a Vijayan loyalist in a compromising position. At the moment, Vijayan seems indomitable. His camp's performance in the organisational polls will ensure his re-election as state secretary at February's state conference for the fourth time in a row. But this may be his last term as secretary, as the Central Committee in January has decided not to allow secretaries to hold their posts for more than three consecutive terms. The decision, however, will come into effect after the party congress is over. For now, the Vijayan camp is set to dominate Left politics in Kerala, while Achuthanandan will have to watch the proceedings from the sidelines.
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

40

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

