Mail

On the Edge of an Abyss
JANUARY 9, 2012

2012 will be the worst year in a decade for the Indian economy. And it will not be because of Europe or the US. The UPA Government is responsible. Its paralysis and state of denial will ensure the prosperity of the 2000s is a mere memory.

K. CHIDANAND KUMAR,

Bangalore

Ripple Effect
High recession in the US and Europe have had their impact on the economic slowdown in India ("On the Edge of an Abyss", January 9). The Government must concentrate on fast-paced infrastructure development, implement FDI in retail, promote private sector investments and work towards fast growth in rural markets. High agricultural production adds speed to overall development. The coming year has a lot of surprises in store for the country.
V.K.TANGRI, Dehradun

Changing with the Times
At last the Shiv Sena has understood that it is no more possible to convince the common man with the doctrine of hatred ("Sena Breaks With The Past", January 2). Today, people want solid community developmental work and not mere propaganda and blaming the opposing political parties. Uddhav Thackeray's effort to change Shiv Sena's methods is praiseworthy.
RANJIT SINHA, Jabalpur

bounce back with inhouse demand rebounding. The RBI is poised to lower interest rates, banks are not too worried about non-performing assets and are inclined to increase their advances, and the government, conscious of being in its last lap, is looking to push ahead with economic reform. The outlook is not as negative as made out to be by the West.
K.U. MADA, Mumbai

The economy is resilient and it will make a major impact in 2012. The debt crisis in Europe has spread pessimism but the Indian economy can afford to ignore it and

Uddhav Thackeray's pre-poll rhetoric sounds hollow and is not likely to cut much ice with Mumbaikars whose tolerance for the blatantly inept and corrupt BMC has been stretched to breaking point.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

The article by Dhiraj Nayyar is very well written and correctly points out the condition of the Indian economy. I think it is the Planning Commission which is responsible for not factoring in the high cost of living set off by high interest rates and inflation and creating the growth crisis. The RBI should bring back the rate

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

``
11

``

The forecast for 2012 indeed looks grim. The Government should start damage-control immediately. By denying facts the UPA will only end up drowning the nation in economic misery.

Mail
of interest to comfortable levels if Montek Singh Ahluwalia wants to see growth take place.
B.S. AGGARWAL, Panchkula
MMRDA

35
not turn up at his fast at ground in large numbers ("Anna Falls into Mumbai Trap", January 9). It is a pity that people lack sustained interest and enthusiasm in building this country. Or have the people fallen prey to the malicious campaign unleashed by the politicians against whom Anna has waged war? An old man from Ralegan Siddhi stood up against the corrupt and powerful Indian government and brought the issue of corruption to the centrestage. Let us not get distracted by the debate on whether Anna and his team have a political agenda. We should allow Team Anna to campaign against the corrupt politicians as that's the only way we can hold these politicians accountable. the fact that Anna had to abandon his fast on December 29. The media that catapulted him to iconic status now appears critical of his capacity to sustain a movement of any significance. But we shouldn't forget that if for some reason Anna is not around, someone else will be take up the challenge to lead the movement.
M. KUMAR, Agra

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
F E B R U A RY 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Correction
In the story "On the Edge of an Abyss", January 9, Deepak Parekh was described as chairman of HDFC Bank. He is chairman of HDFC. The error is regretted.

Indian Cricket-- Back to the Pavilion
Indian Cricket was virtually annihilated at Chepauk (Madras) when England won the third Test by 200 runs and wrapped up the current fivematch series to retain the rubber. It was ironical that Madras, which has so often seen Indian cricket at its very best, was the scene of the most humiliating defeat suffered by the home team on Indian soil. Indeed, it is poetic justice that the severe drubbing to Bedi and his men has been handed by England, who suffered their first Test defeat at Madras almost a quarter of a century ago, at the hands of Vijay Hazare and his colleagues. India got the better of England by an innings and eight runs, and also managed to square the five-match series. It was, incidentally, also India's first-ever victory in a Test.The performance of our batsmen at Madras has, once again, underlined their utter inadequacy, especially when the chips are down. One can understand occasional failure with the bat, but there can be no excuse for the utterly supine and anaemic batting dished out by our "recognised"batsmen. by Saradindu Sanyal

Role Model
It is refreshing to read about a judge who has all the qualities of a gentleman and who does not let his personal opinion come in the way of delivering justice ("Conscience Keeper in Age of Scams", January 9). Our country needs more people like him, specially in politics. Justice Altamas Kabir would make a great leader too.
KAMAL SHUKLA, Lucknow

Poll Position
Your election special feature was a great mix of facts, knowledge, packed with great pictures and interesting bits from the states going to polls ("Polls Apart", January 9). Hope you continue this practice throughout the elections.
VEENA PAUL, Chandigarh

The Departed
The feature on the icons who left us in 2011 was a great effort on INDIA TODAY's part to honour these great people ("Long Goodbye", January 9). The year has been brutal as it has taken away some of our successful and celebrated superstars. Hats off to your team.
CHARIKA SINGH, Sikkim

N. VITTAL, Bangalore

Medal Hunt
I sincerely hope Indian atheletes perform very well at the London Olympics in 2012 ("Faster, Higher and Stronger in London", January 9). Only those who stood out at the Commonwealth and Asian games should qualify for automatic selection. Everyone else must be be put through stiff trials.
BIBEKA GOSWAMI, Kolkata

Strategy-makers of Anna's team made their first mistake by singularly opposing the Congress candidate in the Hisar Lok Sabha by-election without waiting for the winter session of Parliament by when the Prime Minister had promised a strong Lokpal Bill. They went ahead and opposed the Congress despite none of the other contestants having a clean image.
SUBHASH CHANDRA AGRAWAL, New Delhi

Poor Resolve
Mumbai let Anna down as the supporters there did

The year 2011 ended on a solemn note as many of our cultural icons faded into memory. Your feature was a reminder of the void that they have left in the lives of their relatives and in those of their admirers.
SONIA SEN, Hyderabad

There is no use denying

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

LEVER CAUGHT BEHIND OFF BEDI FOR 23 AT MADRAS TEST

12

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

