P O LL S A P A R T
RAJ KUMAR SHIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

WILD
C A R D
DINESH DIXIT WITH HIS STUDENTS

COUNT ME IN

N

SINGH IS NOT KING
rime Minister Manmohan Singh is no longer the brilliant countenance that Congress splashed through its campaigns in the 2007 Assembly polls and the 2009 Lok Sabha elections in Punjab. Punjabis, all the way from Ambala to Amritsar, danced with joy when Sonia Gandhi made him Prime Minister in 2004. Many were even willing to forget the Gandhi family's `misdemeanours', including the massacres of 1984. Now, there is more than a murmur against their favourite sardar. Manmohan's image has been sullied by corruption and inflation. He is now increasingly viewed as a `weak' Prime Minister. While Congress nominees are actively seeking appearances by Sonia and Rahul Gandhi, few want Manmohan. Some Congressmen admit privately that they are relieved he will address only two public rallies, at Amritsar and Ludhiana on by Asit Jolly January 21.

BACK TO SCHOOL
here are those born into political families. There are others born with the gift of the gab. For the rest, there's always Career Point. This one-stop finishing school for political upstarts is the brainchild of Agra-based Dinesh Dixit, 38, the centre's director. "The youth have to be trained in the art of winning elections," he says. Dixit has devised a seven-day crash course on `politricks' . For the first six days, students would be acquainted with the leadership qualities of successful politicians, and tips on how to sway the electorate and circumvent Election Commission (EC) rules. On the seventh day, there would be a practical demonstration. Political aspirants would also be taught the dirty little secrets of crowd management and how and when to exploit the media for publicity purposes. The course fee: a meagre Rs 12,000. "Elections have become more complex affairs because of the EC's directives. A little training would do no harm," says Rajesh Kumar, a non-affiliated politician. Career Point was formerly a training centre for IAS aspirants. Grooming political hopefuls after babu aspirants is as apt a step-up as it gets. by Sanmay Prakash

P

T

Politics for Dummies
Lessons in oratorical skills Each student is given the caste break-up of his constituency Tricks to bypass Election Commission's code of conduct Case studies of how independent candidates win elections How to manage both crowds and the media

Former cricketer and BJP MP Navjot Sidhu managed to get his wife, also called Navjot, 48, a party ticket for the Assembly polls in Punjab. A gynaecologist, the star spouse has heated up the contest in the Amritsar East constituency where she faces former Amritsar mayor Sunil Dutti. "I did not want her to contest," says Sidhu. Rumour has it that a BJP internal poll voted her best suited for the seat, the catch being she shares her husband's name. Get two for the price of one.
by Asit Jolly

N.D. TIWARI

D. Tiwari may be out of active politics, but the octogenarian, who was eased out of the governor's office in Andhra Pradesh, still counts in Uttarakhand. His influence is strongest in the 14 constituencies of the Kumaon belt. This message has been received by both Congress and BJP. The 87-year-old Tiwari is still feted at all important BJP government functions as the man who brought development to the hillstate. There are also rumours that his NGO, Nirantar Vikas Samiti, may be contesting all 70 seats in the coming elections. This could cut the Congress vote. When these rumours reached Delhi, the Congress despatched Chaudhary Birender Singh, its general secretary in charge of the state, to call on Tiwari at his residence in Dehradun. Tiwari is yet to declare which side he is on. This is not good news for the Congress which doesn't even have a chief ministerial candidate in place to lead the by Priya Sahgal party's campaign.

GUNNING FOR GLORY
Mayawati's Social Welfare Minister Indrajeet Saroj is Uttar Pradesh's selfappointed head of the gun lobby. At poll stumps, he promises voters gun licences. He first mentioned it at Maihar on December 27. At Karari on January 3, he told gun licence aspirants, "BSP ki sarkar phir aane par licence rewdi ki tarah bante jayenge (Gun licences would flow if the BSP retains power)." Kaushambi DC Atul Kumar said Saroj would be issued a notice.
by Ashish Misra

SILVER SPOON
Arjun Singh Badal, 17, the youngest Badal kinsman on the campaign trail in Punjab, dared granduncle, Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal, to a contest in Gidderbaha constituency. "Let Dadaji come and we will give him a contest he won't easily forget," said the Class XI student of Choate Rosemary Hall school in Wallingford, Connecticut, US, who is on an extended winter break to campaign for father Manpreet Badal in the polls. Manpreet is contesting from Gidderbaha and Maur constituencies. "All these big sardars in blue turbans (Akalis) and white turbans (Congress) are chors (thieves)," the feisty youngster declared in Bhucho Kalan village. by Asit Jolly
ARJUN SINGH BADAL

OF THE

Chali chali re patang meri chali re, chali badlon ke paar hoke dor pe sawaar, sari duniya yeh dekh dekh jali re (My kite soars, flying high beyond the clouds on its string, while the world looks on with envy).
-- People's Party of Punjab leader and former finance minister

NAVJOT

WEEK

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Manpreet Badal, whose election symbol is a kite, on January 7

TIT-FOR-TAT
On D.P.Yadav being kept out of the Samajwadi Party by Akhilesh Yadav "Akhilesh Yadav is a kid and quite immature. He has just walked out of the school (of politics) and will take some time to learn things."
D.P. YADAV

SPEEDO SINGH
Comedian and satirist Jaspal Bhatti has been hired by the Election Commission (EC) to inspire people to vote. But his first target seems to be the EC itself. He has taken exception to the commission's attempts to block `offensive'content in Akali Dal and Congress advertisements and wants it to end the pretence of being politically correct. He

JASPAL BHATTI

calls Punjab polls "The Great Kabaddi Cup"and is carrying placards depicting key rivals wearing Speedos."Mudslinging is good," Bhatti declared during a demonstration outside the Punjab EC's office in Chandigarh."It is not just entertaining, but informs voters on the wrongdoings of politicians.This engages voters, reveals truths and that can only be good for the democratic process,"he said. by Asit Jolly

"If he thinks I am a kid, let him be happy with his perception. We will continue to work in the manner which is best suited for the people."
AKHILESH YADAV

NEW

NEW

K S DHALIWAL

P O LL S A P A R T
RINGSIDE VIEW
Amarjit Chandan

Why So Serious?

GUEST COLUMN

okes, even the most absurd, have their own logic. Cynically we laugh at others, make fun of them at the cost of human decency.They are usually made at one's physical and mental disabilities.At its best, a joke can be the weapon of the weakest against the most powerful.A joke against Joseph Stalin by Russian poet Osip Mandelstam cost him his life.A close writer friend, who has translated Shakespeare's collected works into Punjabi, is the uncrowned king of jokes and has written his autobiography in the genre. He told me a true incident: once in Jalandhar, a sexologist selling sex pills stood in the election. People thought he must have taken an overdose. I haven't seen any psychoanalytical study of the electorate of any single or multi-party political system--how the voters perceive or fantasise about their favourite politicians. My maternal uncle, who had served in the Indian National Army and never married, idolised Indira Gandhi and kept her photo clipped from a newspaper in his wallet.Those were the pre-Doordarshan times. Two powerful leaders of our times, Chairman Mao and his latter-day buddy Henry Kissinger, knew better about the Freudian aspect of holding political power in their hands. Mao's quotation was a mantra in my youth: power flows from the barrel of the gun. Kissinger's dictum is oft-quoted-- power is the ultimate aphrodisiac.That's another ugly dimension of our post-modernist ideology-free body politic. In the Punjab elections, a new phenomenon has emerged--bhaibhatijavad (promoting brothers and nephews) has been replaced by dhee-puttravad (promoting sons and daughters), which is not seen as nepotism.`Winnability'is the only morality.Who cares if the candidate is a known criminal and smuggler.Thank goodness being an `NRI'(na raha Indian), I have no voting rights in my own homeland. The author is a London-based poet and writer

J

ormer Punjab director general of police Paramdeep Singh Gill, 60, is under 24x7 surveillance by the Election Commission (EC). Gill is contesting the Moga seat as a Shiromani Akali Dal candidate. However, his numerous election code violations have put him under the EC scanner. When confronted by EC officials, Gill said he had "no clue" about the violations. The EC is ready to collect evidence of any further violations. by Asit Jolly

RAHUL GANDHI , IN GORAKHPUR ON JANUARY 8

SPLITSVILLE
On January 8, former MP Anuradha Chaudhary left Ajit Singh's Rashtriya Lok Dal to share the dais with Samajwadi Party chief Mulayam Singh Yadav. She was reportedly upset about Ajit not ensuring a UPA ministerial berth for her when he joined the Cabinet.
by Santosh Kumar

THIS DOESN'T FIGURE
ational Election Watch (NEW) vehemently opposes the Election Commission's (EC) decision to raise the Assembly poll expenditure limit from Rs 10 lakh to Rs 16 lakh for candidates. "It makes no sense," says NEW founder member Jagdeep Chhokar. Data compiled by his group shows that the average expenditure per candidate in the 2007 Punjab Assembly polls was barely Rs 5 lakh, half the maximum limit available at the time. Officially, Congress nominees on an average spent Rs 5.07 lakh, Akali Dal candidates Rs 5.27 lakh and BJP contestants Rs 4.97 lakh, although you have to be an exceptional fool to believe that these figures are accurate. The big spender was the Akali Dal's Ranjit Talwandi, who spent Rs 9.83 lakh in his constituency, Raikot, while the BJP's Ram Kumar turned up as thriftiest, with an election expenditure of Rs 98,969 in the Abohar seat. Chhokar says candidates spend a lot more than they declare."The Election Commission leaves us no choice. Mark my words. Now that the EC has raised the limit to Rs 16 lakh, everyone will show their expenditure as Rs 10 lakh," says a Congress politician. by Asit Jolly

Photographs: MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Wrestling with the Modern
AKHILESH YADAV TRIES TO CHANGE HIS FATHER MULAYAM SINGH YADAV'S ANTITECHNOLOGY STANCE BY SHOWING HIM THE SAMAJWADI PARTY'S OFFICIALWEBSITE

N

COVER DRIVE
Pathhar ka hathi khak ka. Dhaka hathi sawa lakh ka (The stone statue meant little; covered, each could win a lakh-and-quarter votes). Those rejoicing at the Election Commission's (EC) decision to cover Mayawati's statues may have a rude shock waiting for them. The aforementioned SMS is doing the rounds in Lucknow. The EC move may just help Mayawati by adding to the perception of Dalit persecution. A Bahujan Samaj Party leader points out,"Why not cover all hand pumps as well (Rashtriya Lok Dal's symbol)?"The political debate aside, it's a logistics problem as well. EC officials say in Lucknow alone, there are 10 Mayawati statues and over 200 stone elephants. The Noida park has 52 elephant statues and two Mayawati statues. Last heard, EC officials were scouting for plastic sheets. by Priya Sahgal
A DRAPED ELEPHANT STATUE IN GOMTI NAGAR, LUCKNOW

BELIEVE IT OR NOT
Declared assets*

Rs 87.2 crore
MAYAWATI Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister

Rs 9.2 crore
PARKASH SINGH BADAL Punjab Chief Minister

Rs 6 lakh
OKRAM IBOBI SINGH Manipur Chief Minister

Rs 3.2 crore
DIGAMBAR KAMAT Goa Chief Minister

Shiromani Akali Dal's 40 `star' campaigners for the polls curiously include 28 contestants. It figures lightweights such as Sharanjit Dhillon, Jagdev Talwandi and Prem Singh Chandumajra. Election Commission officials know it's an obvious ploy to circumvent scrutiny by expenditure monitors but say their hands are tied. Each party is allowed 40 stars.

Rs 1.7 crore
B.C. KHANDURI Uttarakhand Chief Minister
* Source: Association for Democratic Reforms

Compiled by Abdus Salam

52

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

NEW

NEW

``
53

RED ALERT F

``

Indira Gandhi ka pota aur Rajiv Gandhi ka beta hoon, UP ko badle bina nahin hatoonga (I am Indira Gandhi's grandson and Rajiv Gandhi's son. I will not leave until I bring change to Uttar Pradesh).

POONAM SANDHU

