Cover Story MURDERS ATHOME

Murder has a terrible new face, new motive and a new address. Across urban India, seemingly normal people kill their closest relatives in the name of love, sex or jealousy.

By Damayanti Datta

T
ARUSHI TALWAR, FOUND DEAD AT HER HOME IN NOIDA ON MAY 16, 2008

he apex court will be looking into pillow covers and bed sheets. What is happening?" asked Justice A.K. Ganguly, on January 6, while hearing an appeal from Arushi's parents, Rajesh and Nupur Talwar. He refused to examine bed linen, a piece of evidence in the murder of the teenager at the Talwars' Noida home in May 2008. His verdict was clear: the Arushi Talwar murder trial would begin on February 4 at a Ghaziabad court. The Talwars, who had been using the legal process to delay trial, had finally run out of options. Accused of killing their teenage daughter and the domestic help, they now face criminal proceedings to prove their innocence beyond all doubt. A lot more than bloodstained linen will now be under judicial scrutiny. Across urban India, bedrooms have become dangerous arenas, of war, not love. The enemy is within, waiting to strike. In Bangalore, Kumar, a 27-year-old garment worker, hit his pregnant wife in a fit of anger for demanding new clothes on New Year. The blow killed her on January 4. In Delhi, Gaurav Arora, 22,
Photoimaging by MADHU BHASKAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

23

Cover Story MURDERS ATHOME
shot his two teenage cousins on January 2, because they inherited a much larger share of ancestral property than him. In Chennai on January 7, a 56-year-old employee of a private company, Muthu Palaniappan, killed his wife with a crowbar for fighting neighbours over TV noise. He told them later: "I have solved the issue." An epidemic of domestic murders has broken out over the past five years, peaking in 2011. Police files show intimate partner violence, driven by unrequited obsessions, hidden desires, illicit relations, jealousy, or a sense of being wronged. In the midst of a busy news year, while headlines got bigger over the 2G scam, Anna Hazare's protest or the rupee crisis, quietly, in the privacy of the home, the "ordinary" Indian was busy honing the extraordinary art of murder. Not criminals, not psychopaths, not dowry assassins or honour killers. Just friendly next-door neighbours who, until the day they killed, looked perfectly normal. Who would have imagined that auto driver Ranjit Das, 46, of Guwahati could decapitate his wife and then march through the streets, as he did in October 2011, just because he felt she had cheated on him? Or that Anushree Kundra, 39, a Bangalore professional, could visit her former boyfriend in Pune and, as recorded in October, burn his fiance alive? Or that one day in September last year, Anita, 30, a homemaker in Betul, Madhya Pradesh, who had never dared to refuse her husband Ramcharan's demands for `unnatural sex', would just snap. When he started to display indecent video clippings on his mobile, she picked up a stone and smashed his head in. The stale stench of death in urban homes is familiar to Dr T.D. Dogra who has for 40 years seen bodies in all stages of disintegration. The head of forensic medicine at All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi, ferrets out the dark, chilly secrets inside dead bodies. Murder, in his experience, was generally the domain of professional criminals. But these days, as he investigates bodies sent in by the police, he is increasingly struck by the smell of household chemicals in the viscera, the discoloration and injury from brutal violence. "It makes me unhappy to say this, but domestic murders are emerging as a major trend," he says. The police agree. Increasingly detectives have to force their way into genteel apartments, corral and question aloof neighbours, and check fingerprints in a sea of modern gadgets as doctors search for foulplay on wellclad corpses. "The crime graph is changing," states B.K. Gupta, Delhi Police commissioner. Property disputes and enmity, the usual bulk of urban crimes across India, is stagnating at around 18 per cent since 2007-08, shows National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data. Crimes of passion and provocation have upped from seven to about 35 per cent during this time. "They are unplanned and happen in moments of rage after heated arguments." Ninety-three per cent of the accused are first-timers belonging to all strata of society--MBAs to auto drivers. Have homes become dysfunctional? Urban families look as if they have a lot to celebrate: 46 per cent of India's 295 million households splurged on shopping and entertainment in a year of inflation; 67 per cent urban professionals are "happy" with their work; 60

GUEST COLUMN

DrT.D. Dogra

BODYOFEVIDENCE
The dead don't speak but forensics tells us lots about crime
s a forensic scientist, one encounters the dark and ugly side of intimate relations. One of my first cases of homicide was a domestic murder in the 1970s. I had just joined forensic medicine at AIIMS. The police had brought in the body of a 75-year-old woman, a resident of Lajpat Nagar, Delhi. It was natural death, we were told. But we found that she had been strangulated manually. Police investigation revealed that she was killed by her son for property. We came across the case of a wife, who refused to return to her husband despite his requests. So he came over to her parents' home, dragged her out to his Maruti van and forced sexual intercourse on her repeatedly. And during the struggle, he strangulated her. Our post-mortem examination revealed the full extent of his actions, particularly the vicious love bites. The DNA analysis of vaginal stains sealed the case and he was charged with murder. There was also the case of a 20-something young man with multiple stab wounds. Our examination revealed a homosexual orientation. It was a vital clue that helped the police nab the real culprit: a man who had invited the victim for a party and killed him with a sharp weapon. It is said that the dead can't speak but for us they tell their own tales. During autopsy, we study everything: tears, stains, cuts, soiling or foreign materials in clothing; body injuries, say, love bites, teeth bites or stains, for evidence of violence; genitals for proof of forced or voluntary sexual activity. We check evidence of repeated violence, immediate cause of death, strangulation, stabbing, blunt force or fire-arm injuries and for foreign materials--hair, fingernail scraping, swabs or stains. Post-mortem changes give us the time of death: bluish-purple or purplish-red discoloration under the skin after death that indicates the amount of reduced haemoglobin in the blood; rigor mortis or the stiffening and contraction of muscles that occurs two to three hours after death; signs of decomposition; asphyxiation and poisoning. Internal injuries or damage due to violence lie hidden deep in the body. Muscles are incised, and the three major body cavities--head, chest and abdomen--are cut open. The moment you open up the stomach, typical smells speak volumes about the manner of death. Kerosene, alcohol, cyanides, everything gives off its own smell in the gut. DNA profiling plays a major role in establishing the identities of both the victim as well as the assailant. Here, biological trace evidence--from hair, skin, carpet fibres, paint, glass particles, dust, dirt, pollens, semen, saliva or sweat--left by the assailant at the scene or on the body of the deceased plays a major role. The corpses also tell us about the personality of the murderers: the proprietary attitude towards partners or close family members, the propensity towards violence, obsession with weapons or the inability to let go of the closest relationship. They tell us to beware of people who threaten the people they ought to love most.

WHY I WHY I KILLED KILLED HIM HER
Confessional statements by wives to police, in 2011-12
He was a drunkard and used to harass me regularly. I was fed up with his relentless demand for unnatural sex. He was cheating on me. He suspected that I was having an extramarital affair and would fight constantly over it. He was a pervert.He watched porn films in front of our daughters. He used to beat me when I wouldn't give in to his demands. I wanted to be with my love. She would always call to check on me and disturb me at work. She would protest whenever I went to my parents'house. We weren't on the same wavelength. She was cheating on me. She called me impotent.I killed her.

A

Confessional statements by husbands in 2011-12
I was fed up with her.She nagged me all the time to buy her jewellery. She made fun of me,the way I look and how I make love to her.

GAURAV ARORA (RIGHT) IN POLICE CUSTODY

ACCUSED GAURAVARORA, 22 VICTIMS Cousins Shivani Arora, 19, and Vishal Arora, 16 CAUSE Contested inheritance LOCATION DELHI WEAPON Country-made revolver THE CASE It was 7.55 p.m. "Are you home? I'm coming." His is the last call on Shivani's mobile. He went down to the floor below and shot the cousins pointblank. He rummaged through the house to make it look like a robbery. His father gave the police the first lead, saying Gaurav was unhappy about his grandfather's will.

The writer is professor and head of the Department of Forensic Medicine and

24

Toxicology at All India Institute of Medical Sciences
INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

Cover Story MURDERS ATHOME
THE HINDU

per cent between age 16 and 34 are both religious and happy, with 93 per cent acknowledging parental help to get ahead in life, according to studies by Linked.in, MTV and the National Council of Applied Economic Research. Yet psychiatrists attest to rising footfalls from Happy Indians. Dr Harish Shetty sees "a lot of anger and very little fear of consequence" in many of his patients. "Verbalisation of feelings is a casualty of our times and pent up negative feelings are a bigger explosive than an RDX bomb," says the psychiatrist working with Hiranandani hospital in Mumbai. The murder of Arushi Talwar was one of the most dramatic episodes of 2008. Her parents projected the image of a happy family. "We were such a nice family," Nupur Talwar said in a television interview eight days after her daughter's death. "I always used to think I must have done something good in my last life to get such a nice family." She portrayed her husband as a doting father ("We were about to celebrate her birthday. Rajesh told Arushi to call as many friends, even if it were to become expensive"), maintained that she "trusted" the murdered domestic help, Hemraj, 45, and insisted that at the end of a heavy workday, it was quite possible to sleep through a murder at home

ACCUSED CHAITANYAREDDY, 34 VICTIM Wife Kiran Reddy, 30 CAUSE Marital discord LOCATION H Y D E R A B A D WEAPON Pillow THE CASE On June 17, 2011, the couple went to a party organised by her brother. Chaitanya reportedly got drunk and behaved badly at the party, yelling and fighting with the staff. On reaching home, they possibly had a tiff. Police investigation suggests "mental and physical harassment". Upset, angry and possibly inebriated, he smothered his wife with a pillow before falling into a drunken slumber. with noisy ACs and fans. If the police pointed a finger at them, the parents did so at murderers "out there". The city of Pune witnessed its own version of such a crime. On December 7, 2011, it woke up to the news that a father had strangled his four children before committing suicide. Chandrashekhar J. Ranaware, a 44-year-old landowner, used his estranged wife's saris to hang his four children, age four to 10, from ceiling fans in different rooms. The eldest daughter escaped when the knot came loose. The only trigger was a marital dispute. Ranaware was convinced that his wife, Varsha, 32, was seeing other men. Their fights ended in physical battery, for her as well as the children. Varsha left the house after one such incident two weeks before the killings. Going by police files, no kinship was sacred last year. Sons killed fathers and fathers killed sons; mothers killed daughters and sometimes died in their hands. If in October, a 55year-old Elumalai was killed by his wife and two sons in Chennai, in December a 42-year-old Delhi man, Milan Kumar, hired contract killers to murder his father and usurp property worth Rs 1.5 crore. Bengal witnessed two shocking cases of filicide: in a Kolkata suburb, police arrested a man for his 28-year-old son's murder last August. He confessed to hiring contract killers to get rid of him. A property dispute proved thicker than blood. A woman killed her five-yearold daughter after the toddler reportedly spilled the beans on her mother's extramarital affair. The NCRB reports about 1,200 to 1,400 child murders each year, but doesn't indicate how or why. Global ACCUSED ABHIJITSIKANDAR, 31 VICTIM Aasti Shekhar, 25 CAUSE Extramarital affair LOCATION B A N G A L O R E WEAPON Strangulation THE CASE "Today (he) told me about his girlfriends... I should adjust with these things"--a leaf from Aasti's diary. After they got married on February 27, 2011, he would turn the mobile speakerphone and speak to a woman he was involved with. On June 2, she was found hanging in her room. Police charged him with death caused by dowry harassment.
AASTI SHEKHAR'S DISTRAUGHT PARENTS, IN BANGALORE

FATAL ATTRACTION
Sensational murders at home that shocked the nation

Alavandar case, Chennai, 1952
Alavandar, a businessman, was beheaded in 1952 by Devaki, a woman he was chasing. The head, washed up from sea, fitted neatly on the body, found on a train.

NANAVATI

SYLVIA

Nanavati trial, Mumbai, 1959
Navy Commander K.M. Nanavati was let off by the jury after killing wife Sylvia's paramour. The trial gripped the nation's imagination.

INTENT ON EVIL
Watch out for tell-tale signs of a potential killer

Sex obsession Your partner makes excessive demands for sex, visits prostitutes, is addicted to porn or has affairs. Research ruse A spouse
with murder on their mind is likely to spend hours researching--tools, timing, method and manner. Sometimes, it reflects pre-homicidal planning.

account or secret debts, and ventures into dubious business investments.

Blood blades Watch out
for the unaccounted presence or use of sharp instruments which could easily double up as weapons of attack.

Fear factor It's time to
raise the alarm if you feel scared of your partner: verbal abuse, use of force or threats of violence.

Kill bill A disturbed mind often has a waning bank

data shows that killing of children, or filicide, is not that uncommon, accounting for 8 to 14 per cent of all homicides across the world. A 2004 study by Dewar Research, the Britain-based research body on domestic violence, on six countries shows that a parent is the principal suspect in up to 70 per cent of all family child homicides-- biological fathers being responsible for about 55 per cent of murders and mothers about 45 per cent. The motives for harming children are often

unclear and can range from punishing the mother to killing the child ostensibly "for his own good". Higher education or well-settled careers is no hindrance to barbaric crime. Case files record a number of educated and economically-independent women as victims. Consider Dr Chandra Vibhash, 31, of a Delhi government hospital, who killed his 27year-old wife Supriya, an engineer with an MBA degree, in September last year, for not being "on the same wavelength" as him. Earlier, in February, a 23-yearold computer engineer, K. Sridevi, was allegedly killed by her husband, another computer engineer, in Hyderabad within a year of marriage. Heat of passion and sudden provocation are hallmarks of the new crimes. According to studies conducted by Prateep V. Philip, inspector of police, Tamil Nadu Police Academy, since 1999, about 75 per cent of prisoners are jailed due to decisions taken in a fit of anger. And more than 40 per cent of the cases are over infidelity. "Men murder more often because as a gender, they are more suspicious and vengeful," says Philip. In Kerala, last July, holidaying couple Shyamala, 34, and

SUSHIL SHARMA

The tandoor case, Delhi, 1995
Then Delhi Youth Congress president Sushil Sharma's wife's body was fished out from a tandoor at a restaurant. He was convicted.

Suhaib Ilyasi, Delhi, 2000
His anti-crime activism on TV serial India's Most Wanted was a hit. Ilyasi was held after his wife Anju died under mysterious circumstances but was later set free.

Maria Susairaj, Mumbai, 2008
TV executive Neeraj Grover was killed by Kannada actress Maria Susairaj and her fiance, former naval officer Emile Jerome. Susairaj was held guilty of destroying evidence and Jerome convicted for culpable homicide.

26

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

27

NEW

NEW

Cover Story MURDERS ATHOME

SEVEN SLEAZY WAYS INDIANS KILL THEIR SPOUSE

Perfect murders gone wrong. Diabolical plots of some dangerous minds.
G Rope-play. He covered her eyes with a scarf and asked her to touch him. Bangalore engineer Satish Gupta then goaded wife Priyanka, 29, to imagine a burglary and tied her hands. He then strangled her and slit her throat. August 2011. G "My wife eloped with her lover after serving me tea laced with sedatives," Delhi travel agency executive Sumit Handa, 31, told the police. In reality, wife Niranjani

Pillay, 27, was dead, her body stuffed into a bag for disposal. Killed on suspicion of adultery. November 2011. G They met online and fell in love. Turned out Ludhiana man Jagdeep Singh, 30, was already married. Bitterness brewed. He choked wife Gurpreet Kaur, 24, to death and then "ransacked" the house. The police saw through the charade. August 2011. G Arti Sachdeva

claimed two men entered their west Delhi house and stabbed her husband Sonu, 38, to death. The law caught up with Arti, her paramour and the hired goon. September 2011. G Haridevpur, West Bengal resident Indrajit Pal, 41, attacked his wife of 17 years, Mousumi, with a pair of scissors for leaving him. May 2011. G Honeymoon to Mussoorie with husband Sachin Mishra,

32, turned fatal for Kanak. He killed her with stones, dumped her body in a forest and claimed that she drowned in the Ganga. October 2011. G Give a `supari' to goons to murder your wife and then make it seem like a hit-andrun case. That's what Delhi policeman Mangal Singh did. He was furious with his wife Meena for registering a dowry case against him. Meena, however, survived. September 2011.

Maheshkumar, 42, came to a tragic end, when he caught her reading a text message from another man. He stabbed her and then committed suicide in remorse. One out of five murders in Delhi is due to illicit relationships and unrequited love, reports the NCRB'S 2010 report. The age spectrum of murderous couples varies ACCUSED JAVED SHEIKH, 36 VICTIM Naved Sheikh, 22 CAUSE Affair with his wife LOCATION S A N T A C R U Z , M U M B A I WEAPON Chopper THE CASE It was Naved's phone calls at odd hours that aroused Javed's suspicion. His wife Riti, 28, was having an affair with Naved. A week before the stabbing, in early October, he caught them in a compromising position on the terrace of the building where Riti's parents live. Furious, Javed forced his wife to call her paramour for a supposedly secret rendezvous and killed him in front of her.

from late 20s to early 40s. "They usually happen during the first 10 years of the marriage," says Philip, "when passion and sexual desire peak." If intimate relationships are hardwired in romantic love, jealousy and sex, these are also the top three motives for all murders. Police data shows that most couples married for love,
MID DAY

with jealousy ruining their lives. "They indicate serious stress and thinning out of relationships within the family," says social psychologist Ashis Nandy. Delhi executive Sumit Handa, 31, and 27-year-old NRI Niranjani Pillay's journey to the altar started with two years of courtship but ended last November after four years of marriage, with Handa's uncontrollable jealousy snuffing out his wife's life. He stabbed her, chopped her into pieces, stuffed those into a trolley bag and disposed of it miles away. He even filed a police complaint that she had left home with her lover, jewellery and cash. Police say, he wanted to set the stage for a "perfect murder". Crime is the best way of looking at what is going on in society, they say. As Arushi Talwar's parents prepare for the long haul in court, the nation will take a hard look at the mother of all questions: what does it take to turn picture perfect family bliss into murder?
With Lakshmi Kumaraswami, Kiran Tare, Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Kaushik Deka, Mona Ramavat and Tithi Sarkar

JAVED'S WIFE RITI

Click on iPad for the moving cover

28

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

NEW

