NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA
BARACK OBAMA

Dumb and Dumber
In the cover story of the latest issue of Newsweek magazine Why Are Obama's Critics So Dumb?,Andrew Sullivan, author and editor of the blog, The Dish, wrote,"The attacks from both the right and the left on the man (Obama) and his policies aren't out of bounds.They're simply--empirically-- wrong," and that "Obama has delivered in a way that the unhinged right and purist left have yet to understand or absorb".The article has caused a stir in the world of American politics and conservatives have taken to the Internet to prove that Sullivan is the dumbest of them all.

buzz feed

Let's Play Games

SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

app alert smart sheet Together is better?

``

You'd have to be stupid,fanatical and dishonest to argue that Barack Obama's failures are part of an ingenious `long game'that is destined to succeed.
Joel Pollak,editor-in-chief, Breitbart.com

In a bid to "highlight illegal dowry demands" and get some publicity, Shaadi.com launched a Facebook game called Angry Brides that lets players attack potential grooms seeking a dowry. We suspect brides are using it as the perfect excuse to throw things at the often obnoxious grooms.

AP

web wow

viral video

Here's the Money
In these troubled times, www.kickstarter.com helps you fund your dreams. Post details of your project here and wait for people to start pledging support. If enough people make pledges by a deadline, the idea is funded. A few winners on the site: A weekend-long block party celebrating comedy in Los Angeles--69% funding A graphic novel about the life of an art historian/graphic novelist--197% funding A superhero-themed card and dice game--452% funding

Look Who's Talking
A simple conversation between friends gave birth to a Twitter account under the handle @s***girlssay. It garnered more than eight million followers and recently, account creator Graydon Sheppard, 29, started posting videos of the feed, starring him as the girl, on YouTube. Featuring the permanent "I always knew he was a jerk," to the dangerous "the thing is, I shouldn't have to ask", the Twitter feed and videos are hilarious, and have managed to upset white feminists.

blog watch

Young and Fabulous
Mumbai-based Malini Agarwal is a celebrity, at least on the Internet.A professional dancer, part-time emcee and, most recently, a television producer,Agarwal, 34, was not a part of Bollywood until she started writing about it in her blog. She quit her job at Channel V last year and started to blog full time on www.missmalini.com and now has a team of writers and trusted insider sources in the Indian film industry working for her. Updated throughout the day, the blog carries celebrity interviews, party news, redcarpet reports and Bollywood breaking news. Her most recent revelation was that John Abraham got married in Las Vegas.And when Shah Rukh Khan wondered what happened to Farex babies of the past,Agarwal wrote about child models from the 70s and 80s and where they were now. Here's what got people talking this week

``

Top of the Lot

Baffled with the millions of apps that try to grab your attention on your iPhone, iPad and iPod? Here are three that deserve it: An addition to the range of `Angry...' games, Angry Gran lets you bash people on the street to earn money. Turning your phone into a scanner, CamScanner turns pictures into PDF files and gives you the option to retouch them. DoseCast sends you a reminder to take your medicines on time.

Uncommon sense prevails
An article on The New York Times website titled How Yoga Can Wreck Your Body has angered and tickled many Internet-dwellers with its theory. Most critics complained that writer William J. Broad listed examples of people getting injured while practising yoga, without considering the obvious--that all forms of exercise have to be practiced with care."Timothy McCall, a physician who is the medical editor of Yoga Journal, called the headstand too dangerous for general yoga classes," Broad wrote.Well, duh!

From the prodigious Picasso to Apple's introverted engineering wizard Steve Wozniak,geniuses swear by the power of solitude.In an nytimes.com essay,author Susan Cain questions whether creativity really flourishes in a work culture that relies on "the new groupthink"and says while socialising at work is important,real creative work happens only in solitude.

