UP FRONT

by NRIPENDRA MISRA

DO WE NEED ASUPERCOP?
t will be naive to think that the institution of Lokpal will of officials working in the Lokpal institution. To entrust the eradicate all forms of corruption. The devil lies in the de- functions of policing over various institutions is only to contail. Unless we are careful, the Lokpal can become a vert the Lokpal into a supercop. In our debate for an effective Lokpal, we have overleviathan among a plethora of institutions. The transition from rhetoric to the reality of establishing a strong Lokpal looked the trend of near paralysis in decision-making. could lay the foundations for a parallel government. Any measure which will discourage the honest officers Imagine 10 lakh complaints from 60 lakh Central from decision-making will hurt the national cause. Policy Government employees coming to Lokpal every year. The decisions are taken on the basis of certain known and dedemand on human resources and finances would be colos- rived facts. A concept of notional loss hurting the public insal and the danger is that a new breed of corrupt would terest can cripple the decision-making process. Such a principle could even question the tariff determined after proliferate within the very agency dedicated to end it. Public Interest Foundation, an NGO, has gathered lapse of years of restructuring or liberal measures in tax through RTI applications that there are thousands of cases, administration. We must not overlook the fact that a pubwhich are more than three years old, pending before most lic official is as much a patriot and as dedicated as the civil of the state lokayuktas. The investigation, prosecution and society would claim itself to be. We need to remember that conviction data is also not impressive. Research conducted any element of distrust or suspicion would only erase the by the Azim Premji Institution also brings out that the credibility of the institutions and functionaries who enjoy lokayukta in Karnataka is being overburdened with cor- specific jurisdictional power granted by the Constitution. ruption complaints and the cases under trial are pending The solution lies in the selection of able persons to head for more than five years, with a poor conviction rate in constitutional and statutory bodies. The Lokpal should have powers to investigate and take complaints where the trial has been completed. Further, the massive inflow of unfiltered complaints has taken the appropriate measure for prosecution with the help of its precious time of its highly specialised staff. The data on dis- own staff and supporting organisations. The powers to posal of appeals in the office of Chief Election verify and confiscate uncorroborated assets could be enCommissioner also reveals a similar story. To think of the trusted to the Lokpal under defined procedures and prinJan Lokpal Bill as a solution to all such problems is to ciples. The autonomy of Lokpal in terms of its functions, trivialise the issue. It does not fix the system; nor does it re- administrative and financial powers should be unqualified form the institutions of governance. In our enthusiasm for so that it can focus on complaints relating to senior-level a strong Lokpal, we must not shake the delicate equilib- bureaucrats and political functionaries. Without going into legal and constitutional aspects, it rium that our Constitution has SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com may be expedient to pass the granted in terms of checks and balLokpal Bill without the overarchances among the three arms of ing provision for the creation of government--the legislature, the state-level lokayuktas. Many judiciary and the executive. states have already legislated on One of the paramount princithe lokayukta institution. The latples of democracy is the separation est Act passed by Uttarakhand of powers and not its concentration government has been widely in one institution. In democracy, acclaimed. It could become a the supremacy of Parliament has to precedent for other states which be acknowledged. The demand of do not have a lokayukta. We need total autonomy for the Lokpal and to pass a balanced Lokpal Bill, placement of institutions like CBI whose time has come. Any delay and CVC under it is nothing less than will only work against the alreadythe creation of another bureaumobilised nationwide opinion. cratic hierarchy. A strong Lokpal Separately, a package of other need not be entrusted with measures could further boost our unchecked powers of supervision campaign against corruption. over the CBI, CVC and the judiciary. It The transition from rhetoric is arguable whether powers to into the reality of establishing vestigate, prosecute, impose disciNripendra Misra, a former a strong Lokpal could lay plinary sanctions for forfeiture of chairman of Telecom Regulatory the foundations for a assets and even quasi-judicial powAuthority of India, is director of parallel government. ers could be entrusted in the hands Public Interest Foundation

I

14

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

