Na tion

UKMURDER
"He has been treated appallingly. It has now become obvious that the police should not have arrested him and the poor guy's life has now been ruined," said a woman who lives close to Sivia's bungalow on Laurel Drive near Abingdon. The reaction among Sivia's colleagues and friends from the United States is one of shock and disbelief. Roger Pynn, professor of physics at Indiana University and who worked with Sivia at the Los Alamos National Lab, says Sivia was "thoroughly westernised" in most ways although he wore the traditional turban and kept a beard. He also says that Sivia was an open and kind person. Rex P. Hjelm,

By Aditi Khanna and

Indira Kannan

A

n Indian-origin Oxford University professor has been arrested in connection with the mysterious death of a colleague. Devinderjit Singh Sivia was led away in handcuffs on January 11 after the body of Steven Rawlings was discovered at his home in Southmoor, Oxfordshire. The 49-year-old Sikh mathematician from St John's College was later released on bail after spending 36 hours in police custody. Two separate post-mortems were conducted but they were unable to determine the exact cause of Rawlings's death. Initial reports of a violent altercation between the two "best friends" have now been dismissed and the most likely cause of death is a suspected heart attack. Thames Valley Police detectives say they are keeping an open mind in the case and probing it from all angles. On the night of his death, Sivia and 50-year-old Rawlings had gone out for dinner at a local pub. Sivia later invited Rawlings to stay over at his home since Rawlings's wife, Linda, 50, was away. Sivia and Rawlings have been described as extremely close. They co-authored Foundations of Science Mathematics, published in 1999. Rawlings, a tutor of physics at St Peter's College and a leading British astrophysicist, was in a troubled emotional state and reportedly recovering from a breakdown last year. He was also contemplating resigning from his post at Oxford. Linda believes what happened was a `tragic accident'. "I do not believe Steve's death is murder... I do not believe Devinder should be tarnished," she said soon after the incident. Sivia's family moved to England when he was five. He went on to study science at Cambridge University, completing a first class degree and PhD before going to the United States in 1988, where he was a post-doctoral research fellow at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. His best-known work is Data Analysis: A Bayesian Tutorial published in 1996. The book is widely used by undergrad-

DEATH AMONG GENTLE MEN
The mysterious death of an Oxford astrophysicist leads to the arrest of his India-born friend and colleague.

KARNATAKA

GRAND DREAMS FOR GRANDSON
The JD(S) is grooming Kumaraswamy's son Nikhil. Can the third-generation Gowda reverse the party's fortunes?
ikhil Gowda, 23, former Karnataka chief minister H.D. Kumaraswamy's son and former prime minister H.D Deve Gowda's grandson, is all padded up for an innings in politics. The Janata Dal (Secular), of which his father is the state chief, wants to groom him for a bigger role in the future. But there is no word on when the official baptism will take place as his grandfather, the party's national chief, is against him joining politics. Nikhil had a soft launch in Kanakapura, part of his father's Bangalore Rural Lok Sabha constituency, on Kumaraswamy's 52nd birthday on December 16. There he shared the stage with his parents. His mother, Anita, is an MLA from Madhugiri. Nikhil has represented Kumaraswamy at social functions in his constituency. Analysts call it a tactical move by Kumaraswamy to infuse young blood in the party. With the BJP making inroads in his bastion, wresting the Chennapatna Assembly seat in May 2011, the former chief minister wants to push his son as a candidate from the Ramagaram-Chennapatna belt in the 2013 Assembly elections. Nikhil has had his share of problems with the law. He was involved in a late night brawl outside a Bangalore hotel in October 2006, when Kumaraswamy was chief minister. "Nikhil has changed a lot since then and is much more sober now," Kumaraswamy says. He, how-

N

ROGER PYNN, Indiana University

"Sivia has a good sense of humour. He was always invited to social occasions as people enjoyed being with him."

BK RAMESH

NIKHIL GOWDA

DEVINDERJIT SINGH SIVIA (RIGHT) WAS HELD IN CONNECTION WITH THE DEATH OF STEVEN RAWLINGS (LEFT)

"I have known Devinderjit Sivia for several years and always found him a gentle person of great integrity."

REX P. HJELM, Los Alamos Neutron Science Center

KUMARASWAMYWANTS NIKHILAS THE NEXT JD(S) LEADER. FATHER DEVE GOWDA THINKS POLITICS IS NO PLACE FOR THE YOUTH.
ever, hastens to add that he is not sure if Nikhil is keen on joining politics. "I don't really know if he is interested in politics. He is still young," he told INDIA TODAY. Deve Gowda, however, has made his opposition clear. He believes today's politics is no place for the youth. "I will advise Nikhil against entering politics and urge him to stick to business," he says. Nikhil will attend a youth meeting of the JD(S) in Uttara Kannada district on January 28. Whether this will lead to bigger things for him depends on whose writ prevails--the father's or the grandfather's. by Sowmya Aji

uate students of physical sciences and cited by peers and colleagues of this field. The academic has taught Mathematics for Natural Sciences to chemistry and physics undergraduates for several years at Oxford. Sivia's father, 80-year-old retired mathematics teacher Gurbaksh, said his son was still in a state of shock over the incident. He goes on to add, "I can't believe they would have fallen out. They have been friends since they were students at Cambridge. They went back more than two decades. My son is a dedicated teacher. He has very simple habits. He never drinks, he

never smokes. It's unimaginable how something like this could have happened." Andrew Hamilton, vice-chancellor of Oxford University, said the university community was shocked and "profoundly saddened" by the unexplained death. Sivia's brother, Gurdip, 59, a warehouse worker from Birmingham in the United Kingdom, has a different theory. He claims Rawlings was out of control and attacked his brother. "My brother defended himself and while restraining Rawlings had a heart attack," he said. Sivia's friends and neighbours believe he should never have been arrested.

scientist at the Los Alamos Neutron Science Center, says, "I have known Devinder for several years and always found him a gentle person of great integrity." Thomas J. Loredo, a senior research associate in the Department of Astronomy at Cornell University, has known the Sikh mathematician since the early 1990s. Loredo is an astronomer who has found Sivia's work useful in his field. The mystery behind Rawlings's death continues to deepen as there is no final word yet on what actually happened on that January night between the two friends. 

56

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

NEW

NEW

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

