OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2012

T H E B O L D & T H E B R AV E

THE ARSONIST
ARVIND KEJRIWAL
Arvind Kejriwal's fearlessness in taking on the powerful has sparked a fire among ordinary citizens that threatens to singe the Establishment
By Dhiraj Nayyar

O

n November 27, the day after the launch of his Aam Aadmi Party, Arvind Kejriwal and some close associates met to take stock at the party's small office in Kaushambi, Ghaziabad, just outside Delhi. One of the associates carried a Hindi newspaper clip deeply critical of 44-year-old Kejriwal and his party. A majority of those present dismissed the article as the work of a journalist, who, they argued, had always been antagonistic to Kejriwal and his movement. Kejriwal chose to read the article. After he finished, he looked up and said, "But all that he has written is true. It is true we were on the dais separated by a barricade from the people who had come for the launch. It is true there was security and it is true we quickly left the venue without interacting with the people present." Kejriwal was genuinely concerned. On the very day of its launch, his party had already become like others. Like all politicians, he had distanced himself from the common man.

RIDDING ORDINARY CITIZENS OFTHE FEAR OFTHE POWERFUL
The prospect of frittering away a unique movement at a unique juncture in history is what scares the fearless Kejriwal. "I am not afraid of anyone," says the man who has taken on India's powerful--from Robert Vadra to Nitin Gadkari to Mukesh Ambani--in a matter of months. "But I am afraid of making a mistake in my own movement." He wants everything to work to plan. The aam aadmi-turned-politician agrees to meet INDIA TODAY at his home, a stone's throw away from his office in Kaushambi. Somewhat ironically, the anti-government crusader lives in government accommodation--in an apartment building for Indian Revenue Service officers--courtesy his wife Sunita who is still a serving officer. She was most recently posted in the Serious Frauds Investigation Office before she proceeded on leave for two years. Kejriwal says a group of friends from his IIT, Kharagpur, days now based in the US pool together Rs 25,000 a month for him to spend on personal expenses. He lives the life of an ordinary middle-class citizen. His drawing room is spartanly furnished with cane chairs. It is lit with tubelights. His family is at home on a Sunday but Kejriwal has only just returned in the evening after a day at office. "We manage to go out once every fortnight to watch a film," he says with a smile. What motivates a man to give up a good job and quality life to become a crusader? "I am motivated every day to fight against injustice," says Kejriwal. "Everyone feels strongly about injustice. Of course, some feel it more strongly than others," he adds. A week later, thousands of citizens in Delhi and across the country poured onto the streets to protest the injustice done to a 23-year-old paramedical student gang raped and brutally tortured in a moving bus. Clearly, the aam aadmi is feeling the injustice. Kejriwal has every right to feel vindicated. "People were earlier afraid of what the

ARVIND KEJRIWAL

REUBEN SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2012
SHEKHAR GHOSH /www.indiatodayimages.com

ings in Union minister Salman Khurshid's trust and hitting out at businessmen with Swiss bank accounts. He ran out of steam by the fourth exposé --the media lost interest as his targets' profiles dipped and the evidence presented became thinner--but by then he had shaken the Establishment to the core. Kejriwal insists the exposés were never meant to keep him in the news. According to political scientist Yogendra Yadav, WORKING WITH BEGGARS a close aide of Kejriwal, the exON KOLKATA'S STREETS posés were important for two But what drove him to public reasons. "They took the moveservice? Kejriwal is stumped. ment and Kejriwal firmly out of "Many people ask me that Hazare's shadow. Second, they question. To be honest, I don't established that the ruling know the answer." What he class, cutting across parties does remember is that he took and including big business, his first real step into the was in cahoots and corrupt." world of public service at That set the stage for KejriMother Teresa's Missionaries wal's next venture, politics. He of Charity in Kolkata. "That insists it was the right move to was in the early 1990s. I had THE KEJRIWALS LOVE FAMILY OUTINGS. THEY MAKE IT A POINT TO GO OUT FOR A MOVIE ONCE EVERY FORNIGHT. make despite opposition from spent two-three years worknot just Hazare but also Kiran ing at Tisco in Jamshedpur after my graduation from IIT." His real conducted a raid on the offices of a Bedi and N. Santosh Hegde, his colaim at the time was to get into IAS and multinational and found evidence of leagues in the earlier Team Anna. he had just written his mains exams. extensive tax evasion. A huge penalty "Beyond a point, the Government will He was waiting for an interview call was imposed on the company. "They not listen to you. On Jan Lokpal, for exand had some time to experiment. did not even appeal our verdict," says ample, they will do nothing. That is "That's when I approached Mother Kejriwal. "The CEO, a foreigner, why we need to enter politics to evenTeresa. She told me to work with the threatened us. He said `we control tually change the system," he says. Kejriwal launched the Aam Aadmi beggars on Kolkata's streets." He was your Government, we can get anyone moved by what he saw. "I used to clean transferred'," recalls Kejriwal. His Party in the last week of November. their wounds, which were often al- boss was transferred in a week. Several names had been suggested, most gangrenous, and give them a Kejriwal would leave IRS three years including Swaraj Party. The vision bath," he says. later to focus on his NGO Parivartan, document of India Against CorrupAfter spending two months with which did advocacy work for a right tion, a precursor to the Aam Aadmi Mother Teresa, he worked with the to information law. Ten years later, he Party, had laid out as its central goal Ramakrishna Mission, which was would become the face of the citizens' a second revolution or real swaraj afworking on rural development proj- struggle against corruption, supplant- ter the first in 1947. In the end, Vadra's slight at the `mango man' and the ects in West Bengal. That made him ing one-time mentor Anna Hazare. Congress's apparent usurpation of the keener than ever to join IAS, where he felt he could effect real change.He ELECTIONS WILLBE HARDER THAN aam aadmi led Kejriwal and his team to name the party Aam Aadmi Party did not make it to IAS but qualified for EFFECTING EXPOSÉS the Indian Revenue Service. He was His own rise began with Hazare's (AAP). The guiding principle of the new reluctant to join but friends per- favourite method of protest: Hunger party is "puri azadi (full freedom)", as suaded him to take it up. He spent the strike. He quickly realised it was not emblazoned on caps worn by memnext seven years working in different working. He moved on to a strategy of bers. "Democracy is not just about departments of the income-tax bu- exposés. He made news by exposing polls once in five years. It must mean reaucracy in Delhi. certain dealings of Robert Vadra, power to the people," says Kejriwal. He was a crusader while in gov- throwing light on Nitin Gadkari's busi- Aggressive political decentralisation ernment. In 1998, he and his boss ness, highlighting alleged wrongdo- is AAP's core policy agenda so that Government may do. My job has been to take that fear out," he says. The protests proved the average citizen has overcome the fear of the state. They were on the streets to demand an audience with the most powerful. They were on the streets to demand justice from a seemingly apathetic system. That could be Kejriwal's real legacy.

INTERVIEW

"The aam aadmi keeps this country alive"
The office of the Aam Aadmi Party in Kaushambi, Ghaziabad, is a run-down two-storey house. Wearing a Gandhi cap emblazoned with "Main aam aadmi hoon", Arvind Kejriwal takes some time out of his hectic schedule to talk to Deputy Editor DHIRAJ NAYYAR about being named one of INDIA TODAY's Newsmakers. Q. How does it feel to be among
INDIA TODAY's Newsmakers?

tem, they will be ready to overthrow it and replace it with a just system. Q. Was Arvind Kejriwal ever afraid? A. I am not afraid of threats. But this movement has put a huge responsibility and one is afraid of making mistakes. Q. Your critics say you are arrogant, self-righteous and hungry for power. A. That is for people to judge. If I say no, I am not, it doesn't serve any purpose. Q. You say you have not entered politics for power. Why are you so averse to the notion of power? A. That is true. In order to bring about the changes you are striving for, you need to prepare people for change. On the other hand, you need to go into the system for a short period to bring about those changes. Ravi Shankar Prasad said you should start dreaming of becoming prime minister. That is how they think in BJP; every single person is thinking of becoming Prime Minister. And you have seen the condition of BJP. Q. One part of AAP's agenda is political decentralisation and accountability. Any role models from elsewhere? A. Participative democracy models exist in so many countries. In the US, there is participation at town hall level. Porto Allegre in Brazil has a participatory budget exercise. If the US can implement direct democracy at town hall level--the US is three times India's size--why can't we? Q. Is the fact that politicians across the spectrum are united in their criticism of you a sign of your success? A. I am not sure it is success. But it's interesting. There was a time when I thought these were very powerful people. Now, one sees they are all so weak. Inke pairon ke neeche zameen nahin hai. Hawa mein hain.
For full interview, log on to www.indiatoday.in/ak-text To watch an exclusive interview with Arvind Kejriwal, tap on your iPad edition
JANUARY 7, 2013  INDIA TODAY

A. I am not important. The country is important. The poor people are important. The aam aadmi of this country is important. So, in a way, I am happy INDIA TODAY has chosen an aam aadmi. Q. How do you react when you hear the term `mango man'? A. This was said by Robert Vadra. And I think the contempt with which he said it was not in good taste because this country is alive because of the aam aadmi or mango man. The rich and powerful have looted the country. It is the value system of the common man which keeps the country going. Q. You made news by exposing people. What will happen when you can't expose people with similarly high profiles at the same rate? A. Remaining in the news was never the intention. To keep exposing people at some rate is also not the intention. Our intention is to expose the system. There was a reason behind those exposés. We are trying to tell people that both BJP and Congress are looting the country. They are in collusion. Second, we wanted to expose the nexus between politicians and big business. Q. So you're not worried that at some point the media will lose interest in you or that the movement will run out of steam because of that? A. This movement is not based on exposés. It is a wrong perception. We are not WikiLeaks. Q. So far, your movement has used two broad strategies: Hunger strikes and exposés. Is there a third? A. That is your perception. Our strategy is to awaken the people. The other thing is to take fear out of the hearts and minds of the people. If people start understanding this sys-

YASBANT NEGI /www.indiatodayimages.com

28

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

29

OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2012

KEJRIWAL'S REVOLUTIONARY ROAD
 Born on August 16, 1968, in Siwani village, Haryana, to Gobind and Gita Kejriwal. Eldest of three siblings. Grows up in Sonipat, Mathura and Hisar.  Studies mechanical engineering at IIT, Kharagpur (1985 to 1990). Joins Tata Steel. Quits job in 1992 to work with Missionaries of Charity, Ramakrishna Mission and Nehru Yuva Kendra.  Joins the Indian Revenue Service (IRS) in 1992. Marries IRS batchmate Sunita in 1994. Voluntarily resigns from the service in February 2006.

THE ACTIVISTARISES
 Forms NGO Parivartan, which assists citizens in handling tax, electricity and food ration in Delhi in 1999, while still in service.  Campaigns along with Aruna Roy in 2002 for the Right to Information. It becomes a national law in 2005.

THE WATERSHED YEAR
OCTOBER 9 Says Haryana government has become DLF's agent by giving it government land meant for hospital. Claims Robert Vadra owns 50 per cent share in SEZ that DLF will develop. OCTOBER 12 Alleges financial irregularities in NGO run by Louise Khurshid. Salman Khurshid dares him to visit Farrukhabad. OCTOBER 18 Says Nitin Gadkari's factories robbed Vidarbha farmers of land and water, and that 100 acres of farm land was transferred to Gadkari's companies.
DECEMBER 4

 Joins Anna Hazare's Jan Lokpal Bill movement launched on April 5, 2011. Activists are jailed, movement gathers pace and protests start at Ramlila Maidan.

As months go by, Kejriwal develops differences with Hazare. Goes political, and forms Aam Aadmi Party on November 26, 2012. most of the decisions are made at the level of panchayats or the urban local government bodies. The rest of the agenda is still fuzzy, particularly in the domains of economic policy, foreign policy and security. "We will invite every shade of opinion to contribute to the framing of our agenda," says Kejriwal. AAP is planning a three-day workshop from January 13 where it will invite experts from different fields to suggest a policy plan. On economic policy, AAP is positioning itself as a left-of-centre party. "In a poor country, we have to be on the left," says Yadav. But the party insists it is not dogmatic about the state controlling economic activity. "In fact," says Kejriwal, "we need less government in day-to-day lives."
To read Kejriwal's tweets, go to www.indiatoday.in/ak-twitter



OCTOBER 31 Alleges that UPA and NDA governments gave Reliance Industries KG Basin gas-exploration contracts for a song. Company rubbishes claim. NOVEMBER 9 Claims he has a list of 700 bank accounts with black money amounting to Rs 6,000 crore.

Accuses Narendra Modi of favouring Adani Group in power purchase and land allotment, and providing free gas fields to private companies Jubilant Energy and Geo Global.

The party's first target is the Delhi Assembly elections scheduled in November 2013, followed by the General Elections in May 2014. Kejriwal is aware of the challenge of building a party organisation rapidly. "We have to do in a year what the Congress did in 100 years and BJP did in 30 years," he says. AAP will have no central high command. People will elect their candidates through US-style primaries.

SUPPORTERS SAY THEIR LEADER IS UNIQUE, CAN DELIVER
For the party to succeed, it needs Kejriwal to be its face. He is an unlikely politician, hardly charismatic in a conventional sense. His supporters believe he is a unique leader. Says Yadav, "His charisma is in his ordiKejriwal's rise mapped through images, at www.indiatoday.in/ak-rise

nariness." According to Prashant Bhushan, another key member of AAP, it is Kejriwal's commitment to the cause and his energy that set him apart. "He has great clarity of mind and he also has the ability to take instant decisions," says Bhushan. According to his critics, including some members of Team Anna, Kejriwal is arrogant, self-righteous, ambitious and hungry for power. Kejriwal declines comment, saying the people would decide. What course Kejriwal's political future takes will be subject to the judgment of the people in the elections of 2013 and 2014. But in 2012, the former bureaucrat and activist has put his imprint on Indian politics and ignited a hitherto dormant civil society to eruption. 
For a peek into Kejriwal's style, go to www.indiatoday.in/ak-style

30

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

