OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2012

VINOD RAI

THE SUM OF ALL FEARS

By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

n October 9, Finance Minister P. Chidambaram was due to address a conference of Accountants General at the imposing headquarters of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India in the heart of the Capital. During the course of private light-hearted banter between him and CAG Vinod Rai, the minister said he regretted having picked Rai as the country's top auditor in January 2008--Prime Minister Manmohan Singh had approved the appointment. At the same conference, President Pranab Mukherjee noted the shift Rai had brought from "routine compliance audit to a more macro perspective" but cautioned against overreach. Rai's own pithy take: "We cannot don the role of cheerleaders for the Government." Manmohan was invited to the conference but chose not to attend. On November 11, minister of state in his office V. Narayanasamy indicated that the Government wanted to curtail CAG's powers by making it a multi-member body. It was clear as day: The 1972-batch Keralacadre IAS officer had rattled the Government in a most unprecedented way. After a period of judicial activism, it was time for CAG activism. In 2012, Rai consistently embarrassed the Government with scathing reports, questioning wasteful spending of public funds and underlining cases of misgovernance. On August 17, CAG laid three reports in Parliament--on coal block allocation, the Delhi airport and ultra-mega power projects. The one on coal said there was a scam that caused a loss of Rs 1.86 lakh crore to the exchequer and laid the blame at the door of the Prime Minister, who was in charge of the coal portfolio at the time of allocation. Manmohan termed the loss figure "clearly disputable" and found the report "flawed on multiple counts". Rai, a Delhi School of Economics and Harvard University alumnus, can match wits over figures with the best in the business but chose not to join issue. The report on Delhi airport said the civil aviation ministry had violated bid conditions to benefit the GMR-led Delhi International Airport Ltd by Rs 3,415 crore. The third CAG report flayed post-bid concessions to Reliance Power and said the Anil Ambani-led company got undue benefits of Rs 29,033 crore.

O

REUBEN SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

Not mincing words

Holding his own

All the controversies have not deterred him from calling a spade a spade.At the World Economic Forum conference in Gurgaon in November, he asked for constitutional status for CBI and CVC, calling them "government's handmaids" .

Probably the only bureaucrat to stand up to then finance minister P. Chidambaram in 2006, he advised against interfering in the public sector banks'decision to hike lending rates.

CAG's audit machinery thus made an entry into the private sector, leaving Corporate India fuming. Rai has been asking for a change in the Audit Act, 1971, since September 2009 to enable CAG to examine any institution where public funds are involved. While the Government ignored Rai, he found his own way of auditing them, albeit partially. The Delhi airport, for example, is a special purpose vehicle between Airports Authority of India (AAI) and GMR. CAG managed to audit it by examining the deals of AAI, a government body.

The Government is waiting for May 23, 2013, when Rai will turn 65 and complete his eventful tenure. The appointment of a more pliable person may follow. But Rai believes the institution stands galvanised. He says it is up to officials to ensure the systems put in place continue to function irrespective of who heads it. He is waiting to hang his accounting hat and take to wearing his tennis shoes and mountaineering boots more often--two activities he loves.

32

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

JANUARY 7, 2013  INDIA TODAY

33

NITIN GADKARI

THE LOST OPPORTUNIST
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

P.CHIDAMBARAM

Prime Candidate
By Priya Sahgal

P

Chidambaram, 67, is ending 2012 with one of his rare smiles. This is the year where he not only got back his favourite portfolio at North Block, but also moved closer to a higher office. The year has ended with both international and national media speculating about his being a possible prime ministerial candidate for UPA 3. A clean chit from the Supreme Court on the 2G scam case in August bolstered his credit ratings. Both India and Chidambaram's growth rates have swung upwards since he moved into the finance ministry on July 31. He may not be the official No. 2, but Chidambaram doesn't really need designations to dictate the agenda. His glasses may be old-fashioned but his vision is new-age. It was he who sounded the alarm on the precarious state of the economy once he moved into finance. Not wasting time, he convinced both Sonia Gandhi and Manmohan Singh of the urgency for reforms. That he enjoys the trust of both, helped. Known in the Government as the `details man' , he heads the most number of GOMS and EGOMS--10 out of 22. As head of the Group on Media, he is the UPA'S troubleshooter with the media, from marketing the Direct Cash Transfer scheme to defending FDI in retail. In December, the Cabinet cleared his brainchild, the National Investment Board albeit by another name--Cabinet Committee on Investments, a one-stop shop to cut red tape in investments. It was yet another victory over his detractors.

Burning calories

Gadkari prefers a leisurely Ayurvedic massage and a special diet at a Noida retreat to tackle his weight.
Double-edged sword

His Favourite Line at Press Conferences

Style Statement

He was very proud of his networking skills cutting across party lines till his name cropped up in the irrigation scam involving NCP leaders.

This is not a courtroom nor a classroom, so we'll take just a few questions.
34
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

Veshtis in Parliament, sharp suits at Davos and red tees during his time off.
VIVAN MEHRA /www.indiatodayimages.com

itin Gadkari's fortunes have been going downhill from the time the stage he was sitting on collapsed due to overload at an election rally in Uttar Pradesh in February. From his party's dismal performance in the Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections to charges of irregularities in his Purti group of companies, Gadkari, 55, has had a year to forget. Chances of a second term--the party constitution was changed to make it possible--look bleak. Senior party leaders, including L.K. Advani, Yashwant Sinha and Jaswant Singh, say Gadkari has lost the moral standing to continue as president. The Uttar Pradesh election debacle was despite Gadkari's total involvement. All his experiments that promised "surprising results" failed. Bringing in controversial RSS functionary Sanjay Joshi and inducting scam-tainted BSP leader Babu Singh Kushwaha into the party backfired. Gadkari's handling of the elections to the Rajya Sabha seat from Jharkhand in March drew flak even from the most ardent of his backers, RSS, as he decided to support independent MLA Anshuman Mishra. Gadkari's handling of Karnataka, the only south Indian state with a BJP government, and his indulgence of B.S. Yeddyurappa, were openly criticised by Advani. Party leaders felt Gadkari's moves were harming BJP's anti-corruption campaign. They were right. Under his leadership, BJP failed to take advantage of the anger against UPA on rising prices and corruption. BJP is riven like never before as RSS is using Gadkari to micromanage party affairs. Gadkari, on his part, has failed to prove his detractors wrong. In a speech in Bhopal on November 4, he ended up comparing BJP's icon Swami Vivekananda with underworld don Dawood Ibrahim, saying both probably had the same IQ. "Vivekananda used it in nation-building, brotherhood and spirituality, while Dawood used it to excel in the world of crime," he said. "There is an extremely thin line between pragmatism and opportunism, a line that Gadkari has crossed," says a senior party leader.

N

NEW

JANUARY 7, 2013  INDIA TODAY

35

OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2012

VIJAYMALLYA

King of Bad Times
By Dhiraj Nayyar

ROBERTVADRA

THE FAMILY ESTATE
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

O

n December 18, Vijay Mallya, 57, donated gold bricks weighing 3 kg and worth about Rs 1 crore to Lord Venkateswara at Tirupati. But even the gods may not approve of his most recent ostentatious display of personal wealth as hundreds of employees at his debt-stricken Kingfisher Airlines have not received salaries since May. That's not all. Kingfisher Airlines owes Rs 7,500 crore to a consortium of 13 banks. It owes crores to airport authorities all over the country and almost Rs 200 crore to the Government in service tax dues. Mallya's airline has not operated since October 1. His vanity is among reasons why the airline is bankrupt seven years after it was founded as a gift for his son Sidhartha on his 18th birthday. In November, Mallya sold a controlling stake in United Spirits, his cash-rich business, to multinational Diageo. He may have sold his family silver but netted an impressive $2 billion (Rs 10,000 crore) for it, none of which will be used to resurrect the dead airline. By insisting on retaining his public image as `the King of Good Times' while his employees suffered, Mallya gave Indian business a bad name in 2012.

The Biker Boy

Bluster to Bust

September 28 "The media are having a great time slamming me. Let them continue their wild and inaccurate speculation. I will prove all of them wrong." October 1 DGCA suspended Kingfisher's flying license.

Living on a prayer

August 23 He donated gold-plated doors worth Rs 80 lakh to Lord Subramanya temple in Dakshina Kannada. December 18 Donated gold bricks worth Rs 1 crore to Lord Venkateswara temple in Tirupati.

Owns half-adozen high-end motorbikes, including an 1800cc Ducati, a Hayabusa and a Harley-Davidson. However, he chose to sit astride a desi 100cc bike to announce his political ambitions at a rally in Rae Bareli.
rockstar

Vadra is vain about his six-pack abs and loves it when his friends say that he bears an uncanny resemblance to late British rocker Freddie Mercury.
Robert Vadra's colourful life through images, at www.indiatoday.in/vadra-life

here is nothing subtle about Robert Vadra, 43. And this was more than obvious as the first son-in-law of the country moved from Page 3 to Page 1, this year, for all the wrong reasons. From announcing his political ambitions sitting astride a motorbike during an election rally in February, to showing his derision for the aam aadmi by referring to them as "mango people", Vadra displayed an uncanny insensitivity and unusual arrogance, even by the standards of the family he is married into. Vadra's real power was visible when Arvind Kejriwal, then leading India Against Corruption (IAC), accused him of amassing massive wealth through corruption in property deals and questionable ties to realty major DLF. While Vadra did not respond to the charges, the entire government machinery, led by senior Congress leaders, went into an overdrive to defend him. Ironically, not a single leader came out in the defence of then law minister Salman Khurshid when his NGO was charged with corruption. But there was complete silence from mother-in-law Sonia Gandhi, as well as wife Priyanka, who had earlier jumped in to clarify Vadra's statement in Rae Bareli about joining politics. She blamed the media for asking her husband golmatol (roundabout) questions. She asserted that he is a successful businessman with no time for politics. Now, even his business is under a cloud with considerable evidence that its success has much to do with the power of the family he is married into. Not that it has put Vadra off from his favourite activities: Hitting the gym at the luxurious Aman hotel in the Capital and showing up at posh parties. He drives the latest high-end cars and bikes and makes it a point to appear at the F1 circuit in Noida, places where `mango people' are not likely to appear. His last contact with the world at large was through his Facebook status message: "Mango people in a Banana Republic." The uproar that followed forced him to shut his Facebook account, saying that people did not have a sense of humour. Certainly not when it comes to cosy capitalism.

T

MEN'S HEALTH

JANUARY 7, 2013  INDIA TODAY

37

NEW

OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2012

fashion forward

Loves wearing stylish clothes, getting compliments on her dress sense and is happy that her makeover is making heads turn.
secretly glad that

PRANAB MUKHERJEE

People's President
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

M.C.MARYKOM

FISTS OF FURY
By G.S. Vivek

She didn't pursue athletics. Mary was keen on running 400m and in javelin throw until Dinko Singh's 1998 Asian Games gold inspired her to take up boxing.

F

or M.C. Mary Kom, life began at 29. She was not allowed her shot at glory when in her prime--the Olympics opened its doors to women pugilists for the first time only at London 2012. Mary had been a five-time medallist at the world championships since 2001 but her weight category, 48 kg, didn't figure in the London women's boxing line-up. That was the second blow. It's a tribute to the motherof-two's grit and single-minded devotion that Mary stepped up to 51 kg, a process she said "was more demanding than my punishing training regimen". Heartbreak appeared inevitable when she lost in the quarter-finals of the only qualifying tournament, the world championships. But destiny's child got another window of opportunity when Nicola Adams, the English boxer who proved to be her nemesis ultimately in London, helped her make the cut as one of the lucky losers through the repechage system. A medal-hungry nation egged Mary on as she vanquished one opponent after another en route to a semi-final finish and the bronze medal. Mary was left teary-eyed at missing out on gold but she will push her ageing frame for another go at Rio 2016. In the meanwhile, the accolades still haven't stopped coming in. There's a biopic by film-maker Sanjay Leela Bhansali with Priyanka Chopra in the lead, for which the actor will train in Imphal. And a book, which Mary is busy writing when she isn't throwing punches.

nder Pranab Mukherjee, Rashtrapati Bhavan has regained its political gravitas. In government, he was UPA's chief troubleshooter. Now, he is the nation's conscience-keeper. In his second speech as President, on Independence Day, he cautioned, "When authority becomes authoritarian, democracy suffers; but when protest becomes endemic, we are flirting with chaos." The year has ended with a grim reminder of his warning. He has made Rashtrapati Bhavan more accessible to the public, allowing 200 people to witness the Change of Guard ceremony every Saturday. Mukherjee is not limiting his role to the ceremonial. While inaugurating a Petrotech Oil and Gas Conference in Delhi in October, he defended the diesel price rise and cap on LPG subsidy. He explained aligning domestic prices with global rates was in the interests of the consumer. Mukherjee was also prompt in rejecting Pakistani terrorist Ajmal Kasab's mercy plea. With the next General Elections threatening to result in a hung Parliament, the President's role could get more political.

U

The Killing Signature

Signed the file rejecting 26/11 terrorist Ajmal Kasab's mercy plea.
The Look

The President's Office has released an airbrushed picture of a youthful looking President for all government offices.
For more photos of Mary Kom outside the ring, go to www.indiatoday.in/kom-glam
T NARAYAN /www.indiatodayimages.com

For rare photos of the President, go to www.indiatoday.in/pranab-old For more articles on Pranab Mukherjee, go to www.indiatoday.in/prez-essays

38

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

JANUARY 7, 2013  INDIA TODAY

39

OTHER NEWSMAKERS 2012

GENERALV.K. SINGH

Footsoldier of Angst
By Sandeep Unnithan

SHIVANGI KULKARNI

ormer army chiefs either fade into the sunset of golf courses or plum sinecures of Raj Bhavans. General V.K. Singh, 62, the 26th army chief who retired in May 2012, inhabits a strange no man's land. He wrangled a year's extension on a sprawling bungalow given to retired chiefs in Delhi Cantonment, but periodically darts out to attack the Government. General Singh is part of Anna Hazare's anti-corruption campaign but not exclusively so. In November, he shocked people by sharing a stage with INLD's Om Prakash Chautala and later that month led a farmer's rally against the Government. He cemented his reputation as a parachute protester by landing at India Gate to protest the rape of the 23-yearold girl for which he was booked by the police for incitement. Perhaps his career would have taken a different turn if the Government had let him change his birth date, which spawned a controversy that ended up in Supreme Court. It is one of those tempting what-ifs we will never know the answer to.

F

identity crisis

ANURAG KASHYAP

Frequently gets mistaken for Ra.One director Anubhav Sinha; and younger brother Abhinav, who directed Dabanng.
dislikes fame because

THE HIT MAN
By Sandeep Unnithan

He can't wear Govinda-style clothes.
Read interview with Kashyap, at www.indiatoday.in/anurag-text
SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

Honesty is Best Policy

Role Play

To watch the exclusive interview, tap on your iPad edition For previous Newsmaker issues, log on to www.indiatoday.in/nm-older If you disagree with our Newsmakers of 2012 list, cast your vote at www.indiatoday.in/newsmaker2012

Alleged he was offered a Rs 14-crore bribe by a retired general to pass sub-standard trucks.
40
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

As a Lt Colonel, he played himself in a cameo in Nana Patekar's Prahaar (1991).

hen Anurag Kashyap was a Bollywood struggler a decade ago, an industry elder singled him out for exceptional success. "He will never run out of ideas," he prophesied, "because he is so deeply rooted in the world around him". Kashyap, then known as the script writer of gangster epic Satya, was struggling to release his first film Paanch. He tasted critical acclaim with Black Friday in 2007 and box office success with 2009's Dev D. In 2012, he got both with two-part breakout film Gangs of Wasseypur. The five-hour film, part-Sergio Leone, part-Quentin Tarantino, was set against the bloody politics of Dhanbad's coal mafia. It has made Kashyap the face of an emerging new wave of cinema. He has produced over 20 films in a mere five years as financiers are all too willing to bet on him. This is the reason wannabe scriptwriters and directors make a beeline for Kashyap's office in Versova, stalk him on Facebook and the reason he rarely answers his phone. Kashyap, 40, hopes to make a film on desi superhero Doga after he completes Bombay Velvet and urban thriller Ugly. He doesn't seem to be running out of ideas anytime soon.

W

