NEWSMAKER

2012
As young demonstrators screamed their lungs out, old politicians wondered whether they should clear their throats. The State is sitting on a tinderbox and its citizens are ready to light the fire.
stances. But when their effects far exceed their individuhave occurred in the past as well. According to the police alised criminality, it is because the pile-up of public grievfigures of 2011, there is a rape case every 18 hours in the ances is so high that it calls for a tow truck with winches. Capital. Think also of the poor children violated and perWho has not been seriously inconvenienced by a VIP haps cannibalised in Nithari in 2005. This might prompt some to suggest that protesters took to the streets in Delhi entourage? Who has not seen a city policeman openly this year because the raped victim was middle class and pocket bribes? Who has not found obeying the law a lot not a poor, forest-dwelling Adivasi. Such people have just harder than breaking it? Who has not read of megamissed the point. scandals that are run with political protection? And who Does it really matter where the fire was lit so long as has not been helpless with impotent rage when faced its glow can be felt by everyone? It would benefit women with all, or any, of the above? Is it surprising then that of all categories if a rape law that mandates fast track justhe anger at India Gate cannot express a cogent demand tice is put in place. Already over l00,000 rape cases are as much as it can cry? pending in courts and this number will only grow. When One might contend that 2012 should not be rememit is a question of women's dignity, it can jump across party bered only by anti-corruption crusades or the December lines and other social dividers. This is not only because all anti-rape protests. Political parties also played a role this politicians have a sister, daughter or wife, but also beyear. Points were scored in Parliament, such as around cause every party has sent an alleged Coalgate or FDI in retail. Such in-house rapist either to the Parliament or a jousts often led to street marches--restate Assembly. plete with banners and placards. Yet What would it take for our leaders such demonstrations failed to inspire. to declare that henceforth they would They looked rather like staged Netizens pour scorn on the slash their security detail by a signifiwrestling matches where combatants political Establishment cant proportion? This would immediare flung and thumped by turn. In short, An online petition ately release thousands of police they lacked the zing, zeal and authencalled `President, personnel who could then be deployed ticity of non-party demonstrations. CJI: Stop Rape Now!'begins circulating on to patrol the streets. They say no news is good news but at Facebook and Twitter. It gathers more than Why cannot our parliamentarians this rate, bad news will be no news ei65,000 signatures in just two days. implement the recommendations ther. It is happening so often that it is made by the Police Reforms Commissfast losing its cache. #Theek Hai becomes ion? They could even go a step further Soon, we will be so inured to them a popular hashtag among tweeters who criticise and announce that all those who have that neither corruption nor civic vioManmohan Singh's speech. been charged with rape would hencelence will make our stomachs churn. forth not be given party tickets. Go Corruption is already becoming a jaded A group `Our Mission Will Not ahead, surprise us and make our next subject, which is why Arvind Kejriwal Be Hijacked'is established by year new. is not getting the kind of support he was students against political interference by It is true that some of the charges hoping to find. Arvind Kejriwal's team in a social issue. levelled against politicians are not If our politicians have so many skelesustainable in law. Nor is it proper to tons, owned or on loan, in their cup#doordarshanshame begins consider somebody guilty till actually boards, then imagine how difficult it is to trend on Twitter as five proven to be so in a court. It is also into convert bad news into headlines day Doordarshan employees are suspended controvertible that on occasions, misafter day. over the Prime Minister's speech gaffe. chief mongers and motivated minds If good things were to happen now, hurl false allegations. They love to see they would be sensational and eyeCyber outrage at the Delhi police chief's heads ducking, if not rolling. grabbing. Will our politicians oblige justification of injuries in police A representative democracy, howus sometime soon, perhaps in the comaction as `collateral damage'. ever, is meant to observe propriety ing year? with as much rigour as it should obAfter Delhi Chief Minister serve the law. Or else, we will always Dipankar Gupta taught sociology and Sheila Dikshit's complaint be on a tinderbox that is ready to exsocial anthropology at Delhi's Jawaharlal about Delhi Police goes public, plode. This would endow even an orNehru University. He is also a distinguished tweeters take sides in the battle. dinary police case with a big enough professor at Shiv Nadar University. bang to threaten the Government. The Twitter account of And this is exactly what has been `Hysteria on Social Media': Catch Priyanka Chaturvedi (who Headlines Today Deputy Editor going on for the past few years, 2012 claims to be a protester Sonia Gandhi adShiv Aroor on the frontline of Delhi included. dressed) goes viral online. Supporters are gang rape protests, at Rapes happen everywhere, even in enraged to learn she is a member of NSUI. www.indiatoday.in/sm-hysteria the best and most controlled circum-

CLUELESS IN BLUNDERLAND T

Minister Sushilkumar Shinde thought any such he year 2012 did not end with a bang or GUEST act would set a bad precedent. He finally sealed with a whimper; it ended with a cry. COLUMN his argument with this unquotable quote: "TomFrom 2010 onwards, India has been orrow 100 Adivasis can be killed in Chhattisgarh battered and bruised by scandals. In or Gadchiroli, can the Government be there?" 2010 the country was shamed by the This monumental insensitivity needs to be enCommonwealth Games fiddle followed by the 2G graved in history. It edges out to second place scam. Together, these two accounted for the masMarie Antoinette's blooper when she said that if sive endorsement Anna Hazare received in 2011. the poor do not have bread, let them eat cake. The In the following year, Arvind Kejriwal's dirt-digDIPANKAR police chief picked up Shinde's refrain and said if ging team rode this surge and threw a lot of muck GUPTA peaceful protesters were hurt by police action, on the political class. Everybody from Nitin well that was tough, just too bad, or as he put it, Gadkari to Salman Khurshid was targeted, splat"collateral damage". Was he speaking as a policeman or tering even those who were in their near vicinity. the head of an invading army? After two straight years of political wrongs, it was Shinde's remark is symptomatic of the viral that has hoped that the third would set it right. No such luck! 2012 gripped the political class. Others of this group may not began noisily and stayed in that steady state right through have snotted and sneezed in our face like Shinde till the anti-rape agitations perceptibly raised the pitch. did--but the affliction lingers deep in them. Yes, of After Coalgate, protests against Salman Khurshid in course, the Government should be there when people Farrukhabad, the anti-nuclear agitation in Kudankulam, are raped and killed. Barack Obama, president of the the killings in Assam, the exposés on Robert Vadra, the United States, did just that: He went to a small town in political mood in the country was at breaking point. Yet, Connecticut where a mad man had shot dead 27 people. nobody expected this. Cut to India and it is so difWhen a 23-year-old Delhi SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com ferent. While the young girl was raped on a cold demonstrators were screamDecember night and dumped ing their lungs out, old politifor dead, under the noses of cians were still wondering the police, something indefinwhether they should clear able snapped among the their throats. Our Prime youth. Leaderless, but not Minister waited for over five rudderless, they assembled at days to gauge the political India Gate, but the anger soon mood before he spoke to spread to other parts of the the media from a written country. The brutal rape was text. Even then, he asked the tipping point as public senthe television crew if what he timents were already oversaid was "theek hai"! Deep wrought. down, he must have known Once again, the political that his monotone failed to hit class responded with a callousthe right note, but it did not ness that has now become its really matter. It was delivered singular hallmark. No minister in a routine fashion and, just as came out to the protest site; inroutinely, it was dismissed by deed no major figure from the the public. ruling Establishment walked Right from Kashmir to the grass and asphalt around Kokrajhar, dreadful rapes India Gate. Union Home

Anger in 140 characters

21.12

24.12

24.12

25.12

26.12

26.12

26.12

24

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

NEW

JANUARY 7, 2013  INDIA TODAY

25

