Mail

Makers & Breakers of Modern India
DECEMBER 19, 2011

Our founding fathers took a fledgling nation down the path of modernity. The world's biggest democracy suffered body blows, from within and without. But the idea of India survives.

RANI SEKHARAN,

Looking Back
Though Jawaharlal Nehru gave the country big industries and dams, his neglect of villages and agriculture, his Muslim appeasement and his antiHindu policies did not go down well with the masses ("Makers & Breakers of Modern India", December 26). The border problem with China and Kashmir are also considered to be his contributions.
B S BHATNAGAR, Indore

SUVASHIS MULLICK/www.indiatodayimages.com

No Healing Touch
Every fire that kills is tragic, but a fire that kills patients who are trapped by their helplessness in the very place to which they have gone for healing acquires a dimension of nightmare that cannot be easily comprehended ("Kolkata's Villains", December 26). The fire department's laxity in handing out certificates and in monitoring buildings must be checked and heads of brass must roll.
JAYATHEERTHA, Hyderabad

Indira Gandhi laid the foundation of dynastic rule, institutionalised corruption and sycophancy. Though her handling of the Bangladesh war was lauded, her decision to impose Emergency and her dictatorial way of ruling damaged the democratic values of our coun-

Had the required safety measures been in place, the tragedy could have been averted. More than punishing the management, the authorities must make sure that such incidents do not recur in Kolkata.
MEGHANA, United Kingdom

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

12

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

``

``

Many people have written reams about the women in Nehru's life. For me, the one woman who remained his sweetheart till his last breath was his motherland.
Mangalore

try. She should have resigned after the Allahabad High Court judgment. It would have earned her a lot of praise.
MAYA AGGARWAL, Kanpur

Indira Gandhi stands tallest among all Indian prime ministers. Her display of courage and conviction to meet challenges facing the country have only served to make her immortal. Her greatness is worthy of emulation.
VINOD KHARE, Hyderabad

Atal Bihari Vajpayee was interested in the development of the nation, good governance and believed in consensus-building, cooperation between states and the Centre. But he failed due to the rigid and confrontationist attitude of certain powerful leaders in the Congress. Hope

Mail
our leaders learn from the mistakes of the past and work towards the welfare of India, not just concentrate on how to remain in power.
SHARMISTHA DUBE, Jaipur

35
Lokpal Bill. This leads one to infer that the present scams that have surfaced are an indication of his helplessness rather than his complicity. The Government really needs to get its act together if it hopes to be returned to power in the elections.
MILIND KHER, Sangli

military invasion.
ANKITA KHULLAR, Jodhpur

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J A N U A RY 1 6 - 3 1 , 1 9 7 7

Life is a Song
Mindrocks Youth Summit has delivered the message that success follows planning, consistency and hard work ("Chennai Sings Change", December 26). `Celebration' is the key word. If you can really `enjoy' your failures and the journey, only then will you be able to enjoy your success. So, keep going till you feel you have `arrived'.
V.S. GANESAN, Chennai
INDIA TODAY'S

Cricket ­ A Sticky Wicket
In a country where sport suffers from a deplorable lack of popular support and is largely dependent on government doles, the mass hysteria.generated by a cricket Test and the astronomical sums of money that people spend to witness a Test match is a classic example of the numerous contradictions that exist in the national attitude towards sport.This is even more inexplicable when it is realised that the average Indian has little or no time for hockey, which, we delude ourselves into believing, is our national game.The recently concluded Test series against New Zealand and the still unfinished encounter against the MCC have once again revealed the inherent Indian attitude to a game that is more English than any other modern sport, and totally alien to our culture.The mad scramble for match tickets is out of proportion to the importance of the game as a world sport and the number of active cricketers in the country. In this respect, the domestic mass media is equally to blame, judging by the extensive coverage given to cricket and Test matchesin particular. by Saradindu Sanval

It appears that Stanley Wolpert has written the article on Mahatma Gandhi without studying his life history in detail. Many instances from Gandhiji's life show that he was all along working for the Muslims and the British, not India.
RANAJIT KUMAR BAKSI, Orissa

Instead of myopic politicians, our country owes its unity and integrity to her defence forces who are among the best in the world.They have also brought laurels to the nation by serving on peace missions around the globe, especially in poor countries like Congo. Their overall contribution must be gratefully acknowledged by all.
VIRENDER, Punjab

The Lokpal Bill is the need of the hour. Ignoring the power of Anna Hazare and his team has only sullied UPA's image. Enacting the bill at the earliest is the only course left to the Government, looking to salvage its goodwill from further depletion.
VIMAL S. THAKER, Ahmedabad

Under Scanner
An honest and unbiased team of information commissioners can help realise the full potential of the RTI Act ("Check as Balance", December 26). The Act has played an important role in the country's fight against corruption and it has proved to be a very effective tool in the hands of the common man. I hope this mechanism does not fall prey to the corrupt practices plaguing all government agencies.
DEEPAK LODHA, Ranikhet

Lokpal Dilemma
The power of the people in our country is manifesting itself, forcing a rethink on the Lokpal Bill on the part of the Government ("Fear Forces Surrender", December 16". It is interesting to note that Manmohan Singh has been the only Prime Minister to date to agree to office of the PM coming within the ambit of the

One should acknowledge and admire the efforts of Anna Hazare in cleaning up the higher echelons of society. However, it appears that he has underestimated the vicious cycle of corruption! What if the Lokpal and his bureaucracy becomes a den of corruption? Who will bell the cat in that case?
S. R. DEVAPRAKASH, Tumkur

Nuke Show
It is true that no country can dare attack India till our nuclear arsenal is in place ("Insurance Cover", December 26). Therefore, India should stand firm and not tolerate cross-border violations lying down. It is time to stand tall like the Himalayas and prevent the nation from any direct

The RTI Act has brought accountability to the bureaucracy, mired in red tape. Inaction on the part of the babudom has impacted decision-making, bringing down GDP by a significant percentage.
ADEEL KHAN, New Delhi

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

GAEKWAD OUT LBW TO LEVER IN THE CALCUTTA TEST

14

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

