UDDHAV INSPECTS A TUNNEL IN MUMBAI

Na tion MAHARASHTRA

SENABREAKS WITH THE PAST
Uddhav Thackeray-led party dumps politics of identity, focuses on development
head of elections to the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC), the Shiv Sena has decided to make development its poll plank. A 180-degree turn from its earlier tactic of migrant-bashing. With this move, the party seems to be trying to reach out to the urban poor. "Development and not emotional appeal will be our agenda. Let others entertain people by raising emotional issues, we will stick to our agenda," Shiv Sena Executive President Uddhav Thackeray told INDIA TODAY. A veiled attack on estranged cousin Raj Thackeray, chief of the Maharasthra Navnirman Sena, accusing him of pandering to sectarian passions. Elections to the BMC, the second richest civic body in the country after Navi Mumbai and run by the Shiv Sena for the past 17 years, are slated for February 2012. As many as 250 hoardings have been put up across the city with the slogan Karun Dakhavale--meaning we did it in Marathi--and full-page advertise-

A

ments have been issued in local newspapers, an unprecedented move in the party's history. "We have provided better sanitation, water supply, hygienic conditions, low-cost electricity, transport and amusement places to Mumbaikars though the state government is absolutely non-cooperative. We have a right to seek votes on that basis," claims Uddhav. Among the achievements that Uddhav takes credit for include a 12.5-km tunnel for water supply, virtual classrooms for school students and epidemic-control programmes. Analyst Hemant Desai says, "Shiv Sena has given up fighting on the streets since Uddhav took over. He has chosen a different path. His success

SHIV SENA HAS GIVEN UP FIGHTING ON STREETS SINCE UDDHAVTOOK OVER. HE HAS CHOSEN A DIFFERENT PATH.

will depend on how he mobilises his workers," he adds. Leader of opposition in the BMC Rajhans Singh of Congress, though, says credit for the corporation's achievements should go to the administration. "The BMC delivered due to good administration. Shiv Sena wants to take credit for something done by others," he says. He also rejects the charge that the state government has been non-cooperative. "Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan keenly observes matters related to Mumbai. He is pursuing the Union Government to allot more funds for infrastructure projects in the city," he adds. Shiv Sena hardliners are not convinced. They think the party's strength lies in identity politics. But that hasn't deterred Uddhav. "I am interested in burning the chulha (stove) in people's homes rather than burning their homes. If people do not accept my development agenda, it will be harmful for them," the Shiv Sena leader warns. by Kiran Tare

JANUARY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

33

