Na tion PUNJAB

`His Friends Killed Our Son'
By Asit Jolly

Two years on, family hopes son's death, claimed by the police as an accident, will be reinvestigated as murder

our son is dead." The words devastated an entire family two years ago. "In an instant, our world came crashing down," says Gurbaksh Singh Bains, 63, as he recalls the phone call from Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI) Hari Singh of Patiala Police in the early hours of September 28, 2010. Just 20 years old, their son Gagandeep, an MBA student of Thapar University, Patiala, was killed, the police said, in a car crash near Rajpura, on the Chandigarh-Patiala highway. ASI Singh told Bains his son and another student, Gaurav Verma, died instantly, when their Ford Endeavour hit a stationary truck. Two others, Zorawar Singh, son of the then Patiala subdivisional magistrate (SDM) Gurmeet Singh, and Jaskaran Singh, survived. They had apparently gone for a meal at a popular highway dhaba. The case would have been shelved as yet another tragic mishap. Punjab's roads are no stranger to rich young men meeting a grisly end in their big, shiny cars. It took two long years of the grieving father's relentless pursuit of justice and constant monitoring and interventions by the Punjab and Haryana High Court to unmask the truth. Inconsolable over the loss, Bains believed there was more to it, however. Gagandeep had left home in Mohali, near Chandigarh, a day earlier, and had dutifully informed his parents after he reached his hostel. "He was the responsible sort. I found it difficult to believe that Gagan would venture out so late in the night. He wasn't the kind," says Bains. The father first got suspicious when he was denied access to his dead son's body. "They (police officials) said the shock could affect my heart." Later, the investigating ASI Kuldip Singh insisted Bains sign a prepared statement ac-

Y

cepting the boy's death as an accident. "Even then, I wanted to give them the benefit of doubt. I could think of no one who could want Gagan dead," he says. A month later, Bains began seeing discrepancies in the accident version of the story touted, according to him, by Patiala police. He discovered that the two survivors--Zorawar and Jaskaran --were not in the SUV at the time of the alleged crash. Telephone records show Zorawar and the second victim Gaurav were 16 km apart at the time of the `accident'. Photos of the crash site showed Gagan's body lying at an impossible angle under the damaged SUV. "He was in the navigator seat. How did he land under the car after the crash?" asks Bains. Photos also showed the stationary truck had suffered little damage, despite the police claim that the SUV had rammed in at high speed. Launching a private probe, Bains rigged a closed circuit TV camera, and

FACEBOOK ENTRIES BY ZORAWAR, A FRIEND OF GAGAN,"CLEARLY IMPLY THAT A PLOT WAS BEING HATCHED TO KILL MY SON", SAYS BAINS.
recorded Jaskaran and Zorawar's accounts of the events. "There were inconsistencies in what they said," he says. For instance, each named a different dhaba as their rendezvous before the `crash'. He found that contrary to police claims, both survivors, Zorawar and Jaskaran, had been released from Chandigarh's Government Multi Specialty Hospital without any major treatment. Jaskaran later got some medical treatment at Mohali's privately owned Cosmo Hospital. The shocker came from Gagan's Facebook account, which led Bains to Zorawar's chats with his friends. He says entries made in the social network between August 30 and September 17, 2010, "imply a plot was being hatched to kill my son". According to him, the clincher emerged in an entry posted after the `crash', where Zorawar seems to confirm that the deaths may not have been an accident. "With the help of all brothers the target has been achieved," Zorawar states on screenshots of his Facebook wall that are in Bains' possession. Gurmeet Singh, now SDM, Jagraon, accuses Bains of deliberately concocting a case against his son. "He shows only those Facebook pages that suit his murder story," says Gurmeet, showing printouts of Zorawar's Facebook wall where the young man expresses anguish over the deaths. He also displays "happy" pictures of the boys to claim that they were "good friends". Bains insists the expressions of grief on Facebook "are merely a bid to deflect suspicion. I am certain his friends killed my son". Bains made numerous unsuccessful representations to the senior officers of Punjab Police to have his son's death reinvestigated as murder. He

BAINS (LEFT) AND WIFE WITH GAGAN'S PHOTO
ANIL DAYAL

was fighting a lone battle then. "Even Gaurav's family was not inclined to pursue the case," he says, recounting how Delhi businessman S.K. Verma, recovering from a heart attack, had told him he was incapable of supporting Bains' campaign. Gurmeet rubbishes allegations that he has influenced investigations at any stage of the case. "How could a lowly SDM like myself influence senior police officers?" he asks, insisting that Bains was "conspiring" to ruin his family. "There have been six different inquiries. All but one have said it

was a "simple accident case". "So why does he want to persist with his murder theory?" Gurmeet asked, stopping short of charging Bains with outright extortion. It was only after Punjab's then chief secretary Subodh Aggarwal and Home Secretary Dhanbir Bains (no relation of the dead) intervened in December 2011 that the then DIG (Crime), Kunwar Vijay Pratap Singh, was asked to start an inquiry. His report, submitted on December 27, 2011, recommended a fresh probe, for murder, "by an independent and impartial agency", and "custodial interrogation of concerned persons", based on his finding that Patiala police had concocted the FIR on the `accident'. According to him, testimonies of key witnesses, including the cleaner of the stationary truck, who claimed to have seen two men being dragged from a car and thrashed at the `accident' site, were ignored. Police officials not associated with the case told INDIA TODAY the FIR under IPC 297, 304-A, 337 and 427 against the driver and cleaner of the stationary truck were illegal. "How can the driver of a standing vehicle be charged with rash and negligent driving? He could at best be accused of parking unlawfully," says an officer. He also points out that even if it were an accident, "it's Zorawar Singh, who drove the Ford, who should have been booked". However, the then DGP Anil Kaushik ignored Pratap's report and instituted a fresh inquest by a Special Investigation Team (SIT), that included Patiala's SSP, the officer who supervised the initial probe. Though later disbanded by Home Secretary Bains as "illegal", the SIT went ahead and submitted a report that Gurbaksh Bains said was "a blatantly misleading one that sought to establish Gagandeep and Gaurav's deaths as accidental". Home Secretary Bains says he was "shocked" that not only did the disbanded SIT continue to investigate the case without legal authority, but also that its report found its way to the high court, which was hearing an independent petition by Gurbaksh Bains. The latter is convinced that "money

38

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

Na tion
changed hands" in order to try and scuttle a proper probe into his son's "murder". Using the delays, Bains said, "Zorawar relocated to Canada." Gurmeet Singh says his son is pursuing a course in networking at Canada's University of Waterloo. At last, on July 23, 2012, Punjab and Haryana High Court asked Pratap to submit regular reports, effectively asking him to probe the case as a doublemurder. But Gurbaksh Bains' trials may not be over yet. Pratap was, once again, asked to stall his probe. Confirming this, Dhanbir Bains said this was done after Gurmeet objected to Pratap's name, as possibly biased. "I've asked the DGP to assign the case to another officer," the home secretary said. Gurmeet said several senior police officers including DGP Sumedh Singh Saini disagree with the murder theory. He said he was "prepared to face even a CBI probe, but not by an officer who already thinks my son's a murderer". Gurbaksh Bains is not ready to give up. "How can I? Since I cremated my boy, every moment of my life has been devoted to seeking justice," he says. His doggedness may have found him an ally. S.K. Verma, 64, whose son Gaurav died with Gagan, now says he will join the fight. "I've been misled by Gurmeet. He told me his son Zorawar was losing eyesight because of the crash. I now hear he is in Canada," he says. The untimely demise of its youngest member has taken a huge toll on the Bains household. Barely able to speak, Surjeet Kaur cannot recall having enjoyed a full night's sleep since the day they brought her dead son home. "God could not have wanted Gagan dead. Someone else, someone right here killed my boy. They must pay for what they did," she says. Her other son Mandeep, 12 years older than Gagan, went into a depression after his brother died. "He was like my son. I just wish these past two years were a bad dream. I wish Gagan would come home," he says. Gurbaksh Bains says he knows uncovering the truth will not bring back his son. "But the truth needs to be brought out and told. Is that not why it's called the truth?" he says. 

GUJARAT

CALLHIM SWAMI MODI
Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi makes Swami Vivekananda his election mascot
By Uday Mahurkar

niversary year of Vivekananda. RSS has for long tried to appropriate the legacy of Swami Vivekananda, who believed in a muscular, but not extremist, Hinduism. As a student at Nagpur's Hislop College, former RSS chief M.S. Golwalkar is said to have been a keen follower of Swami's ideals. BJP patriarch L.K. Advani was also influenced by him at the Ramakrishna Mission while growing up in Karachi between 1942 and 1946. By distributing cricket kits and volleyballs with pictures of Vivekananda and two of Modi's slogans for the polls: `Ramshe Gujarat, Jitshe Gujarat (Gujarat Plays, Gujarat

Wins)', and `Khele Gujarat, Khile Gujarat (Gujarat Plays, Gujarat Blossoms)', the Chief Minister has tried to link Vivekananda's love of sports with Gujarati pride. Through his wall-to-wall Vivekananda revival that extends to his daily tweets, Modi hopes to acquire a panIndian presence, feels art scholar Jyotindra Jain. "Swami Vivekananda was not ritualistic; he was secular and appealed to the West, especially the US. Yet he was a proud Hindu. That's the kind of image Modi would like for himself," says Jain. It certainly aids his prime ministerial ambitions. Unlike the controversial Swaminarayan sect,

NARENDRA MODI BOARDS THE SWAMI VIVEKANAND YUVA VICHAR VIKAS YATRA RATH

40

SHAILASH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

ujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi has gone on an overdrive to make Swami Vivekananda his symbol for the Assembly polls in December, in a move that seeks to broaden his appeal while also retaining the hardline connect with RSS. His itinerary, that would take him through 150 of Gujarat's 182 Assembly constituencies, was flagged off on September 11, the date Vivekananda delivered his famous address at the Parliament of the World's Religions in Chicago in 1893. His carriage is aptly called the Swami Vivekanand Yuva Vichar Vikas Yatra Rath. The government has announced a series of populist schemes that bear Swami's name. They include 35,000 cricket kits and volleyballs each to 13,000 panchayats and municipal wards, costing Rs 12 crore. Vivekanand Youth Mandals are to be set up in each of the 13,000 villages. There will be a Vivekanand corner in major government libraries, a Vivekanand Swasthya Kendra gymnasium in major municipal gardens. Nearly 400,000 youths would be trained in skilled jobs under the Vivekanand Skill Development Scheme. All this in the 150th birth an-

G

to which Modi has long been perceived as close, Vivekananda's legacy is unsullied by fundamentalism or ritual. And his teachings are practical. As Modi pointed out in his speech at the yatra inauguration, Swami believed in a "samarth and sashakt Bharat (capable and powerful India)". Historian Aditya Mukherjee of JNU believes the Ramakrishna Mission, founded by Vivekananda under the influence of his guru, Sri Ramakrishna, should oppose the move, in the same robust tenor that the late jurist Nani Palkhivala opposed BJP'S attempt to portray Vallabhbhai Patel as a fundamentalist in 1992: "Vallabhbhai Patel, as home minister, had the courage to ban RSS. That shows how secular and non-communal he was in his approach." Adds Mukherjee: "BJP has no icons with mass appeal and has no choice but to borrow icons, as it tries to rewrite history. It is up to India's secular forces to prevent this appropriation of icons." BJP leader Parendu Bhagat rushes to the Chief Minister's

"BJP has no icons with mass appeal and has no choice but to borrow icons, as it tries to rewrite history."
ADITYA MUKHERJEE, Historian, Jawaharlal Nehru University

defence: "Swamiji is not a political tool for Modi. He has drawn inspiration from Vivekananda since childhood." Needless to say, by the time the Chief Minister's tour ends on October 25, he hopes some of the positive symbolism that Vivekananda's name generates will rub off on him. Already, Gujarat has been celebrating his 150th birth anniversary as Yuva Shakti Varsh since January. According to Modi, Vivekananda was inspired to attend the Chicago conference by three Gujaratis, including the Raja of Limbdi, during his tour of the state in late 1891. That's enough of a Gujarat connect. 

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

