Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

BONDING WITH THE PRINCESS
One of India's favourite storytellers goes romancing with an outrageous heroine
By Gillian Wright

P
MAHARANI
byRuskin Bond Viking Price: RS 299 Pages: 180 BETWEEN THE COVERS Bond's style,natural, limpid and totallywithout pretence,draws you in as he relates his encounters with the Maharani over the years.Reading each episode is like hearing from one old friend about what another old friend, always entertaining,is getting up to.

ondicherry seafront on a Sunday afternoon is a welcoming place. Families balance on the black boulders that protect the promenade from the waves, children reaching out to touch the sea spray. Young boys take turns to slide down the marble struts supporting the Mahatma's statue, and vendors rustle up freshfruit salads in tall glasses in the twinkle of an eye. Behind them, facing the sea, modern monstrosities stand cheek by jowl with classic French buildings. And anyone who has read Ruskin Bond's latest book would not be at all surprised to see his Maharani suddenly appear out of one of them, surrounded by a pack of her beloved Pekingese, and not a little inebriated. The Maharani, you see, owns a hotel in Pondi, given to her by her Maharaja in the vain hope that it would keep her occupied while he was travelling. Seldom is a fictional character so real as the Maharani. Outrageous and eccentric, she just won't be restrained to the pages of this slim novel and there is more than one reason she should seem so palpably non-fictional. Firstly, Bond puts himself into his novel--in fact makes himself the narrator, and, with his heroine, one of the two most important characters in the book. He is clearly happy in his own skin, writing with all the charm and wit that is naturally his. Then of course, he brings his Maharani to Mussourie, which is not only the traditional summer haunt of so many Indian princes, but famously his own home and the setting of so much of his writing. As he once put it, `This dust, this grass,/ This tender leaf,/ And weathered bark,/ All in my heart are finely blended.' The setting suits the story well and Ruskin's style, natu-

ral, limpid and totally without pretence, draws you in as he relates his encounters with the Maharani over the years. Reading each episode is rather like hearing from one old friend about what another old friend, always entertaining, is getting up to. Truly, there is nothing like a good gossip. So much of human conversation is made up of it. Ruskin knows this, and knows that private lives make good reading. And then perhaps you or I have come across people who have something of the Maharani about them--people whose circumstances have allowed them to become very much larger than life, and never boringly good. In addition to this, Ruskin strikes up a wonderfully true relationship between himself and his heroine. There seems to be a real bond of affection between them and, just as importantly, real spark. In an interview he gave when this novel was published, Bond spoke of his efforts to endow it with humour. In this he has been successful. Humour is one of the novel's great qualities, especially the repartee between the Maharani and himself. This humour extends to other characters and to situations and a somewhat surreal, gruesome and ultimately tragic abundance of rats and dogs. For, despite all the wit, Ruskin is careful to see that the Maharani herself is never reduced to a joke. In a limerick, he once described himself as an old man of Landour who wanted young folk to laugh more, so he wrote them a book, and with laughter they shook, as they rolled down the road to Rajpore. Maharani will make you laugh but, more than that, it's to be savoured for its characters, its portrait of an era and of place, and as yet another distinctive book from one of India's favourite authors. 
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

