Na tion
KRISHNENDU HALDER

ANDHRAPRADESH

ASADUDDIN OWAISI

No Telangana for Owaisi
Hyderabad MP claims division of state will unleash religious intolerance
saduddin Owaisi of the 54-yearold All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) doesn't want a truncated Hyderabad. The Owaisis run three schools in the old city area, an Urdu daily Etemaad whose editor is Burhanuddin Owaisi, the third of the Owaisi brothers, and own vast lands and business interests in and around the city. Little wonder, Asaduddin is one the most vocal critics of the division of Andhra Pradesh and formation of Telangana. "Muslims are concerned

A

about their physical security and economic, social and cultural wellbeing," he says. The Hyderabad MP is also against the city becoming a Union Territory and has even opposed the merger of the Hyderabad and Cyberabad police in 2011 for seamless functioning in the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation area, which has 32.60 per cent Muslims.

Asaduddin and his father Salahuddin Owaisi have kept the Hyderabad Lok Sabha seat since 1985. Asaduddin says, "Statehood is a political demand that crops up because of inter-party and intra-party bickering between those from the coastal Andhra-Rayalaseema and Telangana regions." He is against the division of Andhra Pradesh for other reasons as well. "Communal riots have been endemic to Telangana region from the late 1960s through the mid-1990s while the coastal Andhra and Rayalaseema regions have been free from it. This shows the religious intolerance in Telangana," says Asaduddin. The AIMIM leader believes the "real answer" to the ongoing agitation for separate statehood is fresh constitutional safeguards for the development of the Telangana region. Separatists disagree. "They (AIMIM leaders) have discovered they are losing ground. So they're opposing the division of state," says Telangana Joint Action Committee Chairman M. Kodandaram. by Amarnath K. Menon

AJIT PAWAR

MAHARASHTRA

CBI ANGLE TO EXIT
Pawar resigned fearing Chavan would order an inquiry
ear of a CBI inquiry and not a proposed white paper on irrigation forced former Maharashtra deputy chief minister Ajit Pawar to step down on September 25. Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan had planned to get CBI to investigate "irregularities" in the Gosikhurd irrigation project, initiated during Pawar's tenure as water resources minister from 1999 to 2009. Pawar has been accused of awarding contracts worth Rs 20,000 crore bypassing the administrative procedure. A highly placed source told INDIA TODAY that Chavan had asked a seasoned Opposition leader to demand a CBI inquiry to facilitate this. "When Pawar got to know what the Chief Minster was planning, he resigned within 12 hours," the source said.

F

When INDIA TODAY contacted the leader in question, he requested that his identity not be revealed. Chavan's relationship with BJP in the state is cordial. He has accepted several the demands of BJP's Eknath Khadse, the Opposition leader in the Assembly. On May 4, while addressing a symposium on the late Yashwantrao Chavan, Khadse said the state's irrigation capacity has grown by just 0.1 per cent in the last 10 years, despite an expense of Rs 70,000 crore. Chavan immediately announced the publication of a white paper on irrigation, stunning Nationalist Congress Party (NCP). "We are being targeted as NCP is growing rapidly in the state," Pawar said after his resignation. His exit has apparently settled the issue, for Chavan is now unlikely to press for a CBI inquiry. by Kiran Tare

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

48

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

