The Big Story BJP

Rise of the
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Uday Mahurkar and Rohit Parihar

SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN 53
Chief Minister, Madhya Pradesh

Quiet Performer
even Narendra Modi. Chouhan may be in the good books of RSS for pushing the Hindutva agenda but some of his initiatives have created controversies. Introducing surya namaskar in schools, and Bhagavad Gita in the curriculum has not gone down well with people. His law against cow slaughter has not been received well by Muslims. The Chief Minister insists he has no plans beyond Madhya Pradesh, a state where BJP looks insurmountable, according to polls. After seven years as Chief Minister, he is in no hurry to reach Delhi. He can afford to wait. Age is on his side.

The old-fashioned RSS regular has carved a niche for himself with his no-nonsense, can-do style, bucking the trend of offering sops to garner votes and putting his faith in development instead

SAFFRON SATRAPS
A
day after BJP'S Surajkund mela--the party's noisy national executive meeting that failed to come out with a national vision--Shivraj Singh Chouhan, the Madhya Pradesh chief minister, took a plane to an unlikely destination. Chouhan's mission in Washington: Lobbying to get World Bank funding for his social welfare schemes. His Gujarat counterpart would have loved to do the same, but Narendra Modi continues to be denied a US visa for "severe violations of religious freedom". Modi is still the unofficial frontrunner as the prime ministerial candidate within BJP, but for allies like Nitish Kumar he lacks the necessary secular credentials. In Surajkund, the shifting power matrix in BJP was very much on display. Modi was not the first among equals; he was just one of them. Along with Modi, other star chief ministers of the party--Chouhan, Prem Kumar Dhumal of Himachal Pradesh and Chhattisgarh's Raman Singh--took centrestage at the national executive. The other rising regional star, Vasundhara Raje, all set for a comeback in Rajasthan, made a late entry in Surajkund, on September 28, the last day of the meet, but the impact was worthy of her status as a powerful woman leader in an otherwise patriarchal Parivar. When it comes to leaders with a market value, BJP, unlike the Congress, has an embarrassment of riches. And they are all sprouting in the provinces, as if Delhi is for apparatchiks. It is the day of the satraps in BJP. L.K. Advani may still feel youthful in his spirit and sinews, but out there in the states, eligible contenders are multiplying. Modi and Dhumal face crucial Assembly polls later this year and their performance will be closely watched. The so-called stars of Delhi have got the wit, but not the base. Arun Jaitley, the leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, is apparently looking for a "safe seat" to contest his first Lok Sabha polls. Sushma Swaraj, his counterpart in the Lok Sabha, finds herself increasingly sidelined within the party. BJP is unlikely to go to the General Elections with a prime minister candidate. It will be a post-election choice acceptable to all NDA allies. Party President Gadkari himself won't rule out his chances as a dark horse. It may not be the diktat of Delhi but the power of the periphery that may decide who will be the BJP'S candidate for the top job.

H
Narendra Modi may still be frontrunner as BJP'S prime minister candidate, but don't write off the party's regional heavyweights with grassroots appeal and a performance record to match

e is your textbook case of an oldfashioned politician. English is still a foreign language to him. Ask him about Twitter or Facebook and he will admit total ignorance. Shivraj Singh Chouhan is the ultimate lowkey chief minister in the BJP, but a very formidable one in political sweepstakes. At 53, he is one of the youngest leaders in the saffron parivar with solid grassroots appeal. An unapologetic swayamsevak, he spends at least 15 to 20 days a month touring the state. "He has this organic, intrinsic quality of leadership. People trust his word. They know if he promises, he will deliver,"

says a senior BJP leader about the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh. He is a firm believer in the uses of social capital. "When other states were promising free TV sets and cheap rice, Chouhan came out with Ladli Lakshmi Yojana, Kanyadan Yojana and Janani Suraksha Yojana. These social welfare schemes have become the benchmark of his governance," says a state bureaucrat. Chouhan's friends claim he has not changed since his days in Bhopal jail in 1976-77 for participation in the movement against Emergency. He makes it a point to be "respectful" towards L.K. Advani, Nitin Gadkari and

The state's agricultural growth rate is 18 per cent.It is leading the economic growth of the state under Chouhan."
NITIN GADKARI, BJP president

PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN

36

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

The Big Story BJP
RAMAN SINGH 59
Chief Minister, Chhattisgarh

VASUNDHARA RAJE 59

Firm Hand
office in his pocket. His most indispensable possession, an iPhone, carries within it all the data about the state for the last three decades. "I don't carry even a single sheet of paper anywhere. Everything I need is here," he says pointing to his phone. Atal Bihari Vajpayee is his role model. And he doesn't wear his Hindutva on the sleeves of his safari suit: "There is so much work to do. My motto is, if you get the chance, do your work and make a difference." For long, Singh, who was commerce minister in the NDA government, kept a low profile. No longer, and he takes extra care to make his ambition obvious: "I will do whatever the party wants me to do."

Former Chief Minister, Rajasthan

Secular Rani
would win 20 of the 25 Lok Sabha seats, and repeat its 2003 Assembly numbers of 123 out of 200 seats, reason enough for BJP to want her as state president for Assembly polls in 2013. "I wanted people to become sufficient enough to lead a happy life rather than only reminding them about their poverty and launching fake schemes," says Raje, who was Rajasthan chief minister from 2003-2008. At the national level, Raje has cultivated friends across parties. She has won five parliamentary and three Assembly elections. Her priority is to reclaim Rajasthan. She is the other BJP woman who has the potential to overshadow Sushma Swaraj. She enjoys complete support of the state party MLAs, so she can afford to take on the central leadership and even RSS. She has the arrogance of Modi but like him, gets away with it.

The tech-savvy Singh has turned the backward state into a model of development despite the recurring Maoist violence

The Maharani of Dholpur has emerged as a powerful rival to Sushma Swaraj. Her priority, though, is to reclaim Rajasthan

I

f Chhattisgarh is no longer the wretched land of the dispossessed, in spite of the recurring Maoist bloodlust, the credit goes entirely to Chief Minister Raman Singh. He has the data on his fingertips: The average GDP of the state in the past seven years is 10.5 per cent, per capita income is Rs 42,000, and with the revamped system of generation, distribution and transmission, power is not a scarcity. The burly Singh, at 59, swears by development. He is one of the few chief ministers to have won two consecutive Assembly elections and looks poised for a hattrick. His tough stance on Maoists has earned him laurels from even P. Chidambaram, formerly in charge of the Union home ministry. Tech-savvy Singh carries his

T

VASUNDHARA RAJE
PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKER/www.indiatodayimages.com

he Rani may have already acquired a common touch, but don't be mistaken: Vasundhara Raje, 59, refuses to be taken for granted by the maledominated House of Saffron. And when she makes an appearance, she still has that regal aura about her. On September 28, the former Rajasthan chief minister returned from London after a two-month vacation. Four hours later, draped in a light blue sari, she was at the BJP national executive meet in Surajkund, swarmed by autograph hunters. "People, like family, make me forget jet lag," she told INDIA TODAY. The erstwhile princess of the Scindias of Gwalior is today the most popular politician of Rajasthan. Opinion polls show that discredited Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot stands no chance against her. According to some polls, if elections were held today, BJP under Raje

I wanted people to become sufficient enough to lead a happy life rather than only reminding them about their poverty."
VASUNDHARA RAJE, Former chief minister, Rajasthan

I don't carry a single sheet of paper anywhere. Everything I need is in my iPhone."
RAMAN SINGH, Chief Minister, Chhattisgarh

NARENDRA MODI 62
Chief Minister, Gujarat

Action Hero
RAMAN SINGH

Rabble-rouser, visionary, development guru: The Assembly poll campaign brings out the vintage Modi as he tries to break into the national scene

F

ront pages and opinion polls continue to boost Narendra Modi's prime ministerial ambition. At a time when bad governance and half-hearted reforms make national headlines, the Gujarat Chief Minister is India's can-do hero of development. The most popular politician from the Sangh Parivar would certainly like to play out the much hyped Gujarat model on the national scene. In office since 2001, he has been Gujarat's longest serving chief minis-

ter. Modi the action hero is his own marketing manager as well. The ongoing Vivekanand Vikas Yatra brings out the vintage Modi: A rabble-rouser who plays with the mass mind; the self-styled national visionary; the highest development guru; and the most effective lampoonist of the Dynasty. He also gets the best endorsements from India Inc. Says former IIM-Ahmedabad director Bakul Dholakia: "For Modi, development is not a cosmetic exercise but a mission. His development reaches the grassroots with strong focus on execution. People throng to Modi because the wild propaganda against him is in sharp contrast to their own experience-- which propels them to see him as the country's future leader." Modi makes an effort to reach out, lest his development model creates an unequal society. Says

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Modi's confidant and former home minister Amit Shah, "Modi's governance aims at fulfilling the constitutional vision of creating a welfare state by ensuring proportionate development for all sections of society." The only factor that could hold Modi back is his inability to take with him his peer group in BJP and RSS. His arrogance and dictatorial style have not made him popular in a section of the Parivar. Allies like Nitish Kumar think he is not secular enough to lead the country; the memories of 2002 still make him a polarising force. Modi supporters, though, insist he is being victimised for being an internationally noticed success story in governance.

NARENDRA MODI

VIKRAM SHARMAwww.indiatodayimages.com

People throng to Modi because the wild propaganda against him is in sharp contrast to their own experience."
BAKUL DHOLAKIA Former director, IIM-Ahmedabad
OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

