PTI

CABLE GUY
Now that Assembly poll dates are fixed for December 13 and 17, Narendra Modi has decided nothing beats having one's own cable channel at election time. Namo Gujarat, named after the Chief Minister, will soon beam pro-Modi programmes and news bulletins on cable. It has tie-ups with five private TV channels--ETV, TV9, Gujarati channels GTPL, VTV and Biz-- and a technical tie-up with Asianet. Most of the details are, however, secret. "It's by Modi's `support group'," is all that state BJP media in-charge Jagdish Bhavsar will reveal. 

(LEFT) SONIA AT THE RAJKOT RALLY; MODI LAUNCHES INTO A TRADEMARK TIRADE

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

IIM-A STUDENTS

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

YOUNGISTAN FOR MODI
With schemes such as a ban on gutka (chewing tobacco) and the Vivekanand Yatra, Modi is targeting the youth to retain power. Everyone is not enthusiastic though. MBA student Rajiv Ranjan, 23, says,"Even though polls are not that far away, curiosity among students is low." However, with over a lakh students in the state government's eMPOWER programme for computer education--84 per cent of them rural, 35,000 of them women --he may still catch the pulse of the student community. A lot can happen in two-and-a-half months. 
ANIL DAYAL

MODI'S FAMILYPLAN
Gujarat Chief Minister kickstarts his election campaign with his pet theme of dynasty bashing
arendra Modi is using the Gujarat polls to kickstart his prime ministerial campaign. His perceived targets are familiar--Sonia and Rahul Gandhi. He started off by daring Rahul to contest from Bihar. Then, on the eve of Sonia's rally in Rajkot, he made her the target of his attack. On October 1, during his Vivekanand Yatra, Modi claimed UPA had spent Rs 1,818 crore on Sonia's travels abroad, quoting a local newspaper report based on an RTI query. Though the report appeared on July 12, Modi waited till Sonia's visit to use it. Perhaps he wanted to put pressure on Sonia to lower the tenor of her rhetoric, or hoped to goad her into another "Maut ka saudagar" statement against him, which had boomeranged during the 2007 polls. Modi had exploited it by playing hurt. After landing in Rajkot, Sonia first visited the Ramakrishna Ashram, founded by Swami Vivekananda. She avoided taking Modi's name in her 17-minute speech on October 3. Instead of responding to his jibe, she took potshots at BJP. She attacked Modi's claims on development by accusing his government of claiming credit for work done by UPA. The impressive turnout at her rally was a bonus for state Congressmen, reeling under daily onslaught by Modi. Sonia may have dodged the issue, but Modi has succeeded in bringing Sonia's travel bill into Gujarat's poll rhetoric. Gujarati daily Jai Hind, which had carried the report, attributed it to an unnamed RTI activist. Hours after Modi quoted the October 1 news report, Ramesh Varma, a Haryana-based RTI activist, claimed he was the one who had made the query, but added he had not got any figure in response. Undeterred, Modi asks, "If it's wrong, why doesn't UPA release the correct figures?" Clearly, he is taking the battle to the Gandhi camp. by Uday Mahurkar

EASTERN PROMISES
There's an unexpected face on poll billboards all across Shimla.West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee smiles at passers-by from huge hoardings put up by industrialist K.D.Singh,entrusted with establishing the Trinamool Congress (TMC) in five northern states.It is a belated start,but Singh,a Rajya Sabha member from Jharkhand, proclaims his party is set to contest all 68 state Assembly seats.At the
A TMC POSTER IN SHIMLA

N

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

INSTANT VERDICT
With most of their leadership away in Delhi fervently lobbying to get tickets for their loyalists, there is a growing anxiety amid Congress workers, the real foot soldiers, waiting eagerly to retake the government in Shimla. The mood turned even more impatient after the ruling BJP released its first list of 45 candidates on September 29. Accosted in the Capital by one such harried supporter, this is how former chief minister Virbhadra Singh sought to allay his fears: "Have you seen T20 cricket? I shall return to Himachal and knock Dhumal's government for a sixer." 

WAR OF WORDS
Modi Sonia Modi Sonia

"Congress has taken corruption to new levels by stealing even coal."
44

"On corruption there is a big difference between what BJP preaches and practises."

"The Centre treats Gujarat like a stepmother.Depriving us is routine for UPA."

"Many good schemes in Gujarat are being run by Central funds."

inaugural rally on former chief minister Virbhadra Singh's home turf, Rorhu,on September 28,he promised to bring `Didi'to the remotest corners of Himachal.Though its presence is thin, TMC is trying to make up with a plethora of posters and jingles on FM radio. 

VIRBHADRA SINGH

by Uday Mahurkar, Asit Jolly and Devika Chaturvedi

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

