Environment

MAHARASHTRA

NAYNA NARGOLKAR

Nayna Nargolkar fights realtors to protect her forest, home to rare trees and birds

H

er mechanical engineer husband Pramod was the inspiration for Nayna Nargolkar's love of trees. An avid nature lover, he planted a private forest on 15 acres at Gorhe Khurd, 23 km from Pune, spending more than Rs 1 crore on it. He then scoured every corner of India, going as far as Africa to collect seeds of rare plant species for 15 years. Tragedy struck on December 26, 2004, when Pramod, who had gone to the Andamans in search of rare tree species, disappeared in the wake of the giant tsunami that devastated South east Asia. Nayna, 60, lost her life's support, but made it a mission to preserve her husband's dream project. There are 450 species of trees and 90 species of birds to be found in Nayna's forest. But it is under threat now, with Nayna fighting miscreants who secretly cut down its rare trees, allegedly in the hope of driving her out and redeveloping the land as commercial real estate. Property rates in the area, close to the Khadvasla dam, have soared to Rs 1.20 crore per acre recently. Pramod ran a factory at Dhayari near Pune that made spare parts for Bajaj Auto vehicles. In his spare time, his passion for trees and photography drove him to jungles across India. "He took me along in his search for rare

plants, though neither of us had studied botany. It was pure passion," says Nayna. Pramod bought the Gorhe Khurd plot sometime between 1989 and 1996, and started by sowing seeds he had already collected. He built water tanks near the trees and left grains to attract birds. It worked. The forest soon turned into a bird sanctuary. Today, Nayna maintains three borewells to water the trees, plans to build a wall around a watering hole for the birds, and spends up to Rs 20,000 a month on the forest's maintenance. "The tsunami changed my life. It was a rare tour where Pramod did not take me along, but was accompanied by his researcher friends instead. All of them went missing. We searched in all the hospitals, mortuaries and mental asylums, but to no avail," she says. The next four months tested Nayna's courage. She had to look after her children Ashlesha and Amol, who

A RARE RUDRAKSHA TREE HAD BEEN CUT, AN ARJUNA TREE HAD
BEEN HACKED, AND ACID SPRAYED ON THE NILGIRI TREES.
NEW

were still in school, and also take care of the trees and birds. She chose family, and couldn't find time to visit the forest during this time. Then one day, she gathered courage to visit it. "Pramod told me the trees spoke to him. I never believed him. But that day, suddenly, I heard the birds make a lot of noise for about two minutes and fall silent thereafter. I felt they were asking me where their caretaker was, and decided to devote myself to the forest," she says. She did a three-month course in botany from University of Pune to educate herself on flora and fauna, then organised visits by students and researchers to the forest. Prajakta Pathare, a student of philosophy, even wrote an MPhil dissertation on it. Then in May 2012, she found branches of a rare Rudraksha tree chopped, a few days after she put up a board to identify it. An Arjuna tree, whose bark is used as a cure for cold, was also hacked down. Elsewhere, acid had been sprayed on the Nilgiri trees. Her neighbours suddenly started claiming the land, saying it was their property. "I've documents proving our ownership of the land, and have filed a case in a Pune civil court against my neighbours' claims. They are terrorising me, but I'll not give up," she says. Touch wood. by Kiran Tare

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

IN DEFENCE OF HER REALM

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

53

