GLOSSARY

High Tea & High Fashion
The ladies who lunch are busy hosting parties and fashionable gatherings

MAKING THE CUT
New York-based actor Neelu Sodhi sails into Bollywood under Sridevi's wings, playing her niece Meera in English Vinglish. It is her wedding in the film that takes Sridevi to New York, and the two even shake a leg together. Though born in Pune, she was brought up in Connecticut, USA. She left a corporate career in finance to train in acting at the Lee Strasberg Institute in New York. She has done commercials for brands like Lancôme, Budweiser, and Citibank and even shot for a music video with Lady Gaga. She didn't make it to the video's final cut. Will she make it in Bollywood?

NATIVITY SCENE
Malayalam actor Shwetha Menon took `candid camera' to a whole new level when she let director Blessy film the birth of her baby girl in a Mumbai hospital on September 27. Apparently, the National Award-winning Malayalam filmmaker documented the pregnancy from the beginning, including pujas and ceremonies held for Menon, for his film Kalimannu. The film focuses on a mother's relationship with her baby before and after birth. Apart from the director, others in the delivery room were two cameramen and the actor's husband Sreevalsan Menon. How much of that do we really want to see?

FOTOCORP

JURY DUTY
Shabana Azmi, 62, becomes the first woman to head the jury for the Abu Dhabi International Film Festival starting on October 11. Others on the jury are Iranian actor Niki Karimi, French filmmaker Ismael Ferroukhi and Chilean director and screenwriter Cedomir Kolar. But this isn't her first time--she has headed the Montreal World Film Festival, the Cairo Film Festival and the Asia Pacific Screen Academy. Over the hill? Not even close.

THE KING OF KOLKATA
Look out Kolkata, for Shah Rukh Khan's Bangla connect is about to get a whole lot stronger.And we are not talking about IPL team Kolkata Knight Riders.As West Bengal's brand ambassador, he appears in Bengal Leads, a new ad campaign for the state.The two-minute film talks of a new 'Sonar Bangla' with Rabindranath Tagore's Banglar Mati Banglar playing in the background.The actor appears at the beginning of the commercial, and at the end, summing it up with 'There is something special about Bengal' .

ON A PLATTER
The Boom Boom girl Anupama Verma went out with a bang when she left the Bigg Boss house in the first ever season of the reality show in 2006. Her relationship with fellow contestant Aryan Vaid went kaput once they left the show and that was the last we heard of her.The once popular VJ and model has resurfaced now, neatly wrapped in cellophane and hanging on to a meat hook in an advertisement to promote vegetaria- nism for PETA. Is that a sign she is going back into cold storage?

Q& "Women like a good love story, and the Fifty A Shades Trilogy is at its heart a good love story"
E.L. James' life has been transformed. From a little known TV executive from West London, she's become the author of the wildly popular Fifty Shades Trilogy. The books became a global sensation, barrelling through critics complaining about the writing. They are soon being translated into Hindi. Q. What motivated you to write the first book--Fifty Shades Of Grey? A. I wanted to write a passionate love story. I also wanted to explore the idea of what would happen if you met someone who was in the bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism (BDSM) lifestyle. Q. You are credited with rekindling readers' love lives and libidos. A. I have had emails from women of all ages and from all walks of life--and the majority seem to be enjoying more sex. I think it's because women like a good love story, and the Fifty Trilogy is at its heart a good love story. Q. What appeals to readers about a subordinate woman and a dominant male? A. I think it's a fantasy which some people live out in their lives and some people like to read about. Q. In an age where we are constantly surrounded by sex, what drew readers to an erotic trilogy? A. I honestly don't know. The Fifty Shades Trilogy is a love story. If the story was just about sex, I doubt it would have had such an impact. Q. You refer to these books as your "mid-life crisis". A. I stopped watching television, going out, seeing people and became obsessed with writing the story. Q. What do you think of the `mommy porn' tag? A. I know it's read by women of all ages, from college students to women in their 80s. And many of them are not mommies.
by Narender Saini by Nishat Bari and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

FOTOCORP

YOGEN SHAH

SANGITA KATHIWADA
is busy gathering the beautiful and influential for high tea, long luncheons, and champagnesoaked yacht evenings at sea. That's when she is not scouting for the next big designer to showcase at the many fashionable gatherings at her Mumbai store, Melange. Quite a packed schedule.

RIMA MEHRA & VIDUSHI MEHRA,
the wives of designers Shantanu & Nikhil, are joined at the hip at social events. It was inevitable that they would turn into a package deal as hosts for hire.As they recently did for the Delhi store launch of British menswear luxury brand Hackett London.

DEVITA SARAF,
the founder and CEO of Vu Technologies, gathered her friends for an exclusive shopping spree at a luxury store. She is not alone as another socialite, Resham Hemdev Chhabria, planned a similar private viewing over tea at the Hermes store in Mumbai. Lucky lot.

62

GETTY IMAGES

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

