Cover Story
KEJRIWAL AT JANTAR MANTAR AFTER BEING RELEASED FROM BAWANA JAIL IN DELHI ON OCTOBER 13

ARVIND KEJRIWAL

WHYEVERYONE IS AFRAID OF
By exposing corruption in high places, the former Income Tax officer threatens to undermine the pillars of the establishment
By Dhiraj Nayyar

ARVIND KEJRIWAL
s a hot October day in Delhi makes way for a cooler evening, the temperature rises to fever pitch inside the Constitution Club, a few blocks away from Parliament. Sixty television cameras are ready to telecast live the latest exposé on corruption. Around 100 photographers jostling for space go into a frenzy the moment they spot a column of earnest men in Gandhi caps with `Main Aam Aadmi Hoon' emblazoned on them. The cameras zoom in on the frail bespectacled man in the middle, the shortest among the lot. Arvind Kejriwal is all set to address the nation and send politicians scurrying for cover. It has become a pattern with him. On October 5, his exposé of Sonia Gandhi's son-in-law, Robert Vadra, caught the country's imagination, with almost every media organisation following the story. On October 10, Kejriwal seized an opportunity to corner Union Law Minister Salman Khurshid, when a story by news channel Aaj Tak revealed financial irregularities in a Trust for the disabled chaired by him. On October 17, his target was BJP President Nitin Gadkari. It was a move aimed at his ultimate agenda: Establish the hollowness of existing mainstream political parties and show why only his party can offer a political alternative. "They are all in it together, making a fool of the people," thundered Kejriwal. His expose on Gadkari, however, lacked the firepower of the one on Vadra, a sign of the pitfalls of his aggressive name and shame strategy. Sometimes, it may not work. For now, in a politically charged environment, Kejriwal had the BJP on the

A

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

19

Cover Story

ARVIND KEJRIWAL

defensive. Within minutes, his narrative of a rich politician profiting from poor farmers had Sushma Swaraj addressing a press conference to defend Gadkari, just as senior Congress leaders had rushed to declare Vadra a private citizen. The fear in the permanent elite is palpable. Who will be next as the fearless crusader becomes a big game hunter? For only when he demolishes the existing pillars of the establishment can Kejriwal erect his new edifice. His fearlessness has inspired others, like IAS officer Ashok Khemka, to expose the rot in Government. At his press conference, Kejriwal exhorted other bureaucrats to join his crusade. Prashant Bhushan speaks with some measure of satisfaction when he says: "Politicians know there is no way to silence us. We cannot be bought. And we have thick skins that can deflect all the mud they are trying to fling at us. As Anna Hazare taught us, one of the five principles of public life is that you must have the strength to swallow insults (apmaan peene ki shakti)." In Kejriwal, they have the middle class' favourite muckraker and also an unlikely candidate for charisma. The former Indian Revenue Service (IRS) officer is neither the conventional orator, nor does he have the moral authority of Hazare. His extraordinary appeal lies in his ordinariness. And what Yogendra Yadav, political scientist and undeclared ideologue of Team Kejriwal, calls his "energy, the capacity to cut through the clutter, ability to vibe with ordinary people, and his absolute integrity". It comes from utter incorruptibility, immense self-belief and powerful convictions. Kejriwal has shown flashes of all before. His brief stint of seven years in the Income Tax Department brought him face to face with the extent of corruption in the government system. When studying at IIT, Kharagpur, he was rejected for a campus placement job by Tata Steel. He called the company chairman's office and pressed them for another interview. His persistence was rewarded and he got the job. In 2000, he took leave from IRS to set up an NGO, Parivartan, which did advocacy for the Right to Information Act (RTI), for which

TEAM KEJRIWAL

The troika that gives IAC its cutting edge as it readies for the rough and tumble of politics
AJOURNALIST-turned-RTI activist, Manish
Sisodia, 40, has been associated with Arvind Kejriwal for over a decade. He worked with Zee News as producer-anchor before plunging into the RTI movement fulltime. Together, he and Kejriwal started the NGO Parivartan in 2000 to conduct advocacy for RTI. They are also trustees of the Public Cause Research Foundation, set up in 2006 to empower the common man. Sisodia also edits Apna Panna, a monthly magazine on RTI. Sisodia is like Kejriwal's shadow--always by his side during all rallies, protests and press conferences, a presence Kejriwal calls "invaluable". The new post-Anna slogan, "Main aam aadmi hoon (I am a common man)", has been coined by him.

PRASHANT BHUSHAN

HE IS THE ONE member of Team Kejriwal who
was not a member of Team Anna. A political scientist and senior fellow at New Delhi's Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), the kurta-sporting Yadav, 49, is also a psephologist who has conducted several opinion polls and exit polls for leading Indian media groups. Yadav did his bachelor's from University of Rajasthan in Sri Ganganagar, his master's from Jawaharlal Nehru University and MPhil from Panjab University in Chandigarh. He taught at the University of Panjab in the 1980s and early 1990s before moving to CSDS in 1994. He has two roles in Team Kejriwal. First, to draft the constitution of the new political party--he drafted the Vision Document of India Against Corruption. Second, to co-opt as many apolitical peoples' movements as possible into Team Kejriwal's political fold.

Eminent lawyer and activist for civil liberties,Kejriwal's legal eagle

LIKE KEJRIWAL used RTI, Prashant Bhushan,
56, has used public interest litigation (PIL) to bring greater accountability in public life. He has been steadfast in his efforts to make it mandatory for judges to disclose their assets and to bring the office of Chief Justice of India under the RTI ambit. He, along with his 86-year-old father Shanti Bhushan, former law minister, is the legal brains trust of Team Kejriwal. All documents that Kejriwal uses to expose corruption have to pass the Bhushan test first. An integral part of Team Anna, Prashant chose to take the path of political activism in support of Kejriwal. He played a major role in framing the Jan Lokpal Bill. Cases initiated by him include the recent Kudankulam nuclear plant case, and, in 2010, the 2G case and chief vigilance commissioner's appointment. With the Government mounting an attack on his integrity, he says he is open to any probe.
SIPRA DAS/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Journalist-turned-RTI activist, Kejriwal's closest aide

MANISH SISODIA

YOGENDRA YADAV

Political scientist and psephologist, ideologue of Kejriwal's new party
INDIAN EXPRESS Photo

he won the Magsaysay Award in 2006. When he asserted his own leadership credentials independent of his mentor Hazare in the last week of July 2012, he was capping over a decade of protest against government corruption and sloth, much before the India Against Corruption (IAC) movement was even a glimmer in Hazare's eyes. On July 25, he chose Hazare's favourite method of protest, an indefinite fast, to demand a Jan Lokpal Bill, marking his credentials for leadership. His fast, lasting 10 days despite his diabetes, was ritualistic. It left him weakened but very much alive. His real breakthrough came with the Vadra revelations. It marked a turnaround after Hazare and other core members of Team Anna, Kiran Bedi and Santosh Hegde, parted ways with him over his decision to form a political party, claiming privately that he was a victim of "indoctrination". Hazare, Bedi and Hegde wanted the movement, which had acquired an all-

India nature, to remain apolitical and continue agitation for Jan Lokpal and the right to reject candidates in an election. Kejriwal and his close advisers, including Prashant and Shanti Bhushan, wanted to jump into politics. The split was not amicable. "My argument was that this was a national movement uniting the country, connecting with everyone. Why move to something that divides us?" says Bedi. Kejriwal is pensive talking about post-Hazare days. "People were saying all kinds of things. Everyone treated us like underdogs. A lot of our supporters left us in August and September but they are now coming back," he says. April was the cruellest month, he says. Conspiracies were hatched against him and his team. He doesn't name anyone. "It was a difficult time. I was suffering from insomnia and lost 10 kg. And then I simply took a break and went for Vipassana," he says. Kejriwal has been practising Vipassana for the past 15 years and says that it helps him keep

his cool under trying circumstances. Kejriwal and his movement are energised with the way the political class has reacted to their exposés. Vadra referred to his movement disparagingly as "mango people". Khurshid called them guttersnipes. Digvijaya Singh said Kejriwal was only doing this because he had been denied membership of the Sonia Gandhi-led National Advisory Council. BJP President Nitin Gadkari called him a "muckraker". There are also more substantive criticisms beyond the personal. Says Delhi Chief Minister Sheila Dikshit's political secretary Pawan Khera, who negotiated with Kejriwal during the Team Anna agitation, "In Kejriwal's brand of media politics, visibility is more important than vision." Kejriwal says he has been forced to enter politics. He is disillusioned because he says Congress and BJP are two sides of the same coin. "There is collusive corruption. Cutting across party lines, they have joint interests. There is

an unwritten understanding between them: Don't target individuals," he told INDIA TODAY. He says his team's effort is to provide alternative politics in the country. "We are not saying that these people (politicians) are bad and we are good. It is the system that is flawed. We have to find ways to change it," he says.

V

isibility is the currency of Team Kejriwal's politics, replacing money from corrupt practices that fuel elections. As Prashant Bhushan says, "We decided to have a political party because public opinion can only take us so far. People will vote for a good person only if he is seen to be viable." They seem to relish the blowback from the political class. Says Yadav, "We have demonstrated that one tiny fellow speaking the truth can shock and rattle them so completely." Team Kejriwal believes that by not playing by the rules of the politicians--for example, of the unwritten

rule of not targeting families--they have changed the game. The moment is perfect for the launch of a new political party on November 26, the anniversary of the birth of the Indian Constitution. The new party will be unabashedly anti-politician. According to the Vision Document of India Against Corruption, a precursor to the constitution of the new political party, what is promised is "swaraj", which is about "rule by the people, not babus and netas". The document is scathing about parties which it says are "election machines designed to catch voters and use them as fodder to convert money into power and power back into more money". Kejriwal wants to turn the clock back to 1947 and redefine India's government. Self-rule, according to him, means rule by gram sabhas and urban neighbourhoods. That is the "cornerstone" of his politics. The political agenda centres around a genuine decentralisation of gover-

20

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

Cover Story ARVIND KEJRIWAL
CITIZEN CANE
NOVEMBER 14, 2010
Arvind Kejriwal, Anna Hazare, Baba Ramdev, Kiran Bedi, among others, lodge an FIR against Suresh Kalmadi for the Commonwealth Games scam.

Kejriwal's long road to politics of exposé
KEJRIWAL RESTORING POWER SUPPLYAT A HOUSE IN DELHI

APRIL 5, 2011 Anna Hazare starts an indefinite hunger strike at Jantar Mantar, Delhi, for a stringent anticorruption law, the Jan Lokpal Bill, with Arvind Kejriwal in tow. AUGUST 25, 2011 Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh reaches out to Team Anna; assures discussion on Jan Lokpal in the House.

stronger Lokpal Bill than was being currently discussed.

while awarding various contracts.

nance, much beyond that envisaged in the Panchayati Raj amendments to the Indian Constitution. According to IAC'S Vision Document, "maximum possible decisions" must be taken at the level of "villages" or "neighbourhoods". Decisions must be taken by the people and not "experts" or "officials". Kejriwal envisions a direct democracy, a system of government that exists only in Switzerland. There, it is often criticised for building up policy paralysis. With India's large numbers, it is difficult to see how a direct democracy will lead to better and, more importantly, faster decision-making. Such a system may also decentralise corruption rather than eradicating it altogether.

MARCH 25, 2012 Hazare
fasts at Jantar Mantar, demands protection for whistleblowers.

OCTOBER 10, 2012
Kejriwal puts Law Minister Salman Khurshid in his sights, alleging financial irregularities to the tune of Rs 71 lakh by his Trust for the physically disabled.

JUNE 3, 2012 Hazare
fasts for a day along with yoga guru Ramdev at Jantar Mantar.

DECEMBER 27, 2011
Hazare begins a threeday hunger strike at the MMRDA grounds in Mumbai, demanding a

OCTOBER 2, 2012
Kejriwal joins politics and releases a draft Vision Document of his yet-to-be named party.

OCTOBER 14, 2012 A
group of India Against Corruption volunteers protest against Khurshid at the Indira Gandhi International Airport and later outside his residence. About 15, including Kejriwal, are detained but are later released.

OCTOBER 5, 2012
Kejriwal accuses Congress President Sonia Gandhi's son-inlaw Robert Vadra of taking an interest-free loan and huge bargains on land from realty giant DLF in exchange of political favours.

OCTOBER 15, 2012
Kejriwal-led India Against Corruption suspends its agitation against Khurshid and his wife Louise in Delhi and declares that Farrukhabad, which Khurshid represents in the Lok Sabha, would be the new epicentre of its movement.

OCTOBER 6, 2012
He launches a `Bijli Paani Satyagraha' to protest against the allegedly inflated electricity and water bills and the tariff hike announced by the Delhi government.

OCTOBER 17, 2012
Kejriwal alleges that the BJP President Nitin Gadkari had colluded with Nationalist Congress Party leader Ajit Pawar in land and irrigation scams in Maharashtra.

OCTOBER 9, 2012
Kejriwal accuses the Haryana government of giving preferential treatment to DLF, "illegally" favouring the company

he urban middle class should be very afraid of Kejriwal's economic agenda. He threatens to turn upside down the one institution that has delivered prosperity for the middle class, despite the government, in the two decades since liberalisation--the free market. IAC's Vision Document, which will form the basis of the future political party's agenda, is quite clear when it says that development cannot be guided by the "logic of capital" or forces of the "free market". Development, according to the document, must be guided by the principle of "equity" and the "need of the last person". It is a vision that harks back to Indira Gandhi's heady days of disastrous socialism in the late 1960s and 1970s. India's own experience shows that it simply doesn't work. There are other parts of the Vision Document that may find greater acceptability. The setting of an independent Jan Lokpal is one such proposal. Extensive reform of the police and judiciary would also find a constituency in the larger anti-corruption mood of the country. Equally unobjectionable are the agendas to universalise education and healthcare. But can the appeal of these overcome the radical nature of the overarching vision of Gandhian decentralised politics and Marxist economics? Kejriwal has succeeded in mobilising public opinion against corruption. He has succeeded in delivering a real scare to the political class. Success in persuading India that he

T

AP Photo

Cover Story
THE POLITICAL PROJECT
Rule by panchayat. Sample some ideas from the IAC's
Vision Document:
 "People hold

ARVIND KEJRIWAL Radical decentralisation is the one big idea of Kejriwal's party
PTI

BETWEEN GANDHI & MARX

ECONOMIC POLICY
Kejriwal's party has a vision that is a mix of socialism and green activism.
 "Our path of develop-

the reins to government and administration."
 "Government

ment must be guided by pursuit of equality and needs of our last person."
 "We must seek a

may control only minimum powers and resources."
 "Maximum

sustainable balance of development with environment."
 "We must not allow

decisions are taken in the village or neighbourhood."

( FROM LEFT) BHUSHAN, KEJRIWALAND YADAV

profit motive to be sole drivers of the economy."

offers a real political alternative may be much harder to achieve. IAC and its successor political party have a problem. Much like the Hazareled movement against corruption, Kejriwal's "andolan (movement)" is excessively Delhi-centric. Its support is confined largely to urban pockets, which are particularly enraged by UPA'S corruption. That is not good enough for a future political party that intends to supplant all existing political parties, including Congress and BJP. The task of establishing a national political party is hard. Kejriwal need only ask BJP. More than three decades after it was founded in 1980--its predecessor Jan Sangh was around since Independence--the party has struggled to catch up with the pan-India footprint of the 127-year-old Congress. In politics, history matters. The Congress has age on its side, and its leadership of the freedom struggle. Team Kejriwal is not unaware of this challenge. While Kejriwal and Bhushan focus on exposing corruption, Yadav is tasked with expanding the group's political reach. On October 15, Yadav travelled to Hyderabad to meet the APPVU, a union of agricultural workers in Andhra Pradesh. Says Yadav, "My role is to be the bridge between this anti-corruption movement and pre-existing peoples' move-

ments." He has spoken with the Lok Sangharsh Morcha, an Adivasi movement in Maharashtra. He is trying to bring on board Sarvodaya Karnataka, which he calls "an unusual formation of Dalits and peasants". He has extended a hand to the Women's Front of Tamil Nadu and an agricultural movement in Maharashtra.

he objective seems clear. Team Kejriwal is reaching out to specific constituencies in different geographies to give its future political party a base beyond the agitated urban constituency. The team is in discussions with the Samajwadi Jana Parishad, a political organisation that operates in eight states; with the Independent Democratic Party, which operates in Jammu, Punjab and Rajasthan; and the Uttarakhand Jan Vahini. Yadav does not deny the difficulty in cobbling together an alternative. "We tried with the Lok Rajniti Manch in 2004 and 2009. It did not take off," says Yadav about an earlier political alternative he had worked on. But for Kejriwal, it is a fight for the future. When he announced in Delhi on October 2 that he would form his party, he said: "I have to fight for my children. If I don't fight, they will never forgive

T

me. If I fail, they will know that I tried and they will carry the fight forward." While the crowds cheered and clapped, at his three-bedroom flat in Vaishali, Ghaziabad, his 12-year-old son Pulkit held his head in his hands. "What is papa saying? I don't want to do all this. Didi (his 16-year-old elder sister Harshita) can do it if she wants. I want to play cricket," he said. Kejriwal smiles fondly while narrating the incident but it is quickly replaced by his soaring determination: "We have to build capacity of the people. The entire structure needs to be dismantled and rebuilt from scratch. The idea is to make people aware of their power. And it is happening," he says. Kejriwal wants his politics to work like an "andolan". "We won't spend money. If we do, what is the difference between us and other parties? It has to be a peopledriven movement. If people do not support us, we will withdraw," he says. In the last one-and-a-half years, Kejriwal says IAC has spent about Rs 3 crore, the major chunk being spent on sending SMSs to their supporters. "We have two crore members who get our SMSs," he says. They need many more if they have to translate the simmering anger against corruption into a positive vote for their party in 2014.
with Bhavna Vij-Aurora and Priya Sahgal

24

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

