NET FLUX
tumblr tales

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video

Photo Furnish
Swedish home furnishings company IKEA came under fire recently for airPRINCE WILLIAM brushing women KISSING A LAMP out of their Saudi Arabia catalogue.The controversy has given birth to the Tumblr blog, Ikeafiles. Netizens took iconic photos and using photoshop swapped the women with couches, lamps and wardrobes.The end result is hilarious--the blog features pictures of Prince William passionately kissing a lamp (instead of wife Kate) and Sean Connery's James Bond romancing food containers (instead of Bond girl Shirley Eaton).

Gaga Over Gangnam
On winning the T20 World Cup on October 7, the West Indies cricket team stood in a row and galloped like horses-- Gangnam Style had officially taken over the gentleman's game.The song by Korean rapper PSY exploded online in September with cheesy lyrics and a crazy video of Koreans simulating riding. Chris Gayle introduced the song to cricket when he celebrated a wicket against England by doing the dance. However,

WEST INDIES TEAM DANCING TO THE SONG

news now

Gangnam Style's fan following isn't restricted to cricket.Viewed over 411 million times on YouTube, everyone is going gaga over this wacky tune.

smart sheet

Dividing Duties
Would we parent like this if we were lesbians? That's the question American novelist Erica Miller wants mothers to ask themselves.In the article,`Why Straight Moms Should Parent Like Lesbians'published in New York Magazine, Miller,a lesbian mother,discusses prevalent gender stereotypes among parents."In my same-sex relationship,we don't fall back on gender roles.It's not all 50-50 here in two-mom central,but job schedules and personalities divide labour,not chromosomes," she wrote.

tweet tweet

Winning Formula
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on October 9: Reality TV show Bigg Boss 6 topped trends. The most frivolous trend had Tweeple doling out advice ranging from the profound (Do your best) to the inane (Drink more wine). They also discussed their last wishes. Fashionistas took over Twitter when news about the Wills India Fashion Week poured in. The suicide of singer Asha Bhosle's daughter Varsha also had the Web buzzing.
#BB6
957,541

app alert
This week's list is for DIY junkies, jazz lovers and photographers. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. Blue Note has a catalogue of over a hundred hours of jazz music, photo galleries and historic interviews of jazz artists. FixYa will give you short, easy solutions to fix any kind of electronic gadget.

Star of the week
THE iPOD DEVELOPED BY DESAI

Top of the Lot

iTribute

#Threewordsofadvice
424,164

#WIFW
409,175
*Figures denote number of followers

#50thingsiwanttodobeforeidie
386,636

#ashabhosle
119,682

Pritesh Desai wanted to pay tribute to Apple co-founder Steve Jobs. So the 21-year-old from Mumbai developed a simVapp responds to ulation of an iPod Classic that sounds to take pictures can run on your computer automatically, without browser. Desai took a month to pressing any buttons. develop the code for the iPod. It can be used like a regular iPod funonet (with play/pause buttons and a clickwheel) and has over a The boys from UK who featured in 1,000 songs. But why did the hugely popular YouTube video Desai choose to simulate `Charlie bit my finger' , will now star the first iPod? "The iPod in their own Web series. paved the way for A security camera footage showed a man gadgets like the stealing an iPhone from a 20-month-old iPhone and baby girl at a store in England. iPad," he says.

net point
Need to test the competence of a potential employee? Mettl.com does it for you. Founded by Delhi-based duo Ketan Kapoor and Tonmoy Shingal, both IIT and IIM alumni, Mettl develops an online assessment and testing platform to measure, analyse and improve people's skills.The online start-up provides services to companies like Cognizant, Myntra and Ericsson.

