SIMPLY DELHI

Travel

QuickESCAPE
hether it's about relaxing in a spa, foraying into green outdoors, foodie binges or a soulful experience, a break from the busy city life can do you good. Make a temporary getaway before the good weather runs out and take the first road out. Choose from our list of best getaway options from Delhi.

Overdue for a break? It's not too late to plan one. We suggest you places to slip away this weekend

W

THE HOLY SHRINE
Thousands visit Amritsar every day to seek blessings from the almighty at the Golden Temple. Apart from being the holiest of all Gurudwaras, Amritsar is also home to many other monuments of historical relevance including the summer palace of Maharaja Ranjit Singh and Ram Tirath which is believed to be Maharishi Valmiki's ashram, amongst others. Often referred to as the Berlin Wall of Asia, the Wagah Border near Amritsar sees great crowds on either side every evening, who come down to witness the 'Beating the Retreat' ceremony at the border.

While here, visit the many bazaars around the Golden Temple. Each lane has its own retail speciality--from bridal trousseau and vibrant Punjabi juttis to a variety of dry fruits and Amritsari specialities of vadiyan and papad. Punjabis have hearty appetites, and Amritsar is the hub of the gastronomy. Check out Maqbool Road, also known as Cholesterol Chowk, for its delicious meaty fare-mutton tikkas, shammi kebabs, spicy brain curry, atta chicken and more to tickle your palate. Make a trip to All India Famous Kulche Chole at Cholesterol Chowk, if you'd like to gorge on Amritsar's favourite breakfast. And when in Punjab, do as the Punjabis do--reach out for a tall glass of thick lassi. This refreshingly creamy yoghurt drink has a huge fan following. GETTING THERE Take the Grand Trunk Road to Amritsar DISTANCE 250 Km STAY Green Acres Haveli TEL 09781983828 COST Rs 4,000 per day plus taxes

HEMANT CHAWLA//www.indiatodayimages.com

SIMPLY DELHI

Travel
gant lawns dress the exteriors. The stunning fort cuts right into the edge of the mountain. Décor is simple and low-key, not the plush five star variety. Yet Neemrana is extremely stylish, with a heady mix of colonial and Indian antiques and object d'art. But the real romance of Neemrana is simply in leaving your ordinary world as you make your way up its curved driveway to the majestic, ancient spiked wooden doors. GETTING THERE Take the NH 8 DISTANCE 122 Km TEL 01494 299900 COST 16,000 per night  Text by Travel Plus

ROYAL RAJ
Neemrana Fort Palace is one of India's oldest heritage hotels and also one of its most beautiful, formerly owned by descendants of Prithviraj Chauhan III, this palace offers a magnificent view from its hilltop vantage--and a superb experience. It taught India that a hotel need not be in a destination, it can be the destination. A hotel only in the very broad sense of the word, Neemrana is part heritage monument and part exclusive getaway; a modern marvel with history. On the National Highway between Delhi and Jaipur, the 500 year old palace is built into the mountainside in a stepped layout, and extrava-

SUNNY DAYS
This is a postcard location with golden sands, vibrant hues, massive forts, beautiful havelis, gastronomic treasures--and the list goes on. Luxury and vintage charm at its best, Jaisalmer is one of the jewels in Rajasthan's tourism map. One of the main draws here is the daunting 12th century Jaisalmer Fort. Built by Bhati Rajput ruler Rawal Jaiswal in 1156 AD, the daunting citadel is one of the largest forts in the world. The fort with four massive gateways and 99 bastions, (92 of which were built between 1633 and 1647) has havelis, temples and numerous eateries within its complex. The famous Indian film director Satyajit Ray wrote a detective novel and later made it into a film called Sonar Kella, based on the fort. While in Jaisalmer, its best to hire a jeep and camp out in the open desert. To get the feel of the desert, it's nice to visit the rustic hamlets of Pithila, Tilon and Ratasar. GETTING THERE Take the Delhi-Jaisalmer Express DISTANCE 793 Km STAY Hotel Golden Haveli TEL 094141494641 COST Rs 2,000 per night

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR//www.indiatodayimages.com

SIMPLY DELHI

Travel
SUMEET INDER SINGH//www.indiatodayimages.com

RUSTIC RETREAT
Tucked away in the midst of lush green forests, orchards and gardens, luxuriously stretched along the undulating contours of the Aravalli range, Vedic Gram is a wellness and destination spa. Here relaxation, rejuvenation and therapy form a pleasant triangle making it an ideal getaway from hectic city life. In their programs, musical symphonies are combined with mantras, chants, shlokas and prayers based on Indian classical and folk music. In India, music and mantras are believed to have originated from the divine consciousness at the time of cosmic origin, and therefore bestowed with metaphysical healing powers. At Vedic Gram, these healing symphonies are imparted a universal appeal and appropriately combined with Pranayama, flowing dance movements, basic yogic exercises and guided meditation. GETTING THERE Take NH8 DISTANCE 46 km TEL 811140216 COST Packages starts at Rs14,000 inclusive of taxes

FORT TOWN
Kumbhalgarh with its numerous forts is fast becoming one of the more popular tourist destinations in Rajasthan. The fort wall here is an astounding 36 km long and the fort itself is surrounded by 13 mountain peaks, guarded by seven great gates and seven walls, strengthened by rounded bastions and mammoth watchtowers. The meandering roads here lead through thick forests. It has many sites for the tourist who's willing to explore. On top of the fort is the Badal Mahal Palace which has beautiful sections painted with delicate pastel coloured murals. The palace was rebuilt by Rana Fateh Singh in the late 19th century. Haldighati, where the famous battle between Rana Pratap and the forces of the Mughal Emperor Akbar was fought lies here as well. GETTING THERE Take a train to Udaipur and then a bus or taxi to Kumbhalgarh DISTANCE 625 Km STAY Club Mahindra TEL 09672723444 COST Rs 6,000-9,000 for the suites

INTO THE GREENS
Built on nine acre with an 18-hole Greg Norman golf course, Jaypee Greens Golf and Spa Resort is a great weekend retreat from the hustle bustle of the city. The accommodation here is spread over 170 rooms including 152 deluxe room and 18 suites. The splendid resort also features a 24 hour resto café Eggespectation, Chinese restaurant Ano Tai and an Italian eatery La Brezza with the Enoteca Bar. Covering 90,000 sq ft, the Indian flagship of the Thai spa chain Six Senses, is one of the major attractions here. With a comprehensive menu spanning over 50 pages, the signature therapies at the spa include Signature Hammam and Watsu, an aquatic therapy that combines elements of shiatsu, yoga and meditation GETTING THERE Take the Noida Expressway DISTANCE 25 Km CALL 0120-6743000 COST Rs 10,000 plus taxes per day for two

s-20

SIMPLY DELHI  OCTOBER 2012

