Mail

Children of the Revolution
OCTOBER 8, 2012

As the People's Republic prepares for a leadership transition, Mao's heirs turn the economic giant into a potpourri of aspiration and hedonism

If the Chinese people have to face the suppression of the Communist Party's ideological deviants and yet contend with corruption, it's a recipe for disaster.
N A L I N I V I J AY A R A G H AVA N ,
Thiruvananthapuram

State of Affairs
China is a land of vast contradictions ("Children of the Revolution", October 8). Despite the overall economic progress, majority of the ordinary citizens are frustrated because of the suppressive policies of the dictatorial rulers. Hedonism sways across the higher echelons of the society. But a strong rift prevails among different social classes. The picture presented before the world is all contrary to the real scenario. People want to break off the shackles of slavery to breathe the air of freedom.
VIRENDRA T., Dehradun

ANIL DAYAL

Now Or Never
The Congress party cannot undo the damage of the past three years by initiating a slew of reforms all of a sudden ("Reform Rush Gives Congress Hope", October 8). But the important thing is that the party should focus on bringing the battered economy back on track and not look at the reforms as merely tools to win the 2014 Lok Sabha elections.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

the country. Widespread corruption and a disastrous healthcare system have further exacerbated the divide. An article that appeared in Communist Party of China-run newspaper, Study Times, warned that this income gap could reach dangerous proportions in the near future. This open admission by a party newspaper shows the government is fully aware of the problem. The government should act immediately if it wants to ensure China continues to progress and become the next big superpower.
KANGAYAM R. NARASIMHAN, Chennai

The economic disparity between the rich and the poor has been growing in China since 2003. Over the years, the number of public protests over income divide has been on the upswing in

With Mamata Banerjee out, the Congress can go ahead with its reforms programme. Foreign investors have to be convinced of the sincerity of the Government about going ahead with its agenda of welcoming FDI, as envisaged in different sectors. To promote India as a proper investment destination is the need of the hour.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

China's ability in utilising its manpower has helped the country become an economic powerhouse. But in reality, it is still a developing country, where both the affluent and the poor

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

``

``

Mail
coexist. Despite economic reforms, increasing inequalities and income gap between urban and rural China are clearly visible. Economic growth counts for little if it cannot uplift the masses. Alongside developing infrastructure, emphasis on human development index and per capita income of citizens is essential.
SANJEEV GUPTA, Australia

35
is not a panacea. In fact, as countries like India have shown, democracy often creates a system in which politicians and bureaucrats get more leeway to indulge in corruption.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

of the society to afford medical treatment. Domestic firms should be allowed to make drugs at cheaper rates.
R. MENON, Thiruvananthapuram

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
N OV E M B E R 1 6 - 3 0, 1 9 7 7

Tantrik Terrorists
In their saffron coloured cotton garbs, they look like sadhus, yet they are far from being the traditional Hindu sanyasis. They preach peace and non-violence but use violent methods to achieve their aims. They do not fit into the stereotype image of the urban guerrillas, yet they act like any terrorist group in the world. Through these contradictions, the Anand Margis of India--the newest band of revolutionaries to emerge on the world political map--defy definition. They are as secretive as the Mafia and as well organised as the CIA. Their tentacles stretch from Calcutta to California, from Patna to Perth, from Bombay to Berlin and from Lucknow to London. Their initiation ceremonies involve human skulls and are said to be as gruesome as those of the Mau Mau--Kenya's nationalist movement in the '50s. The objective is to achieve a revolutionary transformation in the lives of India's 650 million people through the ideology of the PROUT--short for PROgressive Utilisation Theory. It is a mumbo-jumbo of anti-Marxist and anti-capitalist jargon which tries to capsulate the spiritualism of the East with socio-economic theories of the West. A pinch of humanism is thrown into it for good measure.
ANAND MARGA MEETING IN LONDON

Curbing Freedom
The violent crackdown on birthday bashes, pubs and bars in Mangalore point to a worrying future ("The City of Imagined Enemies", October 8). In the name of culture and tradition, vigilante groups are carrying out all sorts of atrocities. This kind of moral policing is totally uncalled for in a democracy. The Karnataka government has been too soft on these anti-social elements. Strict action should be taken against such extremist groups for violating the laws of the land by curbing citizens' democratic rights.
SUNAINA SURESH, Mangalore

Healthcare for All
The Supreme Court of India has done the right thing by questioning Swiss drugmaker Novartis AG as to why it can't make cheaper cancer drugs ("Big Pharma At War With Copycats", October 8). It is high time that we start asking the drug companies, especially those from abroad, as to why they sell medicines in a developing country like India at exorbitant costs. Medicines for life-threatening diseases like cancer should be available at affordable prices to help the poor and the middle class. Currently, treatment of cancer, among many other diseases, is totally out of the common man's reach. The Government should consider this issue seriously.
RUPAM ROY, Kolkata

There can be some exceptions but on the whole, the younger generation in China has ensured that the country fares well in most aspects. The young are innovative in their thinking and are dedicated and hardworking. China has also benefited from the communications revolution.
MAHESH KAPASI, Delhi

Increasing cases of corruption and the rising disparity among people from different sections of the society can be considered as the collective failure of a country. As the cover story indicates, the simmering discontent among the people of China might ultimately become the agent of change from totalitarian regime to democracy. The government may be complacent about the growth rate, but a total disregard of the miserable conditions of stoical poor may lead to tacit collapse. Yet, one should remind the people of China who are rhapsodising for democracy that it

Game On
It's heart-warming to see Afghanistan taking to the game of cricket ("The Great Game", October 8). For years, the country has been ravaged by war and during the dark days of Taliban rule, pursuing sports, music or any form of entertainment was not encouraged. The fact that they are coming out of the shadows and embracing the gentleman's game augurs well for the country's overall development.
RAHUL GILL, Gurgaon

Healthcare should not be the property of the privileged. The Government must ensure that the poor in this country are able to avail of the best of medical treatments at a nominal cost. The drug companies run their own racket and sell medicines at sky-high prices, thus making it impossible for a large section

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

