Mail

Green Terror
OCTOBER 15, 2012

Outdated environmental laws and inflexible ministers strangle India's economy

The Ministry of Environment and Forests must take a positive approach and not stall industry clearances. It should punish those who break green laws.
V I R E N D R A T. ,
Dehradun

Green Hurdles
Your cover story ("Green Terror", October 15) is a timely caution for the Government that if environmental clearances are not given on time, its reformist zeal may not bear fruit. And time is running out. Firstly, strict action should be taken against firms that don't adhere to environmental laws. Secondly, it is essential that the Government rehabilitates or adequately compensates those from whom land is taken away for development. Environmental laws should be transparent and holistic. To end the curse of corruption, the Government needs to put all such clearances under one window with transparent procedures.
JACOB S., Thiruvananthapuram

ANIL DAYAL

A Cut Above the Rest
Narendra Modi is truly BJP'S prime ministerial frontrunner ("Rise of the Saffron Satraps", October 15). He may have competition from the likes of Shivraj Singh Chouhan, Vasundhara Raje et al, but were BJP to form a consensus on the issue, Modi would get maximum support from across the country. He can lead India to greater heights with his positive and constructive approach.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

objects to a clean environment, but anything overdone that is an impediment to progress shouldn't be tolerated. Every project, from power to coal blocks, building of bridges and roads to irrigation dams, that has been objected to by the environment ministry will have disastrous consequences on India's growth and progress.
A. SRIKANTAIAH, Bangalore

Jairam Ramesh and Jayanthi Natarajan are India's green terrorists. Nobody

That BJP has more than one candidate fit for the top job should give them confidence in the run-up to the next General Elections. Rather than worry over possible squabbles, which BJP should solve internally, its problem of plenty would convey the message of health to the populace, at a time when other parties are in rigor mortis.
A.K. TIWARI, Kanpur

The environment ministry must adop a positive approach and not obstruct industry. It should punish violators of green laws instead. Infrastructure across India has to be improved at all cost to facilitate fast-paced growth.
VIRENDRA T., Dehradun

The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, are not `archaic' as

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

``
OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

``

90

Mail
you describe them. Prior to 2009, possibly due to coalition pressures, the environment ministry was headed by DMK ministers. It would be fair to say that laws were not implemented with the rigour or transparency one would expect then. Hence they posed no hurdles to growth, but quite often a threat to the environment they were supposed to protect. It's well known that damages to the ecosystem are often irreversible. That's when the judiciary stepped in, as the Government, under pressure from industrialists, failed to ensure sustainable development. The much-talkedabout Bellary, Goa, Aravalli and other mining scandals demonstrate how lax the Government was. The Supreme Court's Green Bench, some high courts and the green tribunal are now reviewing MOEF'S decisionmaking process to ensure it is fully informed, based on correct principles, and free from bias or restraint. This review would take into account whether all relevant factors have been considered, and if extraneous factors influenced decisions. Hence, even approvals granted by Jayanti Natarajan have been overruled by the green tribunal.
SHIVESH SINHA, by email

35
prove that China's march has always been upward and onward ("Children of the Revolution", October 8). China has moved from tribalism to nationalism and is now moving on to internationalism. India should learn from China to determine whether we are going to usher in an era of happiness, or be destroyed.
TANMAY BANERJI, Lucknow

order and a rise in corruption. "Susashan" seems a mirage. Even Nitish's ruling partner, the BJP, has started to mobilise, before it possibly breaks ties with JD(U). Nitish needs to sense the popular mood and swing into visible corrective actions to be eligibile as a future prime minister.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, New Delhi

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
D E C E M B E R 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Diplomatic Smugglers
While smuggling is alleged to have registered a sharp drop, the emergence of new, more powerful smugglers--the diplomatic corps--has added a new dimension to the problems of enforcement and customs agencies. The arrest, in quick succession last month, of two diplomats carrying contraband, brought home this fact with ominous force. Later probes unearthed a wellplanned operation to smuggle in a Rs 40-lakh consignment of gold, watches and watch components to an underground syndicate operating from Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras. The first diplomat, from a South-east Asian country, was nabbed with 300 electronic watches on his person. Together with the second haul, the two diplomats had consignments worth Rs 20 lakh on them. According to sources, they were working as carriers for a powerful syndicate with connections in Hong Kong and the Netherlands. The Hong Kong-Netherland connection was earlier known to enforcement agencies as a drug pipeline. Diplomatic smuggling is not a new game. The traditional "spy-diplomat" has long yielded pride of place to his more unpatriotic colleague, the smuggler-diplomat, and their tribe is increasing with ominous regularity.
Dilip Bobb and R. Asoka
HASHISH OIL DESTINED FOR USA

The Deep End
Ever since TMC withdrew support, UPA 2's stability has dwindled because all other allies are interested in their own political gain ("DMK Rebuff Delays Cabinet Reshuffle", October 15). The Government is neck deep in corruption scams in which several ministers are alleged to be involved. Sensing an imminent end, the Government announced several policies to cleanse its image, recover the sagging economy and the Congress's credibility. Congress is in need of `house cleaning' to enhance its credibility. In fact, the party has never faced such a pitiable condition in its long political history.
RANJIT SINHA, Delhi

Suburban Trends
Lifestyles of Indian youth between ages 19 and 40 are changing rapidly. Understandably, poolside parties, nightclubs, pubs, DJ nights, late weekend parties, etc., have reached small towns ("Boogie Nights In Small Town India", October 15). No doubt, young people should have fun. But it should be within the limits of decency. The conservativeness of small town people, too, needs to go. But youngsters need not follow Western culture blindly. India's cultural values are quite different, and each state has its own traditions. We respect our culture and strive to safeguard it. Thus, `dirty dancing', smoking and drinking by revellers as part of a modern lifestyle are in bad taste. Authorities need to be vigilant, and ban poolside/ bar farmhouse parties after 10 p.m. Parents need to explain the adverse effects of an uninhibited nightlife to their progeny and set on the right path.
R.D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

Need for a Paint Job
A thumping poll victory for Nitish Kumar had given Bihar the hope of a peoplefriendly and corruptionfree government ("Nitish Rally Loses Steam", October 15). However, recent sequence of events indicate a deterioration in law and

Eastward Ho!
If one surveys the history of the growth of China, one finds abundant evidence to

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

10

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

