SIMPLY DELHI

·uzz

NTHECITY
RESTAURANT
hangs from the bar. As far as the food is concerned, This is supposed to be a place for it's all about high-calorie indulcrazy bikers to get together and re- gences, fit for bikers. So you could live their passion. However, Rew try their signature classic meaty Cafe, which claims to be one of the burger or the all American mumbo only cafes dedicated to bikers in the jumbo triple decker burger with double meat. One of the must-tries city, is a great hangout for all. One of the first things that you for herbivores is their soya protein notice as you climb up the wooden rosemary burger. Pizza fans can stairs is the sense of space. Spread also feast on their thin crust pizzas over two floors amidst the busy GK or sample their pastas and crepes. market, the cafe is done up in dark Average meal for two Rs 1,000 tones and has a rugged feel to it. without taxes Several magazines for bikers line At M-22, Greater Kailash 1 the counter even as biking gear Tel 844702 5 2 50 -By Rewati Rau

Shot of adrenaline

LOUNGE

Touch, drink, enjoy
Located in the lane adjacent to Select CityWalk is the newly opened lounge Club Czar. Claiming to have India's first automated bar, here you can place an order just by the touch of a button. Pull out a bar stool, scroll through the drinks menu on the BlackRerry playbooks, chose a drink and click 'Order'--the dispenser will automatically pour out your drink in less than 60 seconds. This uber chic, ultra modern club has become the new hangout joint for college-goers. The USP besides the automated bar are the "herbal"

S-64

SIMPLY DELHI * OCTOBER 2012

Quirk appeal
Buzzaria is a multi brand retail store amidst the artistic streets of Lado Sarai. Located opposite Crescent Mall--a plush mall housing some of the city's biggest fashion names' creations, Buzzaria stands out just as its name does. The word buzzaria originates from the word bajaria, a local market at Sawai Madhopur, a small district in the state of Rajasthan. The store stocks various collections by approximately 60 designers giving it an essence of the cultures and traditions of our native regions. The store is an amalgamation of kitsch and quirk. Each corner is divided into several sections which stock ethnic footwear, quirky decor items and designer clothes. The brands stocked in the store are by various social enterprises, NGOs, fair trade organisations, product designers and fashion designers. With over 60 brands retailing at Buzzaria, entrepreneurs and various start-ups of 2011 in the design space have come together under one roof to give you a glimpse of India and its current fashions. The store can be termed as a traditional, ethnic, contemporary, modern, vintage yet fashionable enterprise. Price At Bhram House, F 343, Lado Sarai, Old M B Road, Mehrauli Tel 45793261
· By Marc/a Rodrigues

sheeshas, which they claim are organic and have no health hazards. The club has an in-house DJ who plays both commercial and House. The seating area turns into a dance floor over the weekends. However, the dhinchak music and smoky atmosphere can be a put off for those looking for a low key evening. The saving grace, though, is the food. Though they serve world cuisine, the thin crust pizzas, and Lamb Noisette are must-tries. Timing 12 pm to 1 am Average meal for two Rs 1,200 to Rs 1,500 At G-9, Salcon Rasvilas, D-l, District Center Saket · By Ekta Marwaha

OCTOBER 2012 » SIMPLY DELHI

S-65

SIMPLY DE
STORE

luzz

No kidding
Giorgio Armani has opened its first Armani Junior showroom in India at DLF Emporio in the capital with designer Suneet Varma as its franchise partner. The 2,000 sq ft store retails collections as varied as the lives of the children for whom it is designed. The stylish clothes

and accessories will cater to boys and girls in the age group of 0-16 years. From basic pieces--shirts, sweatshirts and jeans to more fashionable items--jackets, dresses and skirts, the label hopes to meet the suiting up demands for school, leisure time, sports, and formal occasions. The brand favours natural fabrics and offers a contemporary look. Price On request At DLF Emporio, 4, Nelson Mandela Road, Vasant Kunj Tel 46116666
· Text by India Today Spice

Glam up
Walk into this uber chic salon and the first impression one gets is of luxury and glamour. Brainchild of beauty expert Aashmeen Munjaal, Star Salon focuses on new age beauty and hair rituals. The salon director Angel Talwar diagnoses your skin and hair with the help of modern equipments installed at the salon. Once that is done, a personalised programme is advised along with homecare tips. With festivities

RESTAURANT

Wood-fired treat
Designed to resemble a warm, cosy Italian cottage, Pizerria Rossa is tucked in a corner of the bustling Hauz Khas Village. Rossa's USP is their wood fired delicacies. Emphasising on authenticity, they have built a hand-made Italian wood fired pizza oven. Try their thin crust, hand tossed pizzas with your choice of toppings. Take your pick from pizza bianca with artichoke, French fries pizza, chicken cranberry, mint and goat

around the corner, one can try their Petit Facials that promises to give you radiant skin instantly. These quick facials including peels and face polishing make use of organic and Spanish skincare techniques. Another highlight is their beauty package designed especially for men featuring organic face clean up, shoulder and scalp massage as well as muscle reviver massage. The best part at this unisex salon is that customers aren't forced to conform to the menu as there's

plenty of customisation possible. Star offers a dozen custom-painted manicures and pedicures. Clients can also choose from various makeup styles, illustrated in a book that covers bridal, daytime chic, bronzed, a la naturelle, smoky edge and many other looks. Most of these services are in the affordable price range. Price Haircuts start at Rs 500 and Rs 850 for a facial At Moments Mall, Kirti Nagar Tel 9810997076 · By Shilpa Mehta

cheese, Hawaiian and more. For the main course, we suggest you try their wood fired baked caponata with layered potatoes that is lightly spiced with a hint of smokiness. Non-vegetarians can try their tenderloin steak served with polenta chips or wood fired jumbo prawns served with rosemary potatoes. The desserts are Chefs Specials that change every week. Meal for two Rs 1,500 plus taxes At 26, Ground Floor, Hauz Khas Village Tel 43333666 ext 274
· By Shilpa Mehta

OCTOBER 2012 » SIMPLY DELHI

S-67

SIMPLYDELHI

ItIZZ

ALL THROUGH THIS MONTH Fiery treat
Buzz launches the new menu Fire Starters for the month of October featuring dishes like mustard marinated grilled prawns, Turkish style grilled chicken on skewers, grilled

pesto, nachos supreme with plum tomato salsa, crumbed barbeque chicken supreme with mustard mayonnaise and more. Meal for two Rs 15,00 plus taxes At Metropolitan Mall, Saket Tel 29563502

ALL THROUGH THIS MONTH
Bagels and Brownies, the American style bakery offers delicious eggless bakery items especially prepared for the auspicious Navratra, wherein everyone can enjoy the wide variety of goodies including pastries, muffins, brownies and cupcakes. Price Rs 649 per kg for cakes, Rs 75 per piece for cupcakes and Rs 69 per piece for pastries and Rs 69 for muffins At R278, Unit 4, Pamposh Enclave, Greater Kailash (GK) I Tel 32994606; 14/185, Shivalik Road, MaMya Nagar Tel 9310104604

OCTOBER 24 NOVEMBER 4 Just dance
Enjoy some groovy moments at the second edition of Ignite Dance Festival. Aiming to carry dance beyond the conventional theatre space and re-position it as an interactive art form, the festival will take dance to a variety of alternative, public spaces ranging from malls and heritage sites to gallery spaces. This festival will also showcase innovations in dance by choreographers from across India alongside parallel explorations that have been unfolding in other parts of the world. For tickets, visit bookmyshow.com Tel 99714 06113

JUNE 10 Literary take
Watch the film Magic Realism (English/52 minutes) directed by Suresh Kohli. The film seeks to document the growing interest worldwide in the Indian English novel over the last three decades. This interest is no longer limited to native speakers but has cut across

the language barrier. The film highlights these changes through interactions with authors, critics, philosophers, literary agents and publishers across the globe. Timing 7 pm Entry Rs 400, Rs 300, Rs 100 At India Habitat Centre, Lodi Road, Lodi Estate Tel 24682001

S-68

SIMPLYDELHI » OCTOBER 2012

OCTOBER 26 T!LL NOVEMBER 10 Cultura! Capita! Delhi International Arts Festival, pioneered by the Prasiddha Foundation is back for its sixth edition. The festival will showcase a melange of activities including Sufi night at Purana Qila, Bal Kala Utsav at Delhi Tamil Sangam and Ghazal evening at IIC Multipurpose Hall. Some international events such as an Australian painting and photography exhibition at Lalit Kala Akademi, a jazz dance performance by artists from Poland at FICCI Auditorium,a magic show by Murray Molly from Ireland and Hungarian dance evening at Blue Frog are also part of the festival. For further details, visit diaf.in or contact 47340497

Hi I
: jj|||perial pre>- jj |jjj ..:.... . time, The ;". ^ |f . .

ONGOING TILL JANUARY 2013 OZfest Launched with a music concert featuring twice Grammy nominated Australian singer Geoffery Gurrumul Yunupingu, the Australian festival OZ Fest will witness the vibrancy of Australian contemporary culture with an exciting line-up of muscians. To register, log on to ozfestindia.com OCTOBER 2? TILL NOVEMBER 29 Art in silence The Stainless art gallery presents A Silent Symphony, a group exhibition of paintings, ceramic work and installation art by artists including Dhara Mehrotra, Asish Chowdury and Manisha Bhattacharya. At Mir a Corporate Suites, Old Ishwar Nagar, Mathura Road Tel 42603167

| .

'' .

gs at 1911. ·

:

menufea Jj : jjj Iti||l|i | | | | | s t , I · dh.ee.. jSjjJ ' , - . · · . ."ip|||ff toes and <t spinach rouleau. :lllll|gfl|l::yt ' j ! jnasweetnoteffj|||| i | | | | | o n s !: · - · · · . . · · i | | narri . . . . . . - , i^tart witl. \. Meal". ' | | ' . At I K .(. , ·' :..--.pat

OCTOBER 24 Tribal moves Attend an evening of Chhau dance by the tribal group of Bagmundi, Purulia representing an interesting blend of folk, tribal, contemporary and classical elements. Accompanying music will be played on shenai, dhamsa, kettle drum, flute and dholak in collaboration with Literacy India. Timing 4 pm Entry Free of cost At Epicentre, Apparel House, Sector 44, Gurgaon Tel 0124 2715000

ALL THROUGH THIS MONTH Sunday indulgence Lodi-The Garden restaurant kick starts its famous Sunday brunch this month. The brunch is an eclectic mix of European cuisine with Asian and Middle Eastern influences. Price Rs 1,799 plus taxes per person At Near Gate No 1, Lodi Road Tel 24655054

OCTOBER 2012 » SIMPLY DELHI

S-69

