GRAND PRIXSPECIAL

Track Talk
Force India is all set to claim the pole position
"Our main rivals are Sauber and Williams. Sauber has a big points advantage over us and catching up with them will be a big task, but we'll keep pushing ourselves."
PAUL DI RESTA, Force India Driver

THE SAHARA FORCE INDIA TEAM

HOME ADVANTAGE
The first and only Indian team in Formula 1 bets big on the sport and reaches out to desi audiences
ijay Mallya and Subrata Roy have been associated with several sports but it's their joint ownership of India's first and only F1 team, Sahara Force India, that has put them on the global map. The team has had a chequered journey since it was formed in October 2007, but the team management stuck to its vision, resulting in Force India stamping its presence on the F1 circuit.

V

technical and sponsorship deals.

THE ROAD AHEAD
Ravikant Sabnavis, vice-president (marketing) at Kingfisher Airlines, hopes India's 500-million-strong middle class will go the China way. "Just as China's viewership shot up from 8 million in 2002 to 20 million in 2010, Indian viewership too has gone up from 7 million in 2010 to 11 million in 2011. It will only get better," he says. To reach out to audiences, Force India initiated the `Raise the Flag' campaign in 2011, where local icons, such as Chief Minister Omar Abdullah in Kashmir, unveiled show cars which were then driven down to the Buddh International Circuit. A similar venture is planned for this year. The team had also unveiled `Speed Nites', live screenings in Bangalore, Hyderabad and Gurgaon of the race with live bands also playing. To increase the Indian representation in the team, a talent hunt was also launched in seven cities in 2011. Today, Jehan Daruvala, Tarun Reddy and Arjun Maini are being put through kart races on global circuits. The goal is to put a little more India into Force India. by R. Pallavi

"I love coming back to India. It's a special place for the team and I enjoy seeing the enthusiasm that India has for a sport that's still quite new."
NICO HULKENBERG, Force India Driver

SPEEDING UP
The team went through 29 races without scoring points until Italian Giancarlo Fisichella secured pole position and scorched the track to finish runner-up at the Belgian Grand Prix in 2009. The ascent continued in 2011 when their cars consistently featured in top 10 qualifiers. But the path-finding run came in 2011, when they secured a double-point finish in Singapore; the team ended the season at sixth place overall. This year's highlights include Paul di Resta's fourth place at the Singapore Grand Prix, the best ever for Force India, and Nico Hulkenberg's seventh place finish at the Japanese Grand Prix on october 7, which earned them six points. The team's gradual but steady climb in rankings has fostered new

"India is a great place to visit, with lots to see and learn. I am hoping I get a chance to see more of Delhi this year."
JULES BIANCHI, Force India Driver

"It's our home race and there is always lots of interest and focus on the team.We will host a large number of guests and from a marketing perspective, it is our busiest race of the year."
ANDY STEVENSON, Sporting Director, Sahara Force India

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

