Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Little Big Voice
Shalmali Kholgade is only 22 years old but her voice already begs attention. She made her debut as a lead vocalist with Pareshaan from Ishaqzaade. Aga Bai, her song for Rani Mukerjee's Aiyya, created more ripples than the movie did. Little wonder then that she was picked to perform at Amitabh Bachchan's 70th birthday bash. She also has Daaru Desi from Cocktail and three songs for the film Peddlers, which made it to the Cannes Film Festival earlier this year. Trained in Hindustani classical music from the age of six, she was set to join the Los Angeles Music Academy in the US before a Bollywood offer from composer Amit Trivedi shelved those plans. We can't say we are unhappy.
MANDAR DEODAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

DABBOO RATNANI

ALL GROWN UP
Little Anjali from Kuch Kuch Hota Hai is all grown up. Sana Saeed,the child artist in Karan Johar's 1998 film,is now 24 and playing the second lead of a "high school hottie,Tanya"in his latest film Student Of The Year."I was very scared of Karan as a child,but this time it was a whole new experience.He is so nice to work with," she says.How time flies.

First Strike
It's her first time at film festivals and Raveena Tandon, 37, has already brought home an award. She won a Special Recognition for Outstanding Performance at the Indian Film Festival of Houston for her role as a glamorous socialite and novelist in Sudipto Chattopadhyaya's Shobhana 7 Nights. "It's the first time I've played a role that's very contrary to the clichéd Hindi film heroine. It's bold in its character and has no justifications," she says.


GOING UP
The fight against film piracy.The 14th Mumbai Film Festival has taken anti-piracy measures, a first for Indian film festivals. Sonam Kapoor's fascination with Varanasi while filming Raanjhnaa. She is taken by the Ganga aarti and Benarasi sari weavers.

All That Glitters Is Not...
Nikita Anand, 29, has struck gold. A one-time Miss India and actor, she steps into Lisa Ray's shoes as host of the second season of Oh My Gold! on TLC. The TV show takes her across India on a quest to discover the culture and heritage of Indian jewellery. She also has a film with Rajpal Yadav, Four Two Ka One, but given her track record, we're not expecting to be bedazzled.

GOING DOWN
Rajeev Paul's `touchy feely'behaviour with the girls in the Bigg Boss 6 house after host Salman Khan reproached him. Chances of catching Shilpa Shetty in a film anytime soon.She is devoting the next one year to raising her son.No big loss.

GETTY IMAGES

YOGEN SHAH

Compiled by Nishat Bari and Ayesha Aleem

96 Volume XXXVII Number 44; For the week October 23-29, 2012, released on October 22

