The Big Story REFORMS

REFORMER
Chidambaram is on an overdrive to save a sinking UPA 2. His efforts may earn him a chance for the top job.
By Dhiraj Nayyar

Return of the
I

FINANCE MINISTER P. CHIDAMBARAM

t is easy to be finance minister during a boom. But it's very different when times are bad," is what an unusually diffident P. Chidambaram told aides when it became apparent that he was the chosen successor to Rashtrapati Bhavan-bound Pranab Mukherjee in the last week of June. Chidambaram was worried about garnering the necessary political support to push through tough reformist measures necessary for an economic revival. Ironically, he was confident about securing Sonia Gandhi's backing, but was not sure about the Prime Minister's support. "Chidambaram was worried whether the Prime Minister, at the fag end of his tenure, had the political appetite to stick his neck out, like in the nuclear deal," says a senior official. After assuming office on August 1, Chidambaram told his officials that he had a one-month honeymoon period to get things done. "After that, the mess I have inherited, whether in terms of inflation or fiscal deficit, will stick to me," a worried Chidambaram is reported to have said. On the morning of October 8, a little over two months into his third stint as Union finance minister, Chidambaram was confident and relaxed as he sat down to address the Government's Annual Economic Editors' Conference in New Delhi. There was little to be diffident about. The finance minister had achieved everything he had set out to in his short honeymoon period. "Many steps have been taken in the last few weeks to get rid of the sense of stagnation and to get on with the task of restoring high growth," he said. In his first eight weeks in office, the Government had announced several bigticket reform measures in the form of executive action--FDI in multi-brand retail, FDI in aviation and rationalisation of diesel and LPG subsidies. It had withstood Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee's political blackmail. Her exit from UPA emboldened the Government to announce its intent to push other reform measures through Parliament

SIPRA DAS/ www.indiatodayimages.com

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

27

The Big Story REFORMS
74.8
in the winter session, including the long pending proposals to increase FDI in insurance and allow FDI in pensions. The Government had finally broken free after 18 months in policy paralysis. Commission Deputy Chairman Montek Singh Ahluwalia and Chairman of the Prime Minister's Economic Advisory Council C. Rangarajan, have lost a lot of credibility when their predictions have fallen way off the actual figures. Chidambaram knows that the task of reviving economic growth is an uphill one and needs a sustained effort, not simply a few dramatic measures. Excessive optimism at this stage is likely to be proved wrong. The day after he spoke at the conference, the IMF downgraded India's growth outlook for 2012 to 4.9 per cent, a sharp revision from the 6.1 per cent forecast it had made in July, just before Chidambaram assumed office. The finance minister was equally cautious on the prospect of lower inflation over the next six months. He patiently explained how inflation could be caused by one of two factors: First, excess demand and relative shortage of supply, the main cause for sharp price rises in agricultural goods; second, an excess of government expenditure over revenue, which forces the Government to borrow from the public--thus pumping more money into the economy. He admitted that there were no shortterm solutions for either. "If you have any quick solution, I would be happy to exchange places with you," said the Chidambaram to a journalist who pressed him on price rise. According to finance ministry officials, Chidambaram will exercise the few options he has to rein in food prices. "He will liberalise imports of commodities in short supply," says an official. "He may even lean in favour of export restrictions, something he is instinctively against, to shore up domestic supplies," adds the official. Chidambaram is also moving systematically to blunt the damage caused by the retrospective tax amendment introduced by Mukherjee in February's Budget. He called on the services of his adviser from UPA 1, Parthasarathi Shome, to head a committee to recommend the way forward on retrospective taxes. The committee suggested that retrospective taxation may be done away with. However, that will necessitate parliamentary approval.
Jan-Mar 2011

64.4

IT CAN ONLY GET BETTER
The BUSINESS TODAY-C fore Business Confidence Index has improved after announcement of reforms 56.8
Jul-Sep 2011

The PM's Right Hand

Chidambaram argues the case for reform with Congress Chidambaram's concerns about the Prime Minister's political appetite turned out to be unfounded. Officials say preparations for the sequencing of reformist announcements began on June 27, the day after Pranab Mukherjee resigned as finance minister to contest the presidential elections. Manmohan Singh was keen to appoint Chidambaram as finance minister immediately but Congress managers advised him to wait until the presidential elections were concluded. It was no secret in the Government that Manmohan and Mukherjee did not always see eye to eye on economic policy. Mukherjee was an old-style leftleaning Congressman who was never convinced about the need for big-bang reforms. The fact that economic growth clocked over 8 per cent in 2009-10 and 2010-11--Mukherjee's first two years in office--without any big-ticket reform gave him a reason not to push ahead. But once growth collapsed to 6.4 per cent in 2011-12 and to 5.5 per cent in the
PARTHASARATHI SHOME
PRADEEP GAUR/MINT

BUSINESS CONFIDENCE INDEX(BCI)

Apr-Jun 2011

55.4 52.3
Oct-Dec 2011

Jan-Mar 2011

52.4 49.3
Apr-Jun 2011

VIJAY KELKAR
INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIEVE

55

Jul-Sep 2011

first quarter of 2012-13, the need for reform became apparent to Manmohan. According to officials, while Manmohan was convinced about the need for reform, he was not sure he could push it through with the Congress. He needed Chidambaram to argue the case for reform with the Congress. "Chidambaram and the Prime Minister are on the same page in their economic thinking, but unlike the Prime Minister, Chidambaram is articulate, forceful and willing to battle it out with the party's old guard," says an official. Chidambaram had another positive attribute, his proximity to Congress President Sonia Gandhi. "Mrs Gandhi trusts him. She never trusted Mukherjee," says a source. Says another source, "Chidambaram had grown closer to Mrs Gandhi than ever before in his stint as home

minister." It was no small achievement when Chidambaram secured the unreserved, and very public support, of the Congress and its first family for his reform measures. "The Prime Minister was the General, but it was Chidambaram who led the troops," says an official.

Overall economic conditions
More than threefourths felt the situation was worse than in the previous quarter

Availability of business finance
33% of respondents said funds were harder to raise than before

Profit margins
70% felt margins were tighter
SUBSTANTIALLY WORSE MODERATELY WORSE SAME/NO CHANGE MODERATELY BETTER SUBSTANTIALLY BETTER

22 48 23 6 1

21

13

PC Redux

10 1

SAME/NO CHANGE

60

SUBSTANTIALLY WORSE

SUBSTANTIALLY BETTER

MODERATELY WORSE

SAME/NO CHANGE

MODERATELY BETTER

A chastened finance minister recognises the challenges The one thing Chidambaram wants to dispel in his latest stint as finance minister is his legendary intellectual arrogance. At the economic editors' conference on October 8, he deftly avoided falling into the trap of making predictions on exact numbers for future growth and inflation. His colleagues in Government, particularly Planning

MODERATELY WORSE

28

6 1 5

MODERATELY BETTER

SUBSTANTIALLY BETTER SUBSTANTIALLY WORSE

BCI by sector
SERVICES LIGHT INDUSTRY HEAVY ENGINEERING

Morale has improved in all sectors
Jan-Mar 2012

59.5

Apr-Jun 2012

52.4

JUL-SEP '12 JUL-SEP '12

55.5

Jan-Mar 2012

53.2 52.7

Apr-Jun 2012

48.7

51.9

TEAM CHIDAMBARAM

An outsider and an old favourite are among the quartet behind the finance minister

Jan-Mar 2012

Apr-Jun 2012

48.3

JUL-SEP '12

49.5

Demand conditions
54
MODERATELY WORSE

66% felt demand had dropped

25
SAME/NO CHANGE

12
SUBSTANTIALLY WORSE

8

SUBSTANTIALLY BETTER MODERATELY BETTER

1

R.S. GUJRAL 58
Finance Secretary

ARVIND MAYARAM 57
Economic Affairs Secretary

SUMIT BOSE 58
Revenue Secretary

D.K . MIT TAL 59
Finance Services Secretary

Hiring conditions More than half felt hiring had fallen
16
SUBSTANTIALLY WORSE

MODERATELY BETTER

He came up with the Vodafone tax issue.The bureaucrat was moved from revenue to expenditure by Chidambaram. He is the `outsider'in the team.

The finance minister's favourite official, this 1978-batch Rajasthan cadre IAS officer served as joint secretary, economic affairs, in UPA 1.

This 1976-batch IAS officer, also a Pranab Mukherjee favourite, was chosen by Chidambaram to clean up the mess in the tax bureaucracy.

A 1977-batch IAS officer of UP cadre, he is responsible for the execution of the ambitious reform plans in insurance, pensions and banking.

37
MODERATELY WORSE

41
SAME/NO CHANGE

5 1 SUBSTANTIALLY BETTER
OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

FIGURES INDICATE PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS

29

The Big Story REFORMS
HT PHOTO

Chidambaram wants to avoid that. Says an official, "The minister is working on a solution which will not require Parliament." The Shome committee has also recommended that no penalty or interest be charged on retrospective tax cases. Vodafone may be allowed to get away with a minimum penalty.

Future Prime Minister

Chidambaram could be candidate for top job with help from friends Next on Chidambaram's agenda is to reach out to allies and the Opposition to get legislation done. To sustain the reforms momentum, he needs to get the bills on insurance, pensions and the new Companies Bill passed in the winter session of Parliament which begins in the last week of November. According to officials, Chidambaram has already reached out to Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, Arun Jaitley, to seek his party's support. Chidambaram's rapport with Jaitley is well known. But Jaitley's ability to get a BJP, with multiple leaders, behind him on economic reform is questionable. Chidambaram will be tested. Unlike Mukherjee, he hasn't shared warm relationships with either leaders of the Opposition or leaders of allies. He needs to make more friends than just Jaitley. Chidambaram has said that he will be talking to allies soon. But apart from DMK'S M. Karunanidhi and NCP'S Sharad Pawar he has little rapport with regional leaders. For instance, during Sonia Gandhi's lunch to thank UPA's allies for supporting Mukherjee's nomination as President in July, Chidambaram was seated next to SP leader Mulayam Singh Yadav. The two barely exchange a word beyond civilities. A Congress MP believes Chidambaram is a changed man. He says, "His stint in the home ministry, which essentially took him out of his comfort zone, has made him less abrasive." There is much more at stake for Chidambaram than just reviving the economy. After Mukherjee's exit, Chidambaram's stock in the Congress and Government has suddenly risen. Officially A.K. Antony may be the new No. 2 but for all

(FROM LEFT) CHIDAMBARAM, SONIA AND MANMOHAN

practical purposes, it is Chidambaram. As head of the GoM on media, he is the Government's chief troubleshooter. It is clear that Manmohan will not be the Congress party's prime ministerial face for the next General Elections. This has been confirmed by various Congress ministers and party officials, all off the record. In case Rahul Gandhi refuses to step into Manmohan's shoes, Chidambaram could emerge as a prime ministerial contender, along with Antony. If Chidambaram pulls off the reforms juggernaut then his chances are that much brighter.

The Plain Truth

Time is short for a real turnaround At the Economic Editors' Conference, Chidambaram promised to tell the people of India "the plain truth". He didn't quite do that. Like his predecessor, he continued to blame the adverse conditions of the global economy for the difficulties of the Indian economy. He did not venture to admit that much of the mess that he has inherited was the making of his own government. Chidambaram is also acutely aware that he faces red lines on cutting the deficit as recommended by the committee headed by his trusted economist, Vijay Kelkar. The finance minister has defended subsidies in food, fertiliser and fuels for the poor. All he promised was that the Government

would reduce leakage by switching to cash transfers using the Aadhar network. Chidambaram's quick conversion to the virtues of the Nandan Nilekani-led Aadhar project is remarkable, given that he spent much of his tenure as home minister opposing it. He has set aside his ego to cooperate with an institution that will greatly help his task as finance minister. The real worry for Chidambaram is whether he has enough time left to effect a real change. The Government, if it serves its full term, has only 19 months. Says an official, "There is only a 50-50 chance that there will be a real change in terms of higher growth, more jobs and lower inflation in the time remaining." Worse, Chidambaram may not get the entire 19 months. Even as he was doing his utmost to change the discourse from corruption to reform, social activist Arvind Kejriwal landed a body blow on October 5, when he made allegations of impropriety against Robert Vadra. The Government's foot went off the reforms pedal as it focused its energies on protecting the reputation of the Congress's first family. "The Vadra revelations are a setback to the recent push given to reforms," says a bureaucrat. A determined Chidambaram will put his best foot forward. It may not be enough to secure the Congress a third consecutive term in office.
with Priya Sahgal

30

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

