SCHOOLS

Special
When they're not attending back-to-back lectures, B-school whizzkids are off visiting vineyards, painting graffiti, star gazing or learning Japanese dining etiquette

Lighter Side

OF BUSINESS
By Sonali Acharjee

ince 2010, 75-odd aspiring CEOs step out of the comfort of their Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore (IIM-B), campus to roam the streets. Their survival diet: A banana for breakfast, a dish of plain rice for lunch and biscuits for dinner. The aim is to live on Rs 20 a day and experience the life of people they've only read about--India's millions who live below the poverty line. B-school whizzkids at premier management schools in India know much more than how to crack gruelling exams. When they're not attending back-to-back lectures, they're off visiting vineyards, painting graffiti on kites, star gazing or learning Japanese dining etiquette. At the Faculty of Management Studies, Delhi, students of the Finance Club get to participate in workshops conducted by some of the world's biggest private banks such as HSBC, Citibank and Deutsche Bank. At these workshops, it isn't just corporate slideshows and marketing manuals that's on the agenda; there's equal emphasis on enhancing soft skills, be it how to shake hands after a meal in Japan with the right amount of pressure--too much pressure is considered to be overfriendly, too little is rude--or choosing the right business attire for an interview. "One must not only think like a manager but also look, speak and act like one. This means learning global languages, accepted etiquettes, industry expectations and job profiles," says Sudhanshu Sinha, 26, president of the club. At Mumbai's Universal Business School (UBS), one frequently finds groups of students sitting and brainstorming around the 40-acre campus. The task at hand is to set up a profitable business in two months with Rs 50,000 as seed money.

S

STUDENTS AT THE IIM, CALCUTTA, CAMPUS
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

76

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

SCHOOLS

Special
RAVI SAHANI/www.indiatodayimages.com

STUDENTS AT FMS, DELHI

OUT OF THE BOX
IIM-A  Star Gazers  Movie A Day  Genesys (IT Club)  Beta (Finance Club) FMS

Popular student activities and clubs at the top five management institutes
IIM-B  Mountaineering Club  Fashion Club  Book A Day Club  Puzzle Club XLRI  Nature Club  Squash Club  HR Club  Marketing Club IIM-C  Consulting Club  Management Writing Club  Quiz Club  Carrom Board Club

 Finance Club  Consulting Club  Entrepreneurship Cell  Golf Club

"Entrepreneurship cannot be taught but must be learned on the job. That is why we lay emphasis on practical work and interactive activities. That way, even the retention level is higher," says UBS Director Tarun Anand, 45. The Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad (IIM-A), set up its star gazers club in 2009. Comets, meteorites, galaxies and stars are topics of discussion for this 17-member club. The club's activities include star-gazing sessions, local planetarium trips, an online magazine called Corona, astronomy quizzes and online story-writing competitions. "We also have a telescope," says Tanupriya Kohli, 26, the club's co-ordinator. The fun at IIM-A doesn't end there. Their MAD (Movie A Day) Club, set up in 2010, has a movie CD and DVD collection that isn't confined to popular Bollywood flicks. "We recently screened a Bhojpuri film Deswa for the students," says club co-ordinator Ashim Sarkar. MAD also organises a special movie screening annually for the children of Prayaas, the on-campus NGO for the underprivileged. With the growing industry demand

for CSR (corporate social responsibility) managers, corporate social initiatives such as Prayaas not only provide students a break from the classroom, but also strengthen resumes. The Indian Institute of Management, Lucknow (IIM-L), has given a sporty spin to it. Its Bhavishya Club started the `Harmony Cup' in 2007. It holds cricket tournaments annually to raise funds for social causes. The 2011 edition had public sector banking behemoth State Bank of India as its main sponsor. "Funds raised last year were utilised to build a library in Prakash Bal Vidya Mandir, a government school in Gomti Nagar, and a building for a school run by an NGO, Bachchon ki Duniya, in Gannapurwa," says Pramila Bharti, 22, a first-year student and member of Bhavishya. The new campus of the Indian School of Business (ISB) at Mohali values creativity. One of the first student societies started here was the Art Appreciation Club. This 50-member club is into everything from modern art, kite-making, mural painting and photography to digital design. Reputed artists who have

visited the campus include Karl Antao, Baiju Parthan, filmmaker Shekhar Kapur, photographer Atul Kasbekar, and Kuchipudi dancer Shobha Naidu. "Art Appreciation Club is a social club that encourages students to think creatively. A whole new thought process is opened up when one introduces an appreciation of arts and culture to go with the regular academic subjects," says Pallavi Awasthi, 28, president of the club. At ISB's Hyderabad campus, students unleash their creativity through wine. Ruchika Narang, 28, president of the Wine Club, says the club is not just a social bonding experience but a way to explore varying recipes and flavours that go into the making of different wines. So far, the club has held winepairing and wine-tasting sessions and is planning a trip to vineyards in Nashik. "We try to bring in experts on wine appreciation. Since formal meetings have become increasingly common in the industry, wine knowledge is a simple way to impress colleagues," adds Narang. The glass is certainly half full in this case. 

78

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

