He alth

DRUG PATENT
SHOME BASU

Wrong Prescription

BIG PHARMA ATWAR WITH COPYCATS
Will the Supreme Court allow Novartis to patent its expensive cancer drug? The case will decide India's future as the pharmacy of the developing world.
Illustration by CHETAN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Big pharma prices put many drugs out of reach of Indians
Bayer price for cancer drug Nexavar Novartis price for cancer drug Glivec
Rs 1.2 lakh/ month Rs 2.7 lakh/month

Generic price for Glivec copies
Rs 8-12,000/ month

Generic price for Nexavar copies
Rs 6,500/ month

Indian generics have a huge global demand
All figures are from 2011

Export

Domestic

52% 48%

Source: UNDP Human Development Indicators

By Damayanti Datta

hy don't you sell it for Rs 5? Rs 1.2 lakh per month is too high." On September 11, Supreme Court Justices Aftab Alam and Ranjana Desai posed that question to Swiss drugmaker Novartis AG, fighting to patent its expensive cancer drug Glivec. The question wasn't just judicial speculation or indeed wit. It brought out the fundamental issue at the heart of a new war raging in the pharma world. The case, Novartis vs Union of India, is ostensibly about pharma patents: The drugmaker has been locked in a legal battle with India for the last six years, with its patent application for Glivec being rejected repeatedly on the ground that it was not a new drug. But the case is tapping into a much broader conversation about people's right to affordable medicine versus a drugmaker's right to innovation. It also raises questions about India's seven-year-old patent laws, especially Section 3(d), which prohibits

W

patenting new forms of known drugs unless there is significant increase in efficacy, the interpretation of which is now being contested. The case has a classic David vs Goliath plotline: Multi-billion dollar global pharma vs domestic firms that sell copycat generic drugs. A patent allows exclusive marketing rights to a firm and stops local competitors from selling cheaper copies. But India's patent laws protect access to medicine for all, making it difficult for big pharma with high-priced medicines to break into the market. A series of recent lawsuits prove the point: In March, India asked Germany's Bayer to license its patented cancer drug Nexavar to Indian firm Natco. In May, Cipla got a favourable court ruling in a patent infringement case by Swiss firm Roche over cancer drug Erlocip. The Glivec verdict, expected in about two months, will seal the fate or secure the future of India's new patent regime. If Novartis wins, big pharma will get millions of new customers. "But the domestic industry will lose

early mover advantage and face a slowdown in future," says D.G. Shah, secretary-general of the Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance. "Many patients will suffer or die for want of affordable medicines that India supplies to 80 per cent of the developing world." Affordability is a big issue. Consider Glivec. For the last 20 years, since Novartis launched it, Glivec has been hailed as the gold standard for chronic myeloid leukaemia. Though it does not cure, it raises survival rates from three to 10 years. But Novartis sells Glivec at Rs 120,000 for 30 tablets a month in India. Generic versions cost Rs 8,000 to Rs 12,000. India's advantage is that it produces 60,000 affordable drugs in 60 key areas, explains Lanka Srinivas, a Hyderabad-based pharmaceutical expert and an adviser to the Government of India. "From raw materials, profit margins, manpower and cost of bulk production, everything is cheaper here." Over 50 per cent of India's $12 billion (Rs 64,032 crore) annual production is supplied around the world: European Union to

Africa, US to Japan. "That itself speaks for the quality of our medicines." The origin of the case goes back to November 2001. The Doha Declaration of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) spelt out the agreement on traderelated aspects of intellectual property rights (TRIPS). But it also allowed some flexibility to member countries to protect the right to health of their citizens. "Until 2005, India did not recognise pharmaceutical patents, but as a WTO member, it was forced to bring its patent regime into compliance with TRIPS," says lawyer Pratibha Singh of Delhi-based IP law firm Singh & Singh. India made use of the flexibilities to amend the Indian Patent Act, 1970, and include Section 3(d), which is now being challenged by big pharma. "Section 3(d) is India's invention," points out Singh. "It achieves a great balance between the TRIPS mandate and protects access to medicine for the poor. And this has made India a global leader in pharma patent law." From Philippines, Argentina, Thailand to China, patent laws are being

amended to include similar provisions. The battle over Section 3(d) rests on a few fundamental principles. For instance, a patent cannot be granted for any "incremental innovation" if a molecule is known already. The other is "significant enhancement of efficacy". These two are often used by big pharma companies to keep patents alive and retain monopoly over blockbuster drugs they invented, a strategy known as "ever-greening" that Section 3(d) discourages.

CUSTOMERS BUY MEDICINE AT A PHARMACY IN A MIDDLE CLASS MUMBAI NEIGHBOURHOOD

THE $1.2 TRILLION PHARMA INDUSTRY KEEPS PATENTS ALIVE AND MAINTAINS MONOPOLY ON BLOCKBUSTER DRUGS THEY INVENTED BY`EVERGREENING'THEM.

This year is a significant one for the $1.2 trillion (Rs 6,403,200 crore) global pharma industry. A "patent cliff", or impending patent expiry of many blockbuster drugs, is approaching. The first patent for Glivec, for instance, will expire in July 2015 in the US. And it's happening at a time when research and development costs are rising, new drugs are urgently needed to replace the lost income and generics are rapidly expanding business. Big pharma needs to reboot its direction. "The wheel of innovation should continue to move with the fuel of intellectual property rights," says Tapan J. Ray, the director general of the Organisation of Pharmaceutical Producers of India. "The purpose of this case is not money but the vindication of honour," Novartis counsel Gopal Subramanium told the court. Glivec has been granted patents in 35 countries around the world. Why not India? As Justice Alam observed on September 11, "This is a difficult country." I

54

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

55

