GLOSSARY

INDIA'S OWN OCTOBER FEST
A string of films, parties and events promise to make the month a memorable one OCT 5

SETH

Q& "Creativity is not the preserve of gay people.You can be A brilliant and straight or uninspiring and gay."
Vikram Seth has spent the last two decades pushing the limits of his creativity and today, identifies himself as much as a visual artist as a writer. He created three non-acrylic paintings in collaboration with vodka brand Absolut, with the bottle as inspiration. Q. Are you a writer or an all your works. Why? add to or take away from artist now? A. I am deeply affected by the creative process? A. Words are not where it music. My artwork titled A. No. Creativity is not the all begins and ends; there Pyaasa Pyala is inspired preserve of gay people. You are some emotions only art by Madhushala. can be brilliant and straight can express. Q. Do you drink alcohol to or uninspiring and gay. Q. How long did you take induce creativity? Q. Would you want to to create these? A. My Chinese calligrapher rewrite any of your works? A. The Chinese calligraphy made me drink red wine A. Probably, but they would came to me instantly. The before creation. At times I be a different man's work. I other has been a work in have consumed alcohol besometimes cringe at someprogress for over a decade. fore a creative process. thing I wrote; at others I say Q. Music finds its way into Q. Does one's sexuality wow, did I really write that?
by Prachi Bhuchar
FOTOCORP

Sridevi's comeback film is one of the most awaited releases of 2012. Feedback from its Toronto premiere promises good things.

REUBEN SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

CALENDAR BOY
Sidhartha Mallya, 25, has had a few wrong turns but he may have finally found something he could do just right--hunting for calendar girls. He will soon turn up on our television screens as host and judge for the latest edition of Hunt for the Kingfisher Calendar Girl, with Lisa Haydon and Atul Kasbekar for company. He has previously donned a sari to host No Boundaries Super Over, an online show on cricket. The stunt got him plenty of laughs, but we hope those bikini-clad models don't give him any ideas.

SMALL TALK
Former rivals Madhuri Dixit and Sridevi examined each other at an arm's length before leaning in to hug like long-lost sisters on the sets of Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa. Don't go by their sweet smiles, this is probably what they had in mind: `My botox is better,' and `but I am thinner so I win,' and then they battled it out on the dance floor. Love the spark.

OCT 18-25

Over 200 films from 65 countries, restored world classics and Afghan cinema are the highlights of Mumbai film festival this year.

HOMECOMING
Imran Khan and his wife Avantika Malik will soon have a permanent address, and no ordinary address either. They move from their rented Bandra apartment into his grandfather, late filmmaker Nasir Hussain's Pali Hill bungalow in Bandra this Diwali. The 50-year-old iconic home had been under renovation for nearly two years. A fancy housewarming party is in the works.

GETTY IMAGES

FOTOCORP

OCT 19 OCT 6-10 WILLS LIFESTYLE INDIA FASHION WEEK in New Delhi
kicks off with 63 designers. The usual suspects, Rajesh Pratap Singh, Suneet Varma, Namrata Joshipura and grand finalist Ritu Kumar should ensure plenty of glamour on and off the ramp.

OCT OCT 17-21 22 ENRIQUE IGLESIAS LISA RAY is having
of Hero and Bailamos fame returns after eight years for a three-city tour. The Spanish pop singer will be at Amanora Park Town, Pune, on October 17, HUDA Grounds in Gurgaon on October 19, and wrap up at TBA in Bangalore on October 21. an Indian wedding in Napa Valley, US, complete with a sangeet, anarkalis and saris by Indian designers, a tabla performance, and her beau Jason Dehni in a bandgala.A reception in India will follow next year.

OCT 26-28 FORMULA 1 brings
back the squealing tyres and world-class racing champions to the Buddh International Circuit in Greater Noida.There will also be all-night parties with performances by Black Eyed Peas founder Taboo Nawasha as the main attraction.

FOTOCORP

GET OFF MY FILM SET
Stone-pelting protesters do not scare Ramya, 29. The Kannada actress, also known as Divya Spandana, was shooting for Kodi Ramakrishna's untitled Telugu film in Mysore when a group demanded the shoot be called off in support of the Bharat Bandh. When things got out of hand, she stepped out of her vanity van and asked the crowd to leave. "There is nothing wrong in protests. But they need to be peaceful. Opposition should be conveyed in a decent way. It is certainly not a wise thing to turn to violence," she later tweeted. Brave girl.

The curtains finally go up on Karan Johar's return to the director's chair after My Name Is Khan. Hmm. Will the debuting star children be worth the wait?

FOTOCORP

by Nishat Bari
86
INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012 OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

87

