Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

PRESS PAUSE ON EUPHORIA
ood economics doesn't always win elections. Nobody knows that better than Manmohan Singh. The `muchlauded' economic reforms he piloted between 1991 and 1996 sent the Congress into political oblivion for eight years between 1996 and 2004, the party's longest spell outside government at the Centre. The UPA Government's latest push for reforms--too little and certainly too late-- may have similar political consequences. That is because the pain that will follow some of the announcements will have an immediate effect. Consumers will be hit by the inflationary effect of a hike in diesel prices, just as their pockets will be pinched by the withdrawal of significant subsidy on LPG. On the other hand, the gains that will accrue from other measures may take longer to materialise than the 20 months the Government has left in office. Consider FDI in retail. It will take at least 18 months for foreign retailers to actually set up their first shop. The gains--in terms of new jobs, for example--from FDI will not be visible in this Government's tenure, and the Opposition will be free to drum up scare stories until the General Elections. The populist sections of Congress are only acutely aware of this reality. Their efforts, in the last year-and-a-half of UPA'S second term in office, will be to force the Government to be less reformist and more populist. There is, therefore, considerable risk that these early signs of reform and fiscal discipline will dissipate by February 2013 when the Government uses its last Budget to unveil big-ticket spending programmes like Right to Food. It is therefore

G

important for those euphoric about the Government's latest announcements to acknowledge that the good news period may be short-lived as the reality of General Elections hits home in the next six months. Manmohan Singh may not want to sacrifice good economics to the cause of good politics since he won't lead the Congress in 2014, but his successors will not allow the good doctor and his good economics to send them into another long spell in political oblivion. It is not often that good economics and good politics make a harmonious twosome. To expect them to be in harmony in the countdown to General Elections is a great folly. Manmohan Singh's UPA had at least two chances to press ahead with difficult reform without paying a political price. The first chance was during the economic boom years between 2005 and 2007 in UPA 1. It is easier to sell a hike in fuel prices when people are feeling prosperous in general, rather than when they are feeling squeezed. The second chance was between 2009 and 2012 when UPA returned to office with an enhanced majority and much goodwill. The alliance had the political capital at that time to get away with tough reformist measures. The sad reality is that both the Congress and its allies were too busy looting the country precisely at the time when they should have been thinking about harmonising good economics with good politics. Money may not grow on trees but for UPA, it grew out of thin air (spectrum) and under the roots of trees (coal). UPA's crooked Houdinis doomed it to paralysis and defeat just when its clever mandarins ought to have been securing a third term. I

THE SAD REALITY IS THAT BOTH THE CONGRESS AND ITS ALLIES WERE TOO BUSY LOOTING THE COUNTRY PRECISELY AT THE TIME WHEN THEY SHOULD HAVE BEEN THINKING ABOUT HARMONISING GOOD ECONOMICS WITH GOOD POLITICS.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Actor-director Dinesh Thakur, 65, after a prolonged illness. He is known for writing the story and screenplay of Ghar and for his role as one of the leads in Rajnigandha in 1974.
THAKUR

DIED Renowned Malayalam stage and film actor Thilakan, 77, following cardiac arrest. He had acted in over 200 films. Thilakan was honoured with the Padma Shri in 2009. He got the National Award for best supporting actor in 1988 for his performance in Rithubhedangal.

ANNOUNCED Free roaming across India by the Government for all mobile phone subscribers from 2013. TEST-FIRED The indigenous nuclear-capable Agni-III missile with a range of 3500 km, by the Strategic Forces Command. It is now ready for induction into the armed forces.

24

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

WON Silver medal by recurve archer Deepika Kumari, in the Archery World Cup KUMARI final in Tokyo. She became the second Indian ever to win a medal in an Archery World Cup final.

