GLOSSARY

A COUPLE OF GEMS
Five must-watch plays will be shown at this year's Prithvi Theatre festival. Organised by Kunal Kapoor, the fest is back in town after a two-year hiatus.

YESTERDAY ONCE MORE
Over 20 years ago Bhagyashree, 43, committed what many still consider a Himalayan blunder. Refusing to cash in on all the attention she received post the success of Maine Pyar Kiya Bhagyashree insisted she would henceforth only sign films opposite her husband Himalaya. The couple were laughed out of B-Town. Now she is back and networking hard to ensure her son Abhimanyu, 22, gets a big-banner break. Besides attending grooming/dancing/ acting classes Abhimanyu tags along with Mommy dearest to most social events. Looks like the wheel has come full circle.

MULTI TASKER
Dhanush , 29, has already made a mark as an actor and singer. But now he is hoping to make waves as a lyricist as well.The star is penning two songs for his home production Ethir Neechal.While Dhanush is no stranger to putting words to music--he wrote the viral hit Why this Kolaveri di--this film is not about soup boys but the lives of athletes. If he manages another hit, lesser mortals will have every right to feel annoyed.

1
FOTOCORP

BEGUM JAAN
Ekjute, the Mumbai-based theatre company run by veteran theatre artist Nadira Zaheer Babbar, presents Javed Siddiqui's tragic comedy which tells the tale of a legendary classical singer named Begum Jaan.The Begum gives her daughter's hand in marriage to a journalist. Unknown to her the journalist is trying to get his hands on a mysterious letter which is lying in her possession. Babbar plays the title role. Her daughter Juhi Babbar Soni and son-in-law Anoop Soni, a television actor, play the daughter and journalist respectively. November 7

CHANGE AGENT
It's now the turn of Arjun Kapoor to go gaga about Kareena Kapoor. "I have a huge crush on her and will literally give my right arm to work with her," Kapoor, who will soon be seen in Gunday and Aurangzeb, admitted this week on a TV show. Earlier, Ranveer Singh of Band Baaja Baaraat fame had claimed on Koffee with Karan that the new Begum of Pataudi had played a pivotal role in ushering him into manhood, confessing she had turned him "from child to boy" . Is the Nawab more irritated than amused?
86

At the end of this Formula One season, champion race driver Michael Schumacher will retire from a sport of which he was once undisputed king. Caught in a mellow mood at Noida's Buddh Circuit, he tells Prachi Bhuchar why he has no regrets Q. How do you feel about your second swansong? Do you wish you had not come back after the first retirement in 2006? A. Why regret anything? I feel good about what I do. I drive the coolest cars, in the most interesting racing series, compete with the best drivers of all and am now leaving having earned their respect. Q. Your preferred self image--MS with flaws or MS the genius? A. Image is something others see in you or make of you. I never did anything I did because I wanted to shape or create my image. Q. If not a race driver, you would have been... A. A car mechanic maybe. Q. Your memorable F1 moment? A. I think the achievement I remember most was the win of the championship in 2000. Q. What's next for you? A. I have a few races to attend at which I hope to perform well for the whole team. As for after the season, I always live in the present. The future will tell what the future will bring. Q. What song describes your current state of mind best? A. "I did it my way" by Frank Sinatra.

2

husband Javed Aktar will host a reading of Kaifi Aur Main, a memoir written by Azmi's mother Shaukat Kaifi. Expect to be dazzled by the couple's easy chemistry. November 15

BEGUM JAAN

NOBODY'S FOOL
Gone are the days when children could be bribed with a toffee or a trip to the zoo. Dole Dole girl Suchitra Krishnamoorthi's daughter Kaveri, 12, seems to know exactly how much her time is worth.The Mumbai schoolgirl agreed to record her first song only after her mother promised to buy her an iPhone in exchange.

3 4
A WALK IN THE WOODS
With this play, real-life couple Naseeruddin Shah and Ratna Pathak-Shah match wits onstage. Ratna marks her debut as a theatre director with this Indian adaptation of Lee Blessing's Pulitzer-nominated play which tells the story of an improbable friendship, as two people attempt to understand each other across an ideological divide.The 120 minute play also stars Rajit Kapur. November 3-4

NOTHING LIKE LEAR
What does a clown do when he is depressed? Funny man Vinay Pathak hopes to answer that question with this play.Pathak's clown is based on Shakespeare's tragic drama King Lear. November 12

5

BETWEEN THE LINES
Yet another real-life couple, actor Nandita Das and her entrepreneur-turned-actor husband Subodh Maskara, will soon be seen playing a lawyer couple caught on opposite sides of a trial. Between The Lines shows how personal and professional boundaries blur when a couple works together.This play, which Das co-wrote with theatre actor-turned-writer Divya Jagdale, is the first production from the couple's new firm Chhoti Productions. November 9

GETTYIMAGES

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

by Sharla Bazliel, Lakshmi Kumaraswami, Aditi Pai and Prachi Rege

YOGEN SHAH

FOTOCORP

KAIFI AUR MAIN Shabana Azmi and

YOGEN SHAH

Q& A "If not a race driver,I'd have been a car mechanic"

