NET FLUX
viral video

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

star of the week

The most viewed video this week was the Coke Zero challenge for the promotion of the new James Bond film, Skyfall. Participants had to dodge a myriad of planted obstacles at the Antwerp railway station, Bond style. Other popular videos included actor Tom Hanks reading a dramatic poem about the American TV show Full House and actor Nick Offerman's suggestions on how to grow a moustache.
Coke Zero's Skyfall Challenge 6.5 million

Life's a Song
Dushyanth Weeraman does not want to be known as the `Michael Jackson of Sri Lanka'anymore.The Colombo-based 26-year-old singer used to impersonate the King of Pop but is now busy trying to break free from that tag.In fact,Weeraman put his moves to good use and won a Sri Lankan reality show Sirasa Dancing Stars.He now wants to concentrate on music and has been churning out his own tracks. WEERAMAN With over 2 million views for his YouTube videos,this online celebrity recently released Just the Fact, featuring Indian singer Sonu Niigaam.The video has more than no w 70,000 views and his Facebook page is exploding with accolades from news more than 200,000 fans.Weeraman hopes to take his fame all over the world and already has a headstart in 2011--he opened for Grammy Award-winning hip hop artiste T-Pain.

web point

Offerman on how to grow a moustache 495,000

Tom Hanks on Full House 1.4 million

Festival Bonanza
This Diwali, don't stress yourself queueing up outside shops to buy firecrackers.Just log on to Mypatakhe.com instead. Started in 2012 by Arshadeep Kaur and Kunal Gupta, two IIM Ahmedabad students, the website allows you to choose from a variety of crackers and have them delivered at your doorstep at no extra cost.The service is available all over India.

* Views from when videos were uploaded

tweet tweet

Ruling the Roost
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on October 30: The Cabinet reshuffle was discussed extensively online, especially Rahul Gandhi not being initiated into the Government. Shashi Tharoor's re-entry into the Cabinet also dominated Twitter. Tweeple posted pictures, videos and news about Hurricane Sandy that hit the US East Coast. Speed machines and celebrities at the Grand Prix in Delhi made news. Actor Akshay Kumar tweeted about his film Khiladi 786, causing others to tweet on who a khiladi is.The answers ranged from a person who drives on Indian roads to the Gandhi son-in-law.
#Cabinetreshuffle
1,399,616

app alert

net fail
In a YouTube video,billionaire Donald Trump offered US President Barack Obama a $5 million cheque to any charity of his choice.But this was on the condition that the President release his college records and passport application. Sadly,nobody responded to Trump's offer except Tweeple who responded with jokes--calling Trump the worst Bond villain ever and adding that Trump himself could use the money to purchase hats to cover his hideous combover.

Top of the Lot
This week's list is for entertainment junkies, wine aficionados and creative children. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. ThrowMe activates your camera's shutter and takes aerial pictures when you throw your device in the air.

smart sheet

BloomBeautyTrends gives beauty, makeup, hair and skincare tips with easy instructions. Atlas By Collins lets you travel virtually around the world with a variety of 3D, interactive globes.

In the Name of Honour
Conservative author Ann Coulter received backlash after she used the word `retard' in a tweet to describe US President Barack Obama.The strongest response came from John Franklin Stephens, a Special Olympics athlete. In `An Open Letter to Ann Coulter' , Stephens, who suffers from Down syndrome, said she and society needed to learn that being compared to people like him should be considered a badge of honour.
STEPHENS
NOVEMBER 12, 2012  INDIA TODAY

#Sandy
940,361
*Figures denote number of followers

weirdonet
Parking Douche is a mobile application launched in Russia that lets users take pictures of badly parked cars and post them on news websites. Internet pranksters in UK created an uproar when they spread a rumour that pop star Justin Bieber had cancer.As a result, a number of teenage girls shaved their heads in solidarity.

#AirtelIndianGP
748,133

#YouAreKhiladiIf
548,243

#ShashiTharoor
22,962

83

