COVER STORY HIGH-SOCIETYPARTIES

WHERE'S THE

PARTY TONIGHT?
Urban Indians have begun to party with a passion.With pricey performers and Rs 3 lakh cakes, nothing is beyond reach.
By Aditi Pai and Sonali Acharjee
A POST-ENGAGEMENT PARTYWITH AN HERMES AND CHANELTHEME IN DELHI
Photograph RONICKA KANDHARI

hen R. Ayesha turned eight in September, her doting jeweller grandfather made it an evening to remember--he brought snow to Chennai. Her favourite characters from the cartoon blockbuster, Ice Age--Manny the mammoth, Sam the smilodon and Diego the ground sloth--frolicked in the snow with her 50 friends in a Rs 2-crore set at a sprawling farmhouse on East Coast Road. When the Gucci and Armani-clad wives of 10 millionaire farmers-turnedbusinessmen wanted to gossip last week, they took off from Hoshiarpur to the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania for a Rs 20-lakh girls' night out. And if Rajasthan can turn into Naomi Campbell and beau Vladimir Doronin's private party ground, what

W

COVER STORY HIGH-SOCIETYPARTIES
IMAGES BAZAAR

stops our Mumbai girls from heading for a shots-and-shopping spree to the exotic Polonia Palace in Poland for Rs 1 lakh per night weekends? From break-ups to birthdays, urban Indians now party with a passion. Exotic destinations, pricey performers and Rs 3-lakh cakes; nothing is beyond reach. They uncork magnums of Dom Perignon worth Rs 50,000, fly down international pop stars for a $1 million per hour shake-a-leg, dish out Rs 2 lakh for a pound of Italian white truffles and live their wildest fantasies with Playboy Mansion and Matrixthemed parties that could cost up to Rs 5 crore a night. At the Formula One VIP afterparty held at Amber Lounge, in Claridges, Surajkund, on October 28, there were special tables with champagne showers worth Rs 18 lakh and a performance by rapper Taboo, from the Black Eyed Peas. "There is a new group of crorepatis who can afford to host Rs 3-crore parties every month. They want to celebrate everything--from their sixth business deal to 10th wedding anniversary--with Bollywood entertainment, different themes and seven-course wine tasting dinners," says Radhika Khanijo, executive director, Welgrow Travels, a luxury travel company in Delhi that flies customers to Rs 10 lakh

per person parties in exotic locales. Weddings are still the biggest cash burners, with a popular Delhi wedding planner pegging the marriage market at Rs 15,000 crore only to be followed by private dos and birthday bashes, which are fast becoming multi-million affairs. But revellers--with cash and aspirations in equal measure--are turning the home ground into a playground of their deepest fantasies. This October, music baron Bhushan Kumar, a car racing fan, created an F1 track at a Ferrari-themed do for his son's first birthday in Mumbai's J.W. Marriott hotel. A millionaire mill owner's son spent his 18th birthday doing daredevil bike acts with US stunt artists, for almost Rs 1 crore. "They aren't afraid to bring their fantasies alive," says Aditya Motwane, chief operating officer of Percept Sports and Entertainment that organises high-profile parties across the globe. From Playboy parties with Hugh Hefnerlookalikes in Goan villas to New York's rocking Boom Boom Room nightclub in a Mumbai ballroom, any dream destination can be recreated for a price. Kalyani Chawla, vice-president, marketing and communications of Christian Dior Couture, India, and a regular in Delhi's party circuit, calls it a symptom of the nouveau riche culture. "Parties were about being surrounded

BIRTHDAY BASHES ARE FAST MOVING FROM HOMES TO STAGEMANAGED, MULTILAKH EVENTS

Best

Tastemakers

They host parties where celebrities want to be seen

Parmeshwar Godrej
Philanthropist and wife of industrialist Adi Godrej

Nita Ambani
Businesswoman and Mukesh Ambani's wife

Pinky Reddy
Homemaker and wife of G.V. Sanjay Reddy

Subrata Roy
Chairman of Sahara Group

MUMBAI When the
queen bee of the social circuit sends out invites, Bollywood stars, society ladies and newsmakers troop into her sea-facing bungalows in Walkeshwar and Juhu. She has hosted a string of celebrities from Oprah Winfrey to the British royalty.

MUMBAI From Sachin
Tendulkar to Ban Ki-Moon, the country's A-list and visiting dignitaries have all enjoyed her warm hospitality at her 27-storey home, Antilla. Be it a formal book launch with a ramp walk or a casual film with friends, Mumbai's party priestess hosts all with elan.

HYDERABAD She's known
for throwing fashionable parties at her home and hotel Taj Krishna, that the family owns. An excellent cook, she often serves home-cooked food. Her home, built like a resort, is arguably the best known party hotspot for the city's rich and famous.

LUCKNOW White orchids,
music and Moët & Chandon are the trademark of parties hosted by Roy. From bashes for his IPL team to singer Krishnendu Sen's new album and impromptu dos at Aamby Valley, the Sahara patriarch is known to celebrate every occasion with his characteristic warmth.

by friends, someone playing DJ, homemade food and a lot of laughter. Now it's five-star hotels, professional DJs and white-gloved waiters serving drinks. The need to be `different' translates into flying in exotic dancers from Russia or Turkey and DJs from Ibiza," she says. So, the newly minted millionaires land Rs 30 crore worth helicopters in Delhi farmhouses as wedding gifts; 18-yearolds drive home Aston Martin cars that cost a cool Rs 2 crore as birthday gifts; and gold-dusted cakes from elite Parisian patisseries are flown in for birthday bashes for a princely sum of Rs 3 lakh. "Parties have become largescale events these days. Even the brand of alcohol served is a matter of prestige," says Suveer Sodhi, general manager, Operations, DLF Emporio Restaurants that caters to residential parties across Delhi.

They were once the indulgence of the monogrammed elite in metropolitan India. Today, high decibel celebrations are the new rite of passage for the wealthy in smaller cities. Hyderabad's society ladies travel to Dubai's Raffles Spa to indulge in everything from sangrias to scandals over spa lunches, Lucknow's rich brides-to-be live their wild side with strippers in Las Vegas before returning to the joys of family and hearth and Pune's adventure loving men head to Phuket for a weekend of fishing and sailing. The price tag? Rs 1 lakh to Rs 1 crore. "Sudden money and power can be overwhelming. The measure of the impact depends on what strata and class of society you initially belonged to," says Andre Béteille, professor emeritus of sociology, Delhi University The lines are clearly drawn on the

20

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

COVER STORY HIGH-SOCIETYPARTIES

Capitals
Where Indians love to let their hair down and party

party

Antilla

The glittering ballroom at Mukesh and Nita Ambani's home, with a single chandelier that covers the entire ceiling, is where India's power elite party. The crockery is Noritake, the cutlery monogrammed with MDA, and dinners are all-vegetarian spreads. Who can resist the sun, sand and sea? Lara Dutta took her vows with Mahesh Bhupati at the plush Taj Aguada while Sanjay Dutt and Manyata tied the knot at the neighbouring, luxurious beachfacing Taj Exotica in 2008. With its private beach villas, mountain resorts and luxury spas, Bali is the latest pick for party animals. In 2011, Vijay Mallaya threw a huge bash for his daughter Laila Mehmood's wedding at the Ayana Resort in Bali.

Goa

diamond-crusted social ladder. "There are two kinds of people in the country today. On the one hand is the second generation of wealthy families which is well-travelled and aware of the fine things. On the other hand, you've people who have come into money only recently and do not know what to do with it. They are willing to spend without research and awareness," says Basil Massey, MD of INJA World, a luxury travel service that organises upscale bashes across the world. It's no wonder then that the VIP Lounge at the Buddh International Circuit in Noida was teeming with guests who didn't care to look at the track or the cars. Armed with by-invitation-only tickets, the men guzzled vintage wines while the wives, dripping diamonds, exchanged designer notes. A portly businessman even whispered to his companion that F1 was a pharmaceutical company. It doesn't matter when you enjoy the high life; if you have the money, flaunt it.

A MOULIN ROUGE PERFORMANCE IN MUMBAI, PART OF CELEBRATIONS BY THE WORLD OF ACCOR
MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Bali

TAASH,TAMASHAAND TEQUILATAKE OVER DIWALI
There isn't a better time to flash your cash than the festive season. Burano lace napkins, Turkish baklava and silver cutlery adorned the tables at a travel agency owner's Sainik Farms home in Delhi last year. The theme: Playing cards. So, if the women brought out their Chanel and Prada gowns embroidered with the Queen of Hearts, the men sported the Ace of Diamonds on their Versace tuxedos. The hostess was at her best, with a Prada handbag dangling from one arm and a customised pearl bracelet in the other. The cards lay forgotten as gossip on the latest society scandals went on late into the night. The grapevine in Punjab is abuzz about how certain stiletto-clad wives of rich businessmen have gambled away their Rs 40,000 Jimmy Choos and Rs 5lakh Omegas at the table. Men have even laid down keys to their Rs 4 crore Rolls Royces. At a card party at a Sainik Farms bungalow, the highest stake went up to Rs 2.5 crore by a builder. If Chhatarpur's farms throw open their doors to Delhi's charmed circle, Mumbai's upper crust host millionaire private parties at home. Shilpa Shetty

RONICKA KANDHARI

Necker Island

An adventure in the heart of the Caribbean. Sir Richard Branson's iconic private island sits in over 74 acres of turquoise waters, coral reefs and white sandy beaches. The island has become a popular playground for the junior Ambanis and Jindals. With its proximity to India and hotels actively promoting special Imperial-themed venues, it's no surprise that Indians have grown fond of partying in the East.

and husband Raj Kundra's plush Juhu home, Pinnacle of Dreams, is where B-Town gathers for a night of revelry and gambling. Soap queen Ekta Kapoor's Juhu bungalow, Krishna, turns into a mini casino with rummy counters and cash machines as the glam set pours in to grab the lucky hand. In Hyderabad, everyone wants to gatecrash business couple Pinky and Sanjay Reddy's Diwali parties. Open to a close group of 300, they are known for their exquisite décor, chilled champagne and home-cooked food. "We also have international DJs and tarot card readers for those who don't want to gamble. Our guests leave only after breakfast," says Pinky. A Mumbai politician who is a regular at Delhi card parties says: "Parties have become large scale betting and gambling events where people have staked their houses in an inebriated state."

BIRTHDAYS GO BOLD WITH BANDS, BOOZE AND THEMES
No ostentation is spared even for baby birthdays. The four-year-old daughter of a Mumbai businessman celebrated her big day with an all-pink Princess themed tea party where the terrace at the J W Marriott looked like a set

China

straight out of a fairytale with castles, pink upholstery, tiaras and magic wands. In yet another 25th birthday bash of a South Mumbai businessman, guests dressed as popular porn stars such as Asa Akira, Jesse Jane and Manuel Ferrara. Star children have their own favourite themes. At Suhana's parties, doting dad Shah Rukh Khan has experts create themes like a car treasure hunt and German water games. "They like a new theme every year to keep the children entertained and busy with activities," says Jatin Bhimani of Play Time, who organises birthdays at the Khan home. Flying in screen stars and international pop divas is the new rage--and an instant ticket to being the talk of the town. If real estate tycoon K.P. Singh regaled his guests with a Shakira show at Udaipur's Jagmandir Palace last November for his 80th birthday, others are bringing in stars from Bipasha Basu to Neil Nitin Mukesh to cut expensive birthday cakes with their teenage children. Hiring a celebrity can cost between Rs 10 lakh and Rs 20 lakh. This month, Hyderabad entrepreneur Yash Agarwal is flying in his favourite Pakistani band, Roxen, for a few lakhs

to perform at his mother's 50th birthday. "I wanted Atif Aslam but he was busy," he says. Other guests turning up to wish her--for a fee of course--are TV stars Jay Bhanushali, Mahi Vij and Mini Mathur. Ask him why the extravagance and he says: "The occasion calls for something special, since it's a landmark birthday." Taking a cue from Amitabh Bachchan's sit-down dinner on his 70th birthday celebrations in October, the 21-year-old son of a Mumbai-based financial consultant invited 170 guests from across the world for a black-tie dinner at the Taj Mahal hotel. "Every birthday is a milestone and people use the occasion to connect with others and build relationships in an informal atmosphere," says Chhaya Momaya, image consultant to the city's rich and famous and a prominent party host.

WHERE YOU PARTY MATTERS AS MUCH AS HOWYOU DO IT
The charm of foreign shores is hard to resist. So, freshly Botox-ed glam gals fly off to Morocco for coffees and conversations; bored wives of Mumbai's celluloid clique revel in the heady cocktail of chatter and clamour

22

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

NEW

NEW

Diary of a gossip girl
SO I HAVE A confession to make. I suffer from this incurable condition called FOMO. The Fear Of Missing Out. Luckily I'm not alone and Mumbai nightlife, over the years, has taken on a life of its own as a result.You can feel it, it's alive and it's coming to pick you up at 9.15. I moved to Mumbai in 2000 because I was captivated by the neon lights and perfectly safe 4 a.m. cab rides home, which all lent themselves nicely to the city that never sleeps (even well past bedtime.) There are two kinds of parties in this city; the Page 3 kind where the booze is free (expensive even, if you're lucky) and the eyeballs often critical, or the other kind that I like to call The Real World, where you walk into a bar with your four best mates and watch the world go by. At a Page 3 party you'll meet the uncletype who keeps six changes of clothes in his car and calls everybody "darling" , "sweetheart"or "baby" . In The Real World, you'll go up to two boys you thought were cute only to discover that when they told you what "school"they were in, they didn't mean college--they meant school and are in fact only 15. (True story). At a Page 3 party there will be more paparazzi than people and champagne brunches will start at 3 p.m. In The Real World guys will spend all their money trying to impress a girl who's already BB-Ming somebody else to pick her up. At a Page 3 party there will be air-kissing and people will say "you've lost so much weight!" even if you haven't. In The Real Word your girlfriend will tell you to "suck in your stomach and you won't look fat" . At a Page 3 party you'll never pick up a plate, only snack while you schmooze. In The Real World you'll get shots before dinner and maybe a coffee at "Trats" . What matters is that everybody's having a good time (or at the very least pretending to on Facebook the next day!) But here's what I love, there's always somewhere to go, some place new to say you've been and an after party with your name on it--even if it doesn't happen to be your address. xoxo.
Malini Agarwal is founder of MissMalini.com, a party, fashion and film blog

A CARD PARTYAT A FARMHOUSE IN DELHI

tucked away in Villazzo's private villas at St Tropez and the high-onadrenaline with deep pockets head to the Arctic for Rs 2.5 crore weekend luxury treks. With her textile agent husband always on the move, Poonam Nath spends her afternoons with her girlfriends, flaunting her latest Birkin and gossiping about the neighbourhood scandal at Chandigarh's Sector 35 Costa Coffee. In October, she took off for Marrakesh for a strong, freshly brewed cuppa. In Mumbai, six friends set off to Svalbard Island in Norway in September for a luxury North Pole trek with an exclusive concierge and a pre-ordered wardrobe of polar skin fur coats, spending Rs 2.5 crore for that weekend getaway. "The women in my family often feel claustrophobic in India. They fly abroad for a round of coffee in Morocco or sun bathing in Greece. International travel is much cheaper now than what it used to be so why limit oneself to just Mumbai and Delhi?" says Karan Walia, 32, a real estate businessman from Ahmedabad. Luxury travel agents are going all out to chart out the itinerary of your dreams. "Clients ask us to book them to places they haven't been to before,

to celebrate their birthdays and even the occasional kitty party. Depending on where they are heading--London, New York and Miami--we get requests to make bookings at members only clubs or VIP tables at clubs where a top DJ or artist is scheduled to perform. Prices start from Rs 1.5 lakh per person per night," says Taruna Seth, founder of Pearl Luxe, which plans luxury travel parties in Delhi. In summer, she took a family to Peru including a few days aboard the ultra-luxe Aqua Expeditions through the Peruvian Amazon for Rs 50 lakh per person. Revellers are also attracted to offbeat lands like Galápagos, Arctic islands, private islands, Brazil, Egypt, Morocco and Egypt are the new destinations to let your hair down. "People are open to trying new experiences such as sushi on the Nile or a coffee party in Marrakesh," says Khanijo.

Party

know your

ThirstyThursday Binging before
the weekend begins? Tipsy Tuesday and Wasted Wednesday, here's just another fancy term for mid-week partying.

DTI Party Wearing that Little Black
Dress? It's got to be at that formal do where you Dress To Impress.

AYCD Party A new trick to bring
in the crowds at pubs on weekdays; you can drink all you want, for a fixed sum, until you head to the washroom.

HOBO Are you on a booze binge? The acronym for Hanging Out, Blacking Out shouts out that you are in high spirits. DRUNK The cool coinage on coasters means Drinking Rum Until Nothing Kills. PWN Party While Naked--it's the stuff of wild and carefree bachelor and bachelorette parties.

NOTHING LIKE THE POWER AND PULL OF PERSUASION
Novel, off-beat experiences are fast becoming the launch pad of luxury products. From beds costing half-amillion rupees to multi crore cars, high end products are wooing customers over flutes of Moët & Chandon and

Beluga caviar. "Parties are an informal platform to gather just the right target audience in an elegant setting," says Momaya, who has launched over 200 upscale products, from jewellery to tea, over the past seven years. Mumbai's luxury jewellery designer Varuna D. Jani launched her creations with a ballet performance at the Taj Mahal Palace sprayed with Chanel No. 5; Michelin star chef Sergi Arola wowed the crème de la crème by playing the sitar at the launch of his Spanish restaurant in Juhu. Two years ago, a bank in Mumbai peddled its services for HNIs (high networth individuals) by sponsoring a corporate boss's party. Three years ago, the city's business circles were abuzz with rumours of a bank sponsoring a flamboyant industrialist's seaside bash in Goa; another bank wooed top CEOs aboard a ship with an eight-course continental meal and Swarovski-studded Mont Blanc pens, an evening that reportedly cost Rs 4 lakh per guest. Big bucks, million dollar drinks and international stars are the new way to party. Home grown stars are no longer cool, it's international all the way. Lionel Richie, Shakira and Lady Gaga, with millionaire price tags, are the toast of the cool, in-your-face parties that will impress friends. "International stars have become accessible and everyone who has the money, wants them," says Percept's Motwane. Kolkata's eclectic art societies, says Rashmee Das, a party consultant, are increasingly flying in Parisian painters and Austrian ballet troupes as VIP guests for private dos. No one seems to want the humble tequila shot anymore. Party rockers head to the Leela Hotel in Delhi for a Rs 2.8 lakh-a-shot of the 130-year-old cognac, Louis XIII Rare Cask. Piper Heidsieck Monopole 1907, the world's most expensive champagne at Rs 35 lakh a bottle, found 10 buyers in India last year and the Silver Tips Imperial tea, at Rs 1,300-a-cup is the new heady drink on five-star party menus. The crore parties are just getting richer. And you're invited!
with Mona Ramavat, Devika Chaturvedi, Ayesha Aleem and Tithi Sarkar

NEW

