Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

END OFTHE IDEAL
SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

I

t is a familiar story in politics, and it is as old as democracy. The dramatic tension is provided by the relationship between the three characters who dominate the narrative: The ruler, the opponent, and the outsider. In India, a textbook case of democratic volatility which continues to bring out the best and worst of parliamentary politics, the story has reached a page of suspense. The ruler, the default protagonist, is not exactly nobility personified, but his back story is a fine blend of achievement and accidental turns in a stellar career in technocracy. The antagonist here is an apparatchik, and his status as the counterpoint is not sustained by his experience on the right side of the political aisle but by his acceptance by the patriarchs of the House of Saffron. The outsider is the Citizen Enraged, the street fighter who has become the receptacle of popular dissent. The defining three are not the ideal three India deserves at a time when politics has lost its moral content and the politician has fallen further in the hierarchy of the undesirables. The protagonist, Dr Manmohan Singh, could have been the reassuring face of 21st century India, one of the world's demographically youngest nations known for its latent power of creativity. He is not. He is the exhausted, discredited moderniser. Presiding over a stigmatised Government that has repudiated transparency and accountability in governance with a brazen shrug of nonchalance, he is the worst case of effete leadership. The series of economic reforms may be the last gasp of revival, but in their timing and political context, they are more a mark of desperation than a flash of commitment. Same is the meaning of the Cabinet reshuffle, a rearrangement necessitated by political expediency rather than administrative urgency. The leader of India is

too redundant to read--or shape--the future. The protagonist gets the antagonist he deserves. Nitin Gadkari, like Manmohan Singh, is a gentleman politician. He is not your average rabble-rouser from the right, even if his sound bites are not always marketable. Now he himself has become unmarketable for the BJP, though the party stands united behind the chief for the sake of cameras. Still, the very sight of the BJP miming the Congress while attacking the messenger for all the bad news is pathetic. Stepping aside in the face of allegations of corruption is not cowardice. Neither is it a sign of vulnerability. The Congress needs an artificial façade of infallibility when the entire edifice is tottering; it can even afford to reward the tainted with a high-profile Cabinet portfolio. By chorusing hail-to-the-taintedchief, BJP has neutralised its fight against the corrupt Congress. Gadkari refuses to be the leader of the party with a difference; he will rather play out his own sordid script of survival in a level-playing field of politics-as-usual. Raging against the equally discredited Big Two is the Citizen Rearmed. But Arvind Kejriwal is too steeped in his own lofty selfrighteousness to see the fragility of his dissent. He has an argument against corruption, and he knows popular disenchantment with the political class is so intense that his morality performance will have an audience. What makes him incompatible with a 21st century democracy is the idea of his alternative: A rural Ruritania governed by a council of the enlightened. The freelancing tormentor of the political class is not the embodiment of an angry India. His idea of tomorrow is so remote from the attitudes and aspirations of a modern society. The political story of India today defies the ideal and celebrates faux morality. 

WHAT MAKES ARVIND KEJRIWAL INCOMPATIBLE WITH A 21ST CENTURY DEMOCRACY IS THE IDEA OF HIS ALTERNATIVE: A RURAL RURITANIA GOVERNED BY A COUNCIL OF THE ENLIGHTENED.

S I G N P O STS
WON The 2012 Indian Grand Prix, by Red Bull Racing driver VETTEL Sebastian Vettel, 25, at the Buddh International Circuit in Noida. Ferrari's Fernando Alonso finished second. VISITING Myanmar's prodemocracy icon Aung San Suu Kyi, 67, to India from November 13 for a week. This will be her first trip to India after a gap of nearly 40 years. Championship, by Pankaj Advani, 27, after beating defending champion ADVANI Mike Russell at Leeds. This is Advani's seventh title win.

MERGED Top English publishers Penguin and Random House, to take on the e-book revolution. Both publishing giants have sizeable operations in India. WON World Billiards

