NA TION

NITIN GADKARI
vested in the Purti group. Sources in the Sangh headquarters in Nagpur claim that RSS wanted to give Gadkari a chance to clear his name of all the charges before taking any action against him. It has allowed him to complete his term which ends in December 2012 but his second term depends on whether he comes out clean from the allegations or not. "As of now, a second term for Gadkari appears remote. The understanding is that if Gadkari gets a clean chit after investigations, he stays or else he resigns on his own. Even the RSS is in a fix since Gadkari has not succeeded in convincing them about his questionable business dealings," a RSS leader told INDIA TODAY. One thing is certain: Gadkari's image of a `politician-cum-social entrepreneur' has certainly taken a beating with allegations of cronyism and conflict of interest in running his business. Publicly, while BJP leaders are standing by Gadkari, privately he does not have too many sympathisers. "Poster chipkane wale ko laaye the Nagpur se party president banane, woh khud hi poster ban gaya," ridiculed a party leader, referring to the days when a young Gadkari used to stick posters and distribute pamphlets for the RSS in Nagpur. Old rivalries have surfaced. There had been great reluctance among certain central BJP leaders in accepting Gadkari as party president in 2009. It took them a long time to come to terms with the fact that an unknown leader was thrust upon the party by RSS. At a time when the party should have been building its anti-corruption campaign against UPA, focusing on the Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat Assembly elections and preparing for parliamentary polls, the BJP is busy managing Gadkari. Whatever little sympathy that Gadkari is getting from the party leaders is because of the buzz that the campaign against him is being fuelled by someone from within BJP. "That is the reason why he has been given time to clear his name," revealed a BJP spokesperson. In the meantime, it is almost certain that the BJP national council will

THE BURDEN OFGADKARI
Struggling for the restoration of his reputation, the BJP president becomes a liability for his own party and neutralises its fight against corruption
S SUDARSHAN

By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

n October 27, the day Nitin Gadkari addressed two thinly attended rallies in Himachal Pradesh, senior Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader from the state Shanta Kumar sent an SOS to L.K. Advani requesting him to keep the beleaguered party president away from the campaign trail. Kumar's plea was that Gadkari's presence was affecting the party's anti-corruption campaign. Kumar, also the national vice-president of BJP, had a tough time answering media questions in Shimla and trying to defend Gadkari, whose companies are being investigated by the Income Tax Department and the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. Even as Kumar tried to attack Congress for corruption by raking up charges against Congress leader Virbhadra Singh and Robert Vadra, the steam was taken out of him as he was left fire-fighting for Gadkari. Late night on October 28, during a meeting at Gadkari's 13, Teen Murti Lane home in Delhi, he was gently asked to concentrate on clearing his name and not to go for campaigning. The meeting was attended by Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) leader Suresh Soni and senior BJP leaders including Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha Arun Jaitley, and Rajnath Singh. Gadkari headed to Nagpur on October 29, seeking the comfort of his hometown. His scheduled tour of Himachal Pradesh stood cancelled, starting with two important rallies at Bilaspur and Solan on October 30. The 55-year-old BJP chief was all bluster in his home turf as he addressed his supporters, claiming he is a street-fighter. Over 2,000 supporters

O

had come to receive him at the airport, expressing their solidarity. Threatening to take a section of the media to court for levelling "false and fabricated" charges against him in connivance with the Congress, Gadkari said that he would be exonerated in the court of the people. He was apparently referring to his plans of contesting the next Lok Sabha elections from Nagpur. However, he gave no indication of the fact that he has been put on notice by his mentors in RSS. And that the main reason for him to be in Nagpur was to sort out his business documents and seek legal opinion, not just to sue a section of the media but to wriggle out of his own problems. "Adhyakshaji (president) is very hurt by the charges

THE ONLY REASON GADKARI HAS BEEN GIVEN TIME TO CLEAR HIS NAME IS THE BUZZ THAT THE CHARGES AGAINST HIM ARE FUELLED BY SOMEONE WITHIN BJP.
against him. He wanted to be among his own people in his hour of crisis. That is why he has chosen to come back home to Nagpur," said a close aide of Gadkari. Gadkari's Purti group has investments from companies that do not seem to exist as addresses given to the Registrar of Companies turned out to be fake. The BJP president is also under fire for having his driver and astrologer listed as major stakeholders in his company. The Income Tax Department conducted inquiries at various places including Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur and Kolkata on October 30 to check on the companies which in-

GADKARI AT AN RSS EVENT IN NAGPUR

32

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

NA TION
appoint a new party president. The meeting, which was originally scheduled for December, is likely to be postponed till January or even February next year. Discussions are already on about possible successors to Gadkari. By all indications, RSS is on a backfoot and will find it difficult to assert its authority in deciding the next president. "RSS is not in a position to experiment anymore, like it did in foisting Gadkari. Its authority has definitely eroded. Moreover, it will be too close to parliamentary elections to get a novice to head the party," explained a central party leader. Given the circumstances, the choice will again boil down to Jaitley, who is being backed by RSS, Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Sushma Swaraj, who has the blessings of

KARNATAKA

Return of the Scourge
S.M. Krishna's return to Karnataka has the Congress dreaming once again, and the BJP in panic mode
PARVEEN NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

RSS IS ON A BACKFOOT AND WILL FIND IT DIFFICULT TO ASSERT ITS AUTHORITY IN DECIDING THE NEXT PRESIDENT.
Advani and Narendra Modi. "The problem is that while all these leaders have supporters, they have equal number of opponents," said a party member. In such a situation, somebody seasoned like Rajnath Singh may be a compromise candidate since there are no serious reservations about him from any quarter. "He is not seen as a threat by any group in the party. He is non-controversial and the fact that he is not in the running may just go in his favour," said an insider. Shivraj Singh Chouhan and Manohar Parrikar have all the qualifications but they have ruled themselves out. Madhya Pradesh faces Assembly elections in 2013 and the party cannot afford to move Chouhan to the centre. Parrikar has just settled in Goa as Chief Minister. "So the slot for the next president is still very much open," says a leader. The current president, busy battling for his own reputation, does not think so. 

ithin hours of S.M. Krishna resigning as Union external affairs minister, Karnataka's ruling BJP pressed the panic button. Krishna, 80, went on record that he quit to make way for someone else, "as youth is the present flavour", and told his inner circle, family and colleagues, that he is not interested in returning to state politics. But such is the state of Congress in Karnataka that he is still seen as a messiah. The speed at which JD(S) state president and former chief minister H.D. Kumaraswamy denied "any impact on Karnataka of Krishna's return", is an indication of Krishna's potency. Krishna has been away since the 2008 elections, when even his famed charisma in Bangalore failed to counter a sympathy wave for B.S. Yeddyurappa. It is uncertain if Krishna has the old skill that made him the arch rival of former prime minister H.D. Deve Gowda of the JD(S) in the Old Mysore area. The battles between the two for supremacy over their Vokkaliga community that dominates Old Mysore, are legendary. "Gowda and Krishna are both old, and may not have the sharpness needed to steer their parties to power. Gowda at least can fall back on his son Kumaraswamy. Krishna has no option, though he might swing it himself,'' a senior Vokkaliga leader told INDIA TODAY. Major Congress aspirants for the chief minister's post, KPCC President G. Parameshwara and Leader of Opposition Siddaramaiah, are both Krishna protégés. While Parameshwara has always been associated with Krishna, Siddaramaiah left JD(S) to join Congress in 2006, banking on support from the senior leader. But this time, Krishna has not yet committed himself to either,

W

S.M. KRISHNA

and there is fear in both camps that he might be a candidate himself. "We are aware that the only way to counter Krishna is to turn to Yeddyurappa and his community, the Lingayats,'' a senior BJP leader said. BJP state president and Deputy Chief Minister K.S. Eshwarappa said, hours after Krishna's resignation on October 26, that he and Chief Minister Jagadish Shettar would ask the BJP'S national leadership to convince Yeddyurappa to stay back. His supporters say that if the party can defend its national President Nitin Gadkari against corruption charges, Yeddyurappa too deserves a similar courtesy.
by Sowmya Aji

34

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

