SURVEY 2012

SEXPOSITION 2012
BIPASHA BASU (RIGHT) WITH KOEL PURIE RINCHET AFTER THE ACTOR UNVEILED THE INDIATODAY SEX SURVEY ISSUE

INDIA TODAY CELEBRATED ITS TENTH ANNUAL SEX SURVEY WITH A STAR-SPANGLED EVENT THAT MIXED INTIMACY WITH EROTICISM, COMEDY WITH CANDOUR

THE PRATTLE OFTHE

SEXES
Photographs by REUBEN SINGH; VIKRAM SHARMA; RAJWANT RAWAT; YASBANT NEGI; CHANDRADEEP KUMAR AND RAMESH SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Rahul Jayaram

n November 29, all roads in Delhi led to the Blue Frog club in Mehrauli. Touching distance from Qutab Minar, pretty people sipped cocktails, slipped into gowns, revealed sculpted backs, and spoke about sex. INDIA TODAY celebrated its 10th annual sex survey edition with Sexposition 2012, an event to remember. Neither the November rain nor Delhi's traffic jams dampened the spirits of the many present on the occasion; they

O
62

were all clearly excited to be part of an unusual cultural evening, where sex was discussed in fact and fiction. Writer Shobhaa De sizzled. The question she was asked was if success bred infidelity. While she wasn't supporting the act of going astray, she thought the social whirl and the corridors of power were designed for the male species. "One never hears anything about the sexual peccadilloes of powerful women," she said. "That is because as a woman you are made to fit the demands of society. Whereas if you are Bill Clinton, Dominique

Strauss-Kahn or Tiger Woods, women come with the field," she said. Men could afford to stray. Women couldn't. De, who wore a blue James Ferreira gown borrowed from daughter Arundhati's wardrobe, schmoozed with Koel Purie Rinchet on a red, velvet bed. If Koel drooled over De's 64-year-old sexiness, the latter at one point egged Koel to do a little jig. The expressions of mutual admiration were greeted by the charged crowd with whistles and catcalls. This was Delhi at its naughtiest best. Though De was candid, she baulked

at intimate questions. "What would a man need to do to win over you?" someone from the audience asked. "He'd have to work very, very hard," she said. "It's not about how he looks, he just has to engage me completely with his intelligence." The couch gave way to stools but the sex quotient stayed intact. Actor Randeep Hooda took the stage with Madhuri Banerjee (author of Losing My Virginity And Other Dumb Ideas, and Mistakes Like Love And Sex), tantric guru Mahasatvaa Ma Ananda Sarita and sociologist Sanjay

Srivastava. They talked about pick-up lines, sexual positions and endless orgasms. Hooda thought folks were too serious about getting intimate. "Don't intellectualise sex. We are taking it too seriously. Make it creative, fun," he said. Banerjee agreed and said the biggest mistake Indians were making is not having enough sex. "Forget romance and flowers, have sex," she said bluntly. Hooda surprised everyone by admitting that his passion in life is horses. He owns a Hanoverian as well as four thoroughbreds and has won

several junior championships in the past. While Hooda's magnificent obsession was unexpected, his sister in the audience left jaws on the floor as she demonstrated what she sounds like when she has an orgasm. Ma Ananda Sarita related tantric sex to female sexuality. "Women's needs from sex revolve around love, companionship and intimacy whereas a man seeks excitation, orgasm and ejaculation. A woman takes about 20 minutes to have an orgasm whereas a man is done in just three minutes. Hence while a woman reaches the orgasm plateau and is ready for more, the man is already cooling off, satisfied," she said. When asked what her perfect partner would be like, the tantric guru replied with a flirtatious smile that she would go for a deeply passionate man who practises tantric meditation, danced, enjoyed massages and was at once playful and wise. Some peaks to scale, that. Actor Bipasha Basu, 33, took her seat as applause and sighs rent the air. For Bipasha, sex is all in the mind. As the audience clamoured for more, she said, "You don't need a man to make you feel sexy." Dressed in a pale pink Gauri Nainika gown, Bipasha was glowing, and frank on everything, from crushes to relationships to how fitness enhances one's sexual pleasure. She spoke about the importance of being earnest about lust. "You have to lust for your partner," she said, so reminiscent of her "jism ki bhookh" dialogue in the 2003 hit Jism. "If you're not attracted to your partner you are bound to cheat, at least mentally." She has been in relationships since she was 15, and the last two years have been her longest spell of singlehood. "Sex is better when you are committed," she philosophised. Bipasha surprised many with her conservative responses to Koel's racy line of questioning. Backstage, when quizzed on her image as a sex symbol, she admitted that it could be as intimidating as it was empowering,

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

NEW

SURVEY 2012

SEXPOSITION 2012

(CLOCKWISE FROM ABOVE) RANDEEP HOODA, MA ANANDA SARITA, MODERATOR NANDINI BHALLA; SHOBHAA DE; THE AUDIENCE ENCOURAGES THE SPEAKERS

PILLOWTALK
GRIN AND BEER IT
Carlsberg beer sure has a serious fan. Randeep Hooda would not part with his bottle even when he was called on stage for his session on Scoring in the Big City.

BACK TO ROOTS
Self-ordained "tantric sex guru" Mahasatvaa Ma Ananda Sarita, who claims to have a "direct transmission" with Osho, raised a few eyebrows when she said her ecstasy was to "bring tantra back to India" .

WRITERS' BLOC
Shobhaa De found a fan in fellow writer Madhuri Banerjee (in pic). The two discussed love, life, writing, and to Banerjee's delight, even clicked photographs together on her cellphone.

but at the end of the day it serves to keep people at a distance. The real Bipasha? Well, she is nothing but a bookworm, she said. Michelin star chef Vikas Khanna found himself in a bind when the Italian cultural attaché began to pester him about which cuisine he found to be the most erotic. Khanna masterfully alluded to his time in Italy and the warmth that he shared with rustic Italian matriarchs. "In the kitchen of an Italian mother everything is measured in handfuls. She judges how much to add depending on how much she loves the family that she's serving." Comedienne Aditi Mittal pressed for more openness on the topic of sex and felt that "laughter was the best aphrodisiac". "There is no need to be silent about sex. It's just another topic; we should be able to laugh and

discuss it freely," she said. Dressed in a light blue sari and sporting a pair of geeky glasses, Mittal had the crowd in splits with her `sex doctor' act, which was called `The Comic Position'. It might have been the last event of the night but she still managed to keep the energy levels high. Her 15-minute routine involved tips for young virgins, foreplay jokes and oral sex `advice'. Mittal brought out the lighthearted side of sex with her knowledge of the latest sex fads, terms and trends. She unabashingly cracked one joke after another on `squishy balls', `draining lizards' and `rolling skin cigarettes'. It was an evening of talking about sex till it did people apart. Yet, passion and commitment beat casual action and serial philandering.
with bureau inputs

64

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

