LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA E Y E C AT C H E R S

vs
GETTY IMAGES

FROM ACROSS THE BORDER
Meesha Shafi has already earned her international stripes ahead of the release of Mira Nair's The Reluctant Fundamentalist,having performed at the Doha Tribeca Film Festival in late November.The Pakistani actor plays Bina,the protagonist Changez Khan's sister,but we will also hear more of her in the film's soundtrack,and see her again in Bhaag Milkha Bhaag.Till then,there is another Pakistani actor Mehreen Syed,a supermodel back home,is part of vying for attention.M Lahore director Sanjay Puran Singh Chauhan's next.

SPICING THINGS UP
When Paoli Dam did Vikram Bhatt's erotic thriller Hate Story, she brought with her the promise of plenty of skin show. Now a sequel is on the cards with TV actor Surveen Chawla stepping into Dam's seductive shoes and Vishal Pandya as its director. The actor from soaps like Kasautii Zindagii Kay and Kaajjal is more sweet than saucy. Besides doing a whole bunch of Punjabi films, she was last seen hosting Comedy Circus Ke Superstars. Not exactly the profile for an average Vikram Bhatt film. What will she bring to the film? Shekhar Kapur's project Paani which he wrote 15 years ago. It will soon go on floors now that Yash Raj Films has come on board as the producer. The pace of tennis player Leander Paes's film career, with the release of posters for his debut film Rajdhani Express.

NOTE WORTHY
YOGEN SHAH

GOING UP

GOING DOWN

Sanjay Dutt's image. He was snapped chewing tobacco on stage at a cancer prevention event organised by the Nargis Dutt Memorial Trust. Akshay Kumar's Khiladi 786, with Pakistan's board of film censors banning the release of its posters and trailers.

While many others made a hip-swivelling entry into Bollywood, its newest foreign flavour Milli Moonstone comes in singing. The London singer-musician has sung two songs for 2 Nights In Soul Valley, a supernatural film. It's also her first stab at acting, just like it's a first time as director for Harish Sharma, who is otherwise a publicist. She has been singing since she was six and even toured India when she was 17. Her musical talents include a command over several instruments, even Indian ones like the sarangi and flute. Intriguing.


72

Volume XXXVII Number 51; For the week Dec 11-17, 2012, released from Friday onwards

Compiled by Nishat Bari

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

