SPE CIAL REPORT

FOREIGN UNIVERSITIES

The New World of Dream Destinations
Shrinking employment opportunities are prompting Young India to look beyond the US and UK for higher education. China, France, Singapore and New Zealand promise all the perks of a Western degree at a fraction of the cost.

FRANCE
Indian students went France for higher education in 2012.

3,000

30 PER CENT
rise in student applications from India in the last five years.

SINGAPORE

Indians are pursuing their MBBS in China, the highest number after Chinese students.

8,000

CHINA

NEWZEALAND 13,000
Indian students applied in 2011 compared to 2,600 in 2006.

AN ENGINEERING STUDENT FROM PURDUE UNIVERSITYCELEBRATES ON HIS GRADUATION DAY

By Sonali Acharjee

No.of universities 86

No.of universities 69

No.of universities 2,410

No.of universities 8

s September approaches and university classes commence around the world, it is not uncommon to find teary-eyed parents bidding farewell to their children at airports across India. Some students board the plane with a garland around their neck and others with a red tika on their forehead. But they all carry one thing in common--the great Indian dream of a foreign university degree. According to a study conducted by IIM, Bangalore, in September 2012, there has been a 256 per cent rise in Indians choosing to study abroad since 2000. Indians definitely want to study abroad, but their dream destinations have changed. While the US, UK and Australia were the only choice for many students five years ago, lower tuition fees, easy immigration policies and aggressive marketing have opened up a range of new study destinations for those looking to study abroad. "What matters today is not the country itself but the tuition fee, employment opportunity and visa procedure," explains Naveen Chopra, CEO of The Chopras, one of India's leading education consultancies. Even as the Quacquarelli Symonds (QS) World University Rankings rate France, New Zealand, Singapore and China as increasingly popular destinations, the countries themselves have released reports to indicate a high rate of growth in international student applications in 2011.

A

Culture in Your Course
There's no beating the French when it comes to culinary courses and fashion
very December, the 750-year-old Paris-Sorbonne University witnesses scores of students streaming into its grand hall with a buttery croissant in one hand and an espresso in the other for their graduation ceremony. "The British might have invented the graduation ceremony with their black cloaks and caps, but the French are the ones who made it posh," says Smiti Ghosh, 25, a graduate from Paris-Sorbonne University. She adds, "In France, everything is artistic and it's common to find students sitting on 13th century stools, dangling a second-hand Prada handbag. The zest to add style to life, be it a piece of bread or an ornate painting, is what drew me to France." Like Ghosh, Indians have been increasingly considering French universities for higher education. According to data provided by Campus France in India--an official body that represents all French universities in nine centres across India--around 3,000 Indian students enrolled at French universities in 2011, a number that has been growing over the last five years. Various reasons have contributed to the growing popularity of French universities among Indians. The number of scholarships available for Indian students has

E

Photo imaging by SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

SPE CIAL REPORT

FOREIGN UNIVERSITIES

Top of the Lot
1 ÉCOLE NORMALE SUPÉRIEURE DE PARIS

Average tuition fee Rs 1.80 lakh a year
2 ÉCOLE POLYTECHNIQUE, PARISTECH

Average tuition fee Rs 2.16 lakh a year
3 UNIVERSITÉ PIERRE ET MARIE CURIE

Average tuition fee Rs 5.75 lakh a year
4 ÉCOLE NORMALE SUPÉRIEURE DE LYON

Average tuition fee Rs 17,984 a year
5 UNIVERSITÉ PARIS-SORBONNE (PARIS IV)

Average tuition fee Rs 14,387 a year

Heard on Campus
PARLEZ-VOUS ANGLAIS?
Do you speak English?

Why France?
 Over 300 scholarships were awarded to Indians last year.  Easier student visa rules than the UK & the US. Students in France are also issued temporary work permits after graduation.  International students pay the same tuition fees as French citizens--an average of 2,300 euros a year.

D'AIDE,JE SUIS PERDU
Help, I am lost

SANTÉ Cheers ESTQUE LAVENTE
Is that on sale?

OÙ DONNER DE LAFÊTE DE GRADUATION
Which way to the graduation party?

INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS IN FRONT OF THE EIFFELTOWER. STUDENTS FROM OVER 150 COUNTRIES VISIT PARIS EACH YEAR FOR HIGHER EDUCATION

gone up along with a 40 per cent increase in the number of courses taught in English in French universities. According to the French Embassy in India, in 2011-2012, more than 300 scholarships were awarded to Indian students, as opposed to less than half that number 10 years ago. Secondly, the French Embassy in India has set up Campus France, a special student forum which offers free counselling. Students get access to first-hand knowledge on visas, French language exams, university applications, housing, employment opportunities and scholarships available. France has also signed around 30 memoranda of understanding with Indian institutes for student and research exchanges. Many French institutes are looking to establish a branch in India to help Indians get better acquainted with the French style of

living. "We are looking at setting up onates art and fashion. For a designer more academic partnerships between or artist, there is no better country to France and India," says Valérie visit for inspiration and motivation," Pécresse, minister of higher education says Nivedita Saboo, fashion designer and research, France. and an alumnus of NIFT, Delhi. Paris, voted by QS World University Known as one of the best culinary Rankings as the world's best student schools in the world, Le Cordon Bleu in city in 2012, attracts the largest num- Paris is every chef's dream. "After bers of Indian students. Lyon, Toulouse, doing hotel management in India, I felt Montpellier and Lille are other popular the need to specialise. What one learnt in four months at destinations. Degrees the Le Cordon Bleu in MBA, fashion, art, was more than what wine and food are my undergraduate most sought-after by degree had taught students who want to me in three years. It study in France. was here that I Home to some of moved into the the world's best haute In France, foreign students world of culinary couture labels such have to pay the same media, food styling as Chanel, Balentuition fees as a French and handling cookciaga, Dior and citizen. This is a great ery shows such as Givenchy, it is little advantage as studying Masterchef India," wonder that so many here is cost-effective." says Mumbai-based fashion students flock Michael Swamy, to France every year. CHINTAN PANDYA, University of Artois food stylist, writer "France lives, Works as a theatre artist and and chef. breathes and resruns Fanatika Theatre Club in Ahmedabad

48

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

SPE CIAL REPORT
ERIC BERNARD JOSSELIN

FOREIGN UNIVERSITIES

Vijay Singh

GUEST COLUMN

Language No Bar Any More
friend at one day informed me that the French Embassy was offering scholarships to do doctoral A work in France. This was way back in 1980, when virJNU

tually no Indian was interested in studying in this part of the world. Around this time, I had by chance discovered the writings of André Breton, and I was completely in love with my discovery of surrealism and its heady sensuality. So one fine day I took up the scholarship, packed my backpack and left for Paris. The only sentence in French I knew then was Je t'aime, meaning I love you. It was an extraordinary feeling to be in Paris--its buildings, its streets, its history, its feminine elegance and above all the disarming generosity of my university professors who received me with open arms. I was also perhaps lucky to have had the privilege of working under Michelle Perrot and Michel Foucault, two jewels of human sciences whose writing of history integrates the revolt and the irrationale of poetry. I have seen the number of Indian students in France multiply twofold in the last five years. French universities were initially not on the radar of the Indians, although many of them were aware of the French excellence in science, medicine, business studies and liberal arts. I guess the main reason was the language. Over time, the Alliance Française, now called the Insitut Français, has

spread its net all over India, and the French have also started accepting the use of English, particularly in their renowned business schools. One of the most important benefits of studying in France is obviously economic. Barring a couple of top French business schools, the rest are much cheaper than their American equivalents. Good food and medical care are other benefits--at a fractional cost of what it would be in the US. Bilingual education might appear more difficult for a student to start with, but it is a long-term investment as it opens the gates to a much larger job market worldwide. But the greatest advantage in going to a French school is perhaps its mix of academic excellence and cultural richness. The wall between academic learning and mainstream life is much more porous in France. Many of the Parisian universities don't even have a campus; it's just buildings in the city allotted to universities, and a majority of the students rent city accommodation. The cultural and social life of the city-- cinemas, theatres, bookshops, art galleries, museums, and also the social turmoil--permeates the mind of the university student. In that sense, French education is more composite, more wholesome and less monastic.
Vijay Singh, a writer and filmmaker, studied at the École des hautes études en sciences sociales in Paris

France also excels in the field of management. INSEAD France is one of the top business schools in the world and alumni here have the unique opportunity to access job databases from Harvard Business School, Stanford Business School and Kellogg School of Management. But STUDENTS HANG OUT AT THE CAMPUS OF ECOLE NORMALE SUPERIEURE IN PARIS it's not just the traditional full-time MBA programmes that one can pursue in France. Wine completed his master's in hospitality management, hospitality manage- management from Institut Vatel, ment, HR management and project Nîmes, and postgraduate diploma in management are popular alterna- wine tasting from L'Université du Vin, tives. "I love food and wine. With over Suze-La-Rousse in France. Perhaps the only drawback of 27 wine regions, a management degree in France made perfect sense to studying in France continues to be me," says Magandeep Singh, who the language barrier. "Knowing

French will not only make your adjustment easier but throw open more employment opportunities as well," adds Singh. Luckily, there are many language classes for students to prepare themselves in India ahead of time. Alliance Française has 15 branches across the country that provide short-term French courses for all levels of proficiency. With lower tuition fees than the US and the UK, excellent industry exposure and some of the oldest academic institutions in Europe, France is definitely an option to keep in mind for your higher education.
by Sonali Acharjee

50

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

