AnllTIPACTFeature
The hanging out and foodie culture bug has bitten almost every young and happening person in Delhi. Come Friday and everybody is either logged on to their favourite events websites or scrounging through pages of nightlife and events magazine and organizing weekend plans to beat the weekday work blues. Delhi has one of the best nightlives in the entire nation. Whether it is good food, a few drinks or a lazy lounging- whatever you seek is offered to you on a platter irrespective of which part of Delhi you hail from. When you are spoilt for choice, it is only a detailed description of some of the handpicked hang out destinations that will help you put your finger on exactly what you want to do. Here is an exclusive handpicked selection of some of the most happening hang out destinations. The ambience, the food and of course the size of the hole that it will burn in your pocket is all discussed here. So where are you going to hang out this time?

Come Eat Some!
You are never too late to eat at a Comesum and what's more? You can always have fun waiting for a train or even missing one!

T

en years back, a passenger travelling by train was satisfied with the kind of food that was served at railway stations. It is no longer the case with today's customers being more quality conscious and knowing better than to pick up food from an average hawker. Mittal and a cousin Abhishek Aggarwal set up Comesum, a multi-cuisine food cafe at Pune railway station in a response to tenders invited by the Indian Railways for cafeterias around railway stations. Today Comesum Food Plaza is a brainchild Unit of RK Group, which resumed 35 years ago, started their career from railway catering business. Seeing the tremendous response and acceptability of quality food gave birth to the new concept of multi Cuisine food plaza (Comesum) a 24 hours campaign of nonstop eating. Comesum provides a heady combination of glamour, glitz and surreal

surroundings in addition to tongue tickling food like hot crispy vada to ice creams ate. The organization is a valid member of Snack Food Association, Virginia, HACCP certified company with a very stringent guideline for food processing and food safety. It is ISO certified, and a national member of Federation of Hotels and Restaurant Association of India. Comesum literally means multi-cuisine in Latin. Therefore, it is no wonder that they have something for everybody with over 350 items on the menu. The menu includes Mughlai, Chinese, Continental, south Indian, bakery products and also street food like chaat. Gujarat! and Marathi food are also on their way to become popular comesum bites very soon. What's more? The cooks come from different regions so that the taste is authentic. Since Comesum caters to the tastes of people from different regions, it becomes necessary to ensure the regional flavour. Now a north Indian passenger who disembarks from a train and visits Comesum will get to eat Rajma Chawal that tastes just like the one available in Delhi.Comesum has an advantage over other food cafes such as Haldiram because they serve both vegetarian and non-vegetarian food and therefore have more variety. Not only is Comesum the best choice for traditional food at any hour of the day, it is also a safe place for women and children to be. Trains in India have a knack for getting delayed to unpredictable times and therefore the ambience at Comesum along with the added advantage of hygienic sanitation facilities and entertaining open area activities for kids come in handy when dealing with impatient little ones. The recent times have seen Comesum transform from just catering to the eating needs of railway travelers to catering to the needs of the late night party going crowd. Comesum being a 24/7 outlet is also the after party hangout of the young and the happening with many thronging in at the late night hours to grab a bite after some hardcore dance moves. Comesum truly comes alive in the night with people from different walks of light coming in together to grab a bite. It looks like a well lit island isolated from the hustle and bustle of the city life where one can just relax, eat and catch up with friends. The prompt service and exhaustive menu are a definite plus

