SURVEY 2012

GUEST COLUMN STEREOTYPES
survey suggest, despite the strict supervision of young women's sexuality, relationships are formed, with at least a percentage of them being sexual. About 21 per cent of all women in small towns, for instance, have dated a member of the opposite sex. The number of metropolitan women is nearly twice that figure at 38 per cent. The gap between metro and small town diminishes considerably among unmarried women. Thus 22 per cent of the unmarried women surveyed in small towns have dated a member of the opposite sex compared to 30 per cent in metros. As the intimacy level increases, the gap declines. Data on unmarried women who had kissed a person of the opposite sex and those who kissed for the first time between the ages of 16 and 18 shows that women from non-metros are on a par with their metro counterparts in pursuing romantic interaction with the opposite sex. In fact, when it comes to the age at which women begin dating, nonmetro women appear to be ahead of their metro counterparts: 30 per cent of all small town women who dated did so for the first time between the ages of 16 and 18, compared to only 19 per cent of metro women in the same age group. The picture, however, shifts when we compare data on married and unmarried women: The figure for unmarried women dating for the first time at that age is tied at 31 per cent for both metro and non-metro. But the figure for married women in small towns who dated for the first time between 16 and 18 years is nearly 33 per cent, as against a mere 13 per cent in the metros. What do we make of this discrepancy? One can speculate that small town women tend to marry early, but are keen to suggest that they too had `dated', in as much as the custom is seen as a sign of being modern, and therefore count going out with their spouse as `dating'. While the phenomenon of premarital relationships is visible across the spectrum from metro to non-metro, a monogamous marriage still remains the accepted frame of reference for sexual activity. For 80 per cent of the respondents, their first sexual partner was their husband; 82 per cent only ever had sex with one person in their lives, and 90 per cent have never had extramarital sex. Yet, conventional wisdom about small towns as being unable to accommodate the possibility of sexual self-expression for women does not hold up to the scrutiny of the survey, with a majority of the women expecting and receiving equal participa-

DESPERATELY SEEKING

SATISFACTION
Small town women are anything but the inhibited, coy types in popular perception. Their active interest in sex is only masked by a reluctance to talk about it.
By Ira Raja

The writer teaches English at Delhi University.

HAPPY FEAT

Are you satisfied with your sex life?
9%

6%

DISSATISFIED Don't Know/ Can't Say

85%
SATISFIED

*Across metros and small towns

hekhar Kapur's The Bandit Queen, when screened in India for the first time in 1994, generally received bad press. One sexual sequence which came in for special criticism depicted Phoolan Devi on top of her lover, Vikram Mallah. In a review of the film, critic and filmmaker Pankaj Butalia remarked that the representation was unconvincing because it was unlikely that a "rustic" woman could have made love in that manner. While the debate on sexuality has moved on since the controversy erupted over The Bandit Queen, benefits of the shift have largely accrued to women of the urban middle class. Popular perceptions, while granting a measure of sexual agency to women from the metro, continue to stereotype women from small towns as being inhibited or coy about taking the initiative in sexual activity. The INDIA TODAY-Nielsen Sex Survey contributes to the study of heterosexual desire and practices of Indian women, especially from non-metropolitan areas. In the process, it counters some of the stereotypes of Indian women generated over the last century by colonial perceptions and policies, but also nationalist narratives of authenticity, and scholarship on gender in the post-colonial era. No longer figures of piety whose main job is to affirm the self-representation of western (or westernised) women as sexually liberated, women from the small towns of India here come across as sexual agents in their own right. Not much is known about the nature of premarital relationships in India except that they are greatly frowned upon. But, as the findings of this

S

RULES DON'TAPPLY

24%
IN KOTA CLAIM THEY HAD SEX WITH THE SAME GENDER.

22%
UNMARRIED WOMEN SURVEYED IN SMALLTOWNS HAVE DATED A MEMBER OFTHE OPPOSITE SEX COMPARED TO 30% IN METROS.
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

48

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

SURVEY 2012

GUEST COLUMN STEREOTYPES
haven'. Homosexuality is another `no-go' area. While 17 per cent women said they would forgive their spouse for having an extramarital affair in order to keep the family together, 63 per cent of these were willing to forgive a heterosexual affair but only 14 per cent were willing to forgive a homosexual affair. In the opinion of 80 per cent of women bisexuality was not acceptable at all and 79 per cent rejected homosexuality. These figures drop slightly for metro women to 67 per cent and 64 per cent respectively. Generally speaking, in surveys about sexual attitudes and practices male respondents are found to inflate the figures to suggest their greater attractiveness to women. Sometimes higher figures of dating for men suggest that men have greater opportunities for sexual play than women. But data generated in this tion from their husbands in sexual survey strongly indicates that men matters and a substantial majorand women are neither inflating ity of 60 per cent claiming to have or underplaying their experience, an equal say in sexual matters. and that opportunities are more or Even as expression of sexuality less the same for both. Data on outside of the frame of marriage SMALLTOWN WOMEN dating for men and women in remains slim, the marital bed in SAY BISEXUALITY IS NOT small towns is thus repeatedly small town India is by no means a ACCEPTABLE ATALL. found to be consistent on a range staid space. The survey is remarkTHE FIGURE DROPS of issues. Even the break-up of able for its clarity on the signifiSLIGHTLY FOR METRO who was their first sexual partner cance attached to sex in the lives WOMEN TO 67%. matches exactly for non-metro and minds of women in small town men and women (5 per cent India. Sixty-six per cent considered sex to be important in their relationships. friend, 1 per cent casual acquaintance, 8 per cent Twenty-three per cent speak of having sexual fan- boyfriend/girlfriend, 80 per cent spouse, 1 per tasies and 30 per cent had watched a porn film at cent stranger, 1 per cent colleague). The clear articulation of women's sexual exsome point. At least half of those who had watched a porn film saw one at least once every couple of pression as it emerges from this survey conflicts months. Although most women did not show much with received images of Indian women as either inclination for experimentation in sexual positions, pious and chaste or erotic and fearsome. But the at least 10 per cent reportedly preferred to be on image of small town women, as thrown up by this top. Incidentally, this figure is the same for women survey, points to an infinitely complex picture that resists such polarisation. If total figures apfrom the metros. This active interest in sex and sexuality is only pear to invite easy generalisations, these are matched by a reluctance to talk about sex. Up to quickly contested by the detail that follows. The survey is significant for an additional rea76 per cent respondents did not discuss sexual matters with their family and the number of peo- son: Although sexuality studies in India have ple willing to consult a sex therapist, either alone steadily gained legitimacy in the last two decades, or with spouse, remains quite low. Friends and TV as social anthropologist Manuela Ciotti notes, emerged as the chief source of information about knowledge about lived heterosexual practices, sex. Given this hesitation in talking openly about especially in non-metropolitan areas, has been sex, perhaps it is not surprising that at least 34 per limited. The necessary critique of `compulsory cent of all respondents in small towns agreed that heterosexuality' has sometimes confused heterosexual norms for heterosexual practices, while porn could play some role in sex education. Incest and homosexuality emerge as the great neglecting the kinds of critical, comic or othertaboos of small town India. While reports of wise confronting perspectives which practising incest in an abusive setting emerge from time to heterosexuals may bring to normative heterosextime--Pinki Virani's Bitter Chocolate being a uality. That this survey opens the door on a whole case in point--there is very little in the survey to new area of possible enquiry must surely count challenge the popular perception of `home as as its chief achievement. 
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

80%

EARLY BIRDS

31%
UNMARRIED WOMEN IN BOTH SMALL TOWNS AND METROS DATED FOR THE FIRST TIME BETWEEN THE AGES OF 16 AND 18.

50

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

