SIGNATURE
R O U G H C U T

KAVEREE BAMZAI

BETWEEN A SABLE AND A SHAWL
o we will now be flooded with information on what the royal mother-in-waiting will wear. Will it be a mix of high street and luxe labels? Will Kate the Great show her thriftiness and recycle her wardrobe? If she does, she can pick up tips from Tavleen Singh's Durbar. Sonia Gandhi, so Singh tells us, would often get her clothes stitched by a darzi in Khan Market, who was so good that Naveen Patnaik mistook a dress for a Valentino. Sonia got a sable coat in Moscow which she sent to Fendi to refit, according to Singh, and is quoted as buying shahtoosh shawls, before they became illegal to possess. Clearly a woman who knows the worth of a good coat and fine shawl will also know the value of a good meal and providing it to the aam aadmi. Some of this innate fashion sense comes from inheritance. It's easier for Priyanka Gandhi Vadra to slum it as a daughter of Amethi--she has inherited her grandmother's collection of handloom saris. Mayawati, new to power and to money, struggled before she found her style statement. No-nonsense hair, workmanlike salwar kameez, she lets the handbags and diamonds do the talking. Dynasty ensures heirlooms, and heirlooms, from Kashmiri shawls to ikat saris, look rather nice in Delhi winters and on TV during critical Parliament debates. A politician has to look the part, otherwise Indira Gandhi would not touch up the silver streak in her hair for special occasions, and Jawaharlal Nehru would not have insisted on a blood-red rose in the buttonhole of his well-cut achkan. In fact, Pupul Jayakar wrote that Indira was as

S

meticulous about her speeches as about her clothes. Before visiting the US at the invitation of President Lyndon Johnson, she wrote to friends to locate make-up that would lessen the shadows under her eyes and make her nose less prominent. Image is everything, so Sushma Swaraj looks every inch the Bharatiya nari, with bindi, sindoor and mangalsutra in place, while Akhilesh Yadav often looks like an accessory of his red cap. Of course it depends on who you are and where you are. Michelle Obama's sharply defined arms are a sign of discipline and control. Paula Broadwell's equally sculpted arms are a sure sign she is a siren waiting for a David Petraeus to fall. When Hillary Clinton was in the White House as the First Lady, her changeable wardrobe and often scrunchie-tied or headband-held hair reflected the nation's confusion. Was she to be pitied because of Bill Clinton's habit of not saying no to temptation? Or was she to be feared because she was too smart to comb her hair herself? As she got about travelling the world as Barack Obama's chief strategist, in her sharp pantsuits and sleek hair, she has become Frontrunner 2016. So please excuse the media for its obsession with Narendra Modi's half kurtas, Rahul Gandhi's facial hair and the strange lengthening of Arvind Kejriwal's Aam Aadmi cap. And pay attention when Kamal Nath turns up for the FDI vote in the Lok Sabha in the Kolkata businessman uniform of safari suit and Sonia Gandhi sports a smart blazer over her sari. They are dressing for success. As for me, I'm just waiting to see what the Royal Baby will wear. 

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

IT'S EASIER FOR PRIYANKA GANDHI VADRA TO SLUM IT AS A DAUGHTER OF AMETHI-- SHE HAS INHERITED HER GRANDMOTHER'S COLLECTION OF HANDLOOM SARIS. MAYAWATI, NEW TO POWER AND TO MONEY, STRUGGLED BEFORE SHE FOUND HER STYLE STATEMENT. SHE LETS THE HANDBAGS AND DIAMONDS DO THE TALKING.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Former prime minister Inder Kumar Gujral. He served as prime minister of the United Front government from April 1997 to March 1998. GUJRAL

Gujral, 92, was known for the `Gujral Doctrine'--five principles for maintaining good neighbourly ties. HONOURED Shah Rukh Khan with the Wissame Al Kafaa Al Fikria (award of intellectual merit), the highest honour in

Morocco. He is the first Indian actor to receive it. RANKED London Olympics silver medallist Vijay Kumar as World No. 2, in the men's 25-metre rapid fire pistol category by the International Shooting Sport Federation.

APPOINTED Uddhav Thackeray as editor of Shiv Sena mouthpieces Saamna and Dopahar Ka Saamna. All powers of party president will also vest with Uddhav. UDDHAV

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

17

