THE BIG STORY

AVIATION

ON AWING AND

APRAYER
Politics and commercial considerations override safety concerns, making Jammu, Patna, Calicut and Mangalore airports the most dangerous to fly into.Will it take another crash for DGCA to act?
By Asit Jolly

ecember 13, 2011. 0740 hours: Indigo Airlines Flight 6E-554, carrying a full load of passengers and crew, takes off with ease from runway 28 at Delhi's Indira Gandhi International Airport. It is an unusually bright winter morning. Visibility holds at a comfortable 2 km-plus. Its powerful twin turbofan engines at full throttle, the Airbus A320-200 climbs to 39,000 ft. The captain sets course for Jammu. In the cabin, seat belt signs are turned off and the passengers-- excited families on pilgrimage to Vaishno Devi, Army officers returning from annual leave, civil servants carrying files to the winter durbar--settle down to the familiar humdrum of the one-hour-and-ten-minute flight. But there is tension on the flight deck. The Instrument Landing System (ILS) at Jammu is non-functional and the length of the runway is considerably reduced due to repairs: Less than 1,700 m of the 2,054-m-long military airstrip is available for landing. Visibility is failing and already below the minimum required. Closing in on their destination, the captain and co-pilot get ready for another "difficult" landing. There is no scope for error. Touchdown at 0910 hours is bumpy, and the

D

brakes automatically engage to slow down the jet. But the tarmac is running out and the captain is forced to engage manual pedals to bring the careening aircraft to a screaming stop, metres from a brick wall that cuts across the end of runway 36. Acrid burnt-rubber fumes rise from the tyre marks. Minutes later, unknown to how close they came to joining Indian aviation's disaster statistics, smiling passengers disembark. This is a sequence replayed several times a day, not just at Jammu but at Patna airport, amid its multitude of problems, as well as at Mangalore and Calicut airports, both precariously set on levelled hilltops in the Western Ghats. Senior safety experts from Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC) warn that another disaster, the kind India saw on May 22, 2010, when Air India Express Flight 812, a Boeing 737, overran the runway and caught fire at Mangalore, killing 158, is imminent. The four airports handle close to five million passengers annually. "Air travellers in India essentially fly on their horoscopes," says A. Ranganathan, 64, a former commercial pilot from Chennai with 20,000 hours of flying experience with domestic and

WRECKAGE OF AIR INDIA EXPRESS FLIGHT 812 THAT CRASHED IN MANGALORE ON MAY 22, 2010
AP

MANGALORE
MANGALORE INTL AIRPORT
Problems Table-top location. Runway end safety areas & side strips inadequate. Lacks capacity to rescue & fight fire on hill slope. Near repeat AI Express Boeing 737-800 nearly ran off the short runway on June 25, 2011, a year after the similar May 22, 2010 AI Express Flight 812 crash. No casualties. foreign airliners. Founder-member of CASAC, set up by Ministry of Civil Aviation as a safety watchdog after the Mangalore crash, he has been unsuccessfully campaigning to implement safe practices in India's aviation sector. Based on a series of on-site inspections conducted since mid-2010, CASAC

has made several recommendations to streamline procedures and upgrade infrastructure at airports where "passenger safety is dangerously compromised". Amid a reassessment of existing aerodrome codes, in line with actual on-ground situations that include obstacles, runway end safety areas (RESA), actual length of runways available to aircraft, and feasibility of instrument-aided landings, they called for an immediate halt to operations by Boeing 737 and Airbus A320 to Jammu and Patna, and wide-bodied Boeing 747s and 777s to Calicut. CASAC has also raised objections on civilian flights to Thoise, the world's highest military airbase at 10,046 ft, near Siachen in Ladakh. Essentially a 3,000 m asphalt strip, Thoise has no

markings, air control tower or runway lights. Ranganathan says flights were allowed without setting up emergency `go-around' procedures for landings at high-altitude airstrips like Thoise.

I PERILOUS TOUCHDOWNS
Permanent obstacles make Patna's runway 400 m shorter than on paper That Patna was unsafe for jet landings was known for decades. An aerial analysis after the Alliance Air crash that killed 60 people on July 17, 2000, showed over 100 obstacles--both permanent structures like electric poles and a clock tower, and temporary ones like tall trees--within the flight paths of both runways 07 and 25, which not only curtail the length of runway available, but also interfere with ILS signals

and render them useless. On November 9, 2010, the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) decreed that owing to the obstacles, actual length of the Patna runway was only 1,556 m, rather than 1,954 m as claimed by Airports Authority of India (AAI) and the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). This is 924 m short of the 2,480 m needed to land an Airbus A320-200, and 534 m less for a Boeing 737-800, for which the reference length is 2,090 m. Advising DGCA to reclassify Patna from a 4C aerodrome to 3C, ICAO said it was only suitable for small turboprop planes. Ranganathan adds, "When corrected further for high summer temperatures and altitude (above sea level), the declared distances on Patna run-

58

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

THE BIG STORY
CLOSE CALLS
Accidents are routinely ignored or listed as mere `incidents' by DGCA
August 14, 2012 Air India Express Boeing 737-800 has a hard landing short of the runway amid rain, in Mangalore.Aircraft bounces and lands further down the tarmac. Undercarriage is damaged. July 9, 2012 Air India Express Boeing 737-800 touches down on the edge in Calicut and skids, breaking several runway lights, before stabilising. March 2, 2012 Jet Airways ATR-72 makes a hard landing at Chandigarh, bounces several times, causing extensive damage to its nose wheel. November 20, 2011 Alliance Air CRJ overshoots Kanpur runway while landing in heavy rain and is damaged. September 2, 2011 Turkish Airbus A340-300 suffers a runway excursion while landing in rain at Kochi. August 28, 2011 Gulf Air Airbus A320 from Bahrain skids off runway while landing in heavy rain at Kochi. June 25, 2011 Air India Express Boeing 737-800 has a "near miss"at Mangalore. Captain opens throttle to try a go-around after a hard landing. Co-pilot pulls back to avoid a crash. Aircraft stops on the edge of hilltop. July 19, 2011 Tail of SpiceJet Boeing 737-900ER strikes ground on landing, suffers extensive damage to underside of fuselage. Damage rectification takes over a month at Chennai. March 7, 2011 Air India A319 makes a high-speed landing at Lengpui,Aizawl, Mizoram, nearly overshooting runway.All tyres burst. January 11, 2011 IndiGo Airbus A320200 lands on nose wheel at Goa airport, damaging its assembly. November 10, 2009 AI Airbus A319 shoots off strip on landing at Mumbai. November 10, 2009 Kingfisher ATR72 shoots off runway on landing at Mumbai.Aircraft has to be written off as a hull loss.

AVIATION
way would be even shorter and highly dangerous for jet operations." Despite many warnings, airlines continue to operate jet flights out of Patna. In an email response to INDIA TODAY on November 16, Arun Mishra, DGCA, claimed that "85 per cent of the obstacles (trees) have been removed/ reduced by AAI", and that this renders the runway fit for jet landings. But he fails to acknowledge the presence of permanent obstacles, insisting that the ILS at Patna is not compromised by secondary signals bouncing off them. Most pilots will tell you landing a Boeing or Airbus in Patna is a "nightmare". "The need to duck down sharply after clearing the trees often destabilises the aircraft dangerously, and forces a go-around," said a pilot. CASAC believes serious air safety concerns are often overridden by politics and commercial considerations. In case of Patna, a NOTAM (notices to airmen) issued by DGCA (A0516/12) asking AAI to stop Boeing and Airbus flights from August 16 was held back after Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar wrote to Union Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh. "As per a news item in a local newspaper, it appears that AAI has decided to implement the revised declared (reduced) distance from August 16, 2012. This will considerably reduce aircraft operations

THE RUNWAY 28 AT CALICUT AIRPORT

KOZHIKODE
CALICUT INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
Fatal flaws Table top location. Runway end safety areas & side strips inadequate. Warning bells AI Express Boeing 737-800 skidded during landing amid heavy rain, undercarriage crashed into several runway lights and broke them, on July 9, 2012. to AAI. Till then, pilots and passengers must battle death daily, as jetliner flights to Jammu continue unabated.

I SLIPPERY CONCOCTION
Thick rubber deposits on Calicut tarmac could send planes careering On July 9, 2012, an Air India Express Boeing 737-800 skidded sharply during landing at Calicut, amid heavy rain. The undercarriage crashed into several runway lights and broke them, before the aircraft swerved back on the runway. There were no injuries on board, but it raised serious safety concerns. The Boeing had come close to plummeting down the hillside, in a disturbing replay of Mangalore 2010. CASAC member Arun Rao's findings from an inspection in August 2011 showed that the airfield layout at Calicut was insufficient for wide-bodied Boeing 747 and 777 and Airbus A330, that routinely used the facility only because DGCA had licensed it for code 4E aircraft. A subsequent survey by Ranganathan in March 2012 suggested the aerodrome be downgraded to 4C, and be given a 240 m RESA at both ends and 150 m side strips--both international safety buffers, given its table-top location and hilly terrain. "A heavy 747 would find it impossible to reject a take-off once initiated," says Ranganathan, adding that the degraded tarmac, with thick rubber deposits left by tyres, together with rain and sandy loam kicked up by aircraft taking off, constitute a slippery concoction that significantly reduces friction. "The chance of a high speed overrun is highly probable," he says. Interestingly, DGCA skirted the issue on a query from INDIA TODAY. Somewhat feebly, Mishra argues, "B-747 and 777s have been operating

PHOTO COURTESY: A.RANGANATHAN

AAI HAD COMMITTED TO FOLLOWING our recommendations at the CASAC meeting in July 2010. But no action was taken on any of our suggestions. Political and commercial considerations have taken precedence." ANANTHAKRISHAN RANGANATHAN, FOUNDER-MEMBER, CASAC
from Patna, causing great inconvenience to everyone," Kumar wrote in his August 6 letter, requesting "postponement" of restrictions. Ranganathan and his team says Patna is a disaster waiting to happen. Contrary to DGCA and state government claims, they say the number of obstacles have actually gone up. They insist there can be no occasion to allow jet flights as the runway is short and "every landing aircraft is a potential death trap".

REGULATORS LIKE DGCA AND AAI are evidently cued to serve the interests of airline managements. The truth would expose them, so they do everything to withhold information from the public." GIRISH KAUSHIK, CHAIRMAN EMERITUS, NATIONAL AVIATOR'S GUILD
of the runway, and the positioning of the ILS localiser for runway 36, in contravention of ICAO rules and AAI'S own manual, separated by a brick wall and barbed fence and next to a busy public road. "Signals from the ILS are deflected by adjacent structures and confuse aircraft as they approach," says a senior IndiGo Airlines pilot. Besides a shortened runway that is barely 1,700 m after correcting for the 60 m end strip and 90 m RESA, Jammu has the added problem of high bird activity. Also, pilots have often reported "unpredictable drone activity (unmanned aircraft) over Jammu airfield". Flying is further restricted as neighbouring Pakistan does not tolerate violations of its airspace. Glossing over these real problems, Mishra is not inclined to put restrictions on Jammu. He insists the absence of safety overrun areas will soon be resolved by transferring forest land

JAMMU
SATWARI AIRPORT
Problems aplenty No runway end safety areas or end strip. Runway available is 1,700 m of 2,054 m. ILS localiser beyond brick wall, and public road leads to confusion. Proximity to Pakistan restricts flight path. Latest scare On December 13, 2011, IndiGo Flight 6E-554 stopped metres from brick wall across end of runway 36.

I NO MARGIN FOR ERROR
Military airbases like Jammu lack basic civilian specifications The aviation watchdog has sought similar flight restrictions on jetliners out of Jammu. Essentially a military airbase, the runway is 2,054 m with no RESA or mandatory 60 m strip on either end. Safety is further compromised by the absence of side strips on either side

PHOTO COURTESY: A.RANGANATHAN

THE ILS LOCALISER AT JAMMU AIRPORT

60

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

THE BIG STORY
THE PATNA AIRPORT

AVIATION

PATNA
LOK NAYAK JAIPRAKASH NARAYAN AIRPORT
No room to manouevre 140 obstacles, from electric poles and a clock tower to tall trees, curtail length of runway available from 1,954m to 1,556 m, and render useless ILS signals. The available length is 924 m, short of the 2,480 m needed to land an Airbus A320. Tragic past An Alliance Air crash killed 60 people on July 17, 2000. ably landed in the trash bin. "The purpose of installing an ILS is defeated when it is not available during the low-visibility rainy season," he says. "Ninety per cent of India's airports would have to be shut down if our regulations and ICAO guidelines were implemented," says an experienced AI pilot, adding, "We operate flights to questionable destinations. Management and politicians decide how safe we are." He cites recent Haj flights where AI carried full passenger loads on Airbus A-330s from Srinagar to Saudi Arabia. "It may have been politically wise for Jammu and Delhi, but it was dangerous and irresponsible on the part of AI and DGCA," he says. DGCA'S subterfuge includes a dubious policy of incorrectly reporting accidents involving damage to aircraft as "incidents", or of completely ignoring them, says Ranganathan. Though Mishra denies this, many such misses by the regulator are listed as accidents on the ICAO website (see box). Aviation safety experts warn that the alarming frequency of close calls, and DGCA'S obvious reluctance to act, could affect Indian aviation's international rating. In 2010, India narrowly missed being downgraded by the US Federal Aviation Administration from Category I to Category II, which it applies to countries that routinely contravene ICAO norms. This would mean higher insurance premiums for Indian carriers, besides blocking expansion overseas. Clearly, middle class Indian frequent fliers have more to worry about their flight plans than rising ticket prices. 

K M KISHAN

out of Calicut for quite some time." His comment drew this retort from a top US-based aviation safety expert: "A sustained unsafe practice does not make it safe," he said, requesting anonymity, as he did not wish to start a row with the Indian Government.

I UNLEARNT LESSONS
Mangalore still lacks requisite rescue and firefighting capacities Unknown to most passengers, the 2010 crash nearly repeated itself in Mangalore on June 25, 2011. An AI Express Boeing 737-800 nearly ran off the runway. As in the case of the fatal aircraft a year before, the captain opened throttle to try a late goaround. Showing greater presence of mind, the co-pilot, however, pulled back sharply, stopping the aircraft on the edge of the runway. A second incident on August 14, 2012 saw another AI Express plane touch down hard and short of the runway, and bounce and land further down. The undercarriage was damaged but passengers had a providential escape. Shockingly, more than two years after the crash, neither the ministry nor DGCA or AAI have made the slightest attempt to initiate corrective action. "There has been no action by DGCA on any of our suggestions," a disillusioned Ranganathan told former aviation secretary and CASAC Chairman Nasim Zaidi on May 20, 2012.

Mangalore still lacks requisite rescue and firefighting capacities. There are four Rosenbauer crash tenders and one Tatra vehicle that serve well for a fire hazard within the airport. But the hill slope--site of the 2010 crash, is still inaccessible, serviced by narrow, poorly-maintained roads. Ranganathan says the overrun area at Mangalore prevents immediate rescue and fire-fighting operations, a reason why CASAC had advised a minimum RESA of 240 m. This would mean a shorter runway and load restrictions on airliners. "AAI had committed to this at the CASAC meeting in July 2010. But nothing has been done. Political and commercial considerations have taken precedence." Sixty-six-year-old Girish Kaushik, formerly a senior pilot with Jet Airways and chairman emeritus of the National Aviator's Guild, is not surprised that DGCA is economical with the truth on airports. "The regulators (DGCA, AAI) are evidently cued to serve the interests of airline managements. The truth would expose their own incompetence, so they do everything to withhold information from the public, or wilfully misinform them," he says. His own experience has been no different. "DGCA sits on complaints for so long that people give up," the pilot says, recalling how missives on the Category 3 ILS at Mumbai becoming non-functional each monsoon invari-

62

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

