THE NUMEROUS PUBLIC PARKS IN SINGAPORE MAKE FOR EXCELLENT STUDENT HANGOUT ZONES

SINGAPORE

East is East
Its promixity to India and courses in business and management, comparable to the best in the West, make Singapore hot in the education sweepstakes
he Singapore Eye, Sentosa Island, Little India and Orchard Street have long been the Lion City's claim to fame. With the government having spent around 80 million Singapore dollars (Rs 360 crore) in educational investments in 2010, it looks like Singapore is looking to add a few other achievements to its repertoire. Already the country's 18 universities and academic institutes have begun commanding international attention and respect. The National University of Singapore (NUS) has been ranked second best in Asia by QS in 2012 and INSEAD Business School was voted as the number one B-school in the Asia-Pacific region by

T

SPE CIAL REPORT

FOREIGN UNIVERSITIES
ready to pitch in to help make the adjustment easier. "NTU has a network of professional services and advisers to 1 NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF SINGAPORE help international students integrate Average tuition fee Rs 5.80 lakh per year. into the university environment and en2 NANYANG TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY sure their studies are as productive and Average tuition fee Rs 6.24 lakh per year. stress-free as possible. The Interna3 SINGAPORE MANAGEMENT UNIVERSITY tional Student Centre in the Student Average tuition fee Rs 8.49 lakh per year. Affairs Office is the first point of contact 4 MANAGEMENT DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTE OF for international students. The centre SINGAPORE Average tuition fee Rs 4.87 lakh per year. assists with administrative matters, ori5 SINGAPORE INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT entation and the basics of getting essenAverage tuition fee Rs 3.58 lakh per year. tial daily provisions. It also organises social programmes for international students so that they can interact with Why Singapore? Ice-Breakers students from other countries as well as with local students," says Professor Er  Low crime rate and excelDI MANASAYABOLEH Meng Hwa, vice-president of internalent transport system. MEMBELI PAYING? tional affairs at NTU.  This small country is home Where do I buy an Over the duration of the course, stuumbrella? to over 60 beaches, a great dents can access professional counseldestination for those looking DI MANASAYAMEMBELI lors free of cost. Most colleges and halls to soak up the sun. PELINDUNG MATAHARI? of residence also come with their own  The country has collaboraWhere do I buy mentors to help guide students and sunscreen? tions with a number of look after their welfare. "My two-year leading universities such as YANG CARAUNTUK experience of studying at a Singapore INSEAD, London School of MAHKAMAH MAKANAN? institute has cast tremendous influence Economics,Yale, Cornell, and Which is the way to the on my academic development, the food court? New York University. shaping of my character, and leadership potential," says Santosh Kumar, (NTU). While some love the cosmopol- Students can now get degrees from the 27, currently pursuing his MBA at PSB itan nature of the country, others are UK, the US, France or Australia by Academy in Singapore. drawn to its commitment to liberal studying in Singapore itself. "Singapore With institutes gearing up to sign education. NUS student Vasudha is a popular destination for students more collaborations with Indian univerThirani says, "NUS has given me the wanting to pursue finance, mana- sities, the country is still looking to exacademic freedom to explore several gement, business administration, ac- pand its presence in the subcontinent. courses ranging from the principles countancy, law and economics. There "Singapore and India enjoy a strong of quantum mechanics to the history is also a lot of financial help provided friendship that is reflected in the many of the Cold War, while majoring for Indians in the form of scholarships education and research agreements that NUS has in place with Indian instiin economics at the same time. It and study loans," adds Sukhwani. While Singais truly inspiring." tutes. We are keen on "The number of Indian students ap- pore is nowhere strengthening our plying to study in Singapore has been near cheap, tuition bond with India," says rising steadily since 2009. It has grown fees and the cost of Tan Eng Chye, deputy specifically because Singapore has living are affordpresident, academic gradually become a leading financial able compared to affairs, NUS. Indian centre and the Asian headquarters for the West. Another students can defimany global MNCs. Singapore offers the key factor that atnitely look forward The greatest perk for me to gorging on Pad perfect launch pad to students looking tracts Indian stuwas to be able to travel at Thai, researching for careers in different fields, business dents is Singapore's any hour of the night in world-class laboraand management in particular," says proximity to India. without having to worry tories and watching Sushil Sukhwani, director of Mumbai- Also, being an about safety. The country is macaws play at based Indian education consultancy Asian country, Indcosmopolitan and provides ian students adapt one of Singapore's firm Edwise International. an excellent experience." many campuses in the Over 16 leading foreign universities easily to the enviAASHNA SINGH, Alumnus, NUS future. have set up centres of excellence in ed- ronment. The uniucation and research in Singapore. versities are always by Sonali Acharjee Works as a Brand Consultant,

Island's Best

STUDENTS ENJOY STATE-OF-THE-ART FACILITIES AT SINGAPORE'S NANYANG TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY

QS in 2011, overtaking IIM, Ahmedabad, which stood at number two. With over 5,000 Indians looking to pursue higher studies in Singapore each year, it isn't merely rankings that keep them interested. With over 60 beaches, excellent transport facilities and a diverse student community, there is much to attract students. "Singapore gives students opportunities to enhance their leadership qualities and prepares them for the real world," says Faraaz Peerbhoy, 19, pursuing his BBA at Singapore Institute of Management. Located close to Malaysia, with Tamil and Chinese influences, students in Singapore are especially fond of its cultural diversity. "You can eat Canadian beef stew, drink Japanese rice wine, study with a group of Nigerians and party with Brazilians--all in one day. It's like taking a trip around the world and getting a world-class degree at the same time," says Kirti Jadega, 27, alumnus of Nanyang Technological University

Kishore Mahbubani

GUEST COLUMN

The Harvard of the East
t takes decades, if not a century or more, to build a great world-class university. The fact that NUS has emerged as one of the world's leading universities 107 years after its birth shouldn't come as a surprise. The success of NUS was not preordained. Indeed, when I studied here from 1967 to 1971, it was at best a good regional university. However, massive investments by the Singapore government, brilliant recruitment policies and outstanding academic research and teaching have led to its spectacular rise in global rankings in recent years. QS ranks it 25th in the world. The success of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy (LKYSPP) mirrors the larger success of NUS. Even though LKYSPP is only eight years old, it's already the third best endowed school of public policy in the world, and it has the second largest executive education programme after the Harvard Kennedy School. It's also the second most generous school of public policy in the world after the Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton. Overall, Singapore is a great place to live. Those who want to network with the next generation of Asian leaders will find no better place than Singapore.

I

Kishore Mahbubani is the current dean of the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at NUS. He is the author of The New Asian Hemisphere.

Communication Council, Delhi
56
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

NEW

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

