LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

DIVA TO DUD
At 18 Rhea Chakraborty was MTV's youngest VJ, scooped up by the channel after she appeared on the Teen Diva show in 2009. No surprises then that she is already making her way into Bollywood at 20. Mere Dad Ki Maruti has her in the lead role of a college hottie opposite Saqib Saleem. The comedy, directed by Ashima Chibber, is set against a loud Punjabi wedding in Chandigarh. But the picture isn't all rosy. Her earlier tryst with acting with director M.S. Raju's Telugu film Tuneega Tuneega proved to be a dud, with less than flattering reviews on her performance. Can she pull her act together?

Mixed Doubles
Tennis player Rohan Bopanna,32,may have missed out on winning the ATP World Tour with partner Mahesh Bhupathi,but he is ending the year on a high. He tied the knot with Supriya Annaiah,his fiancée of a year,in a traditional Kodava wedding ceremony on November 25 in his hometown Kodagu. After the break he hits the courts again with new partner,Rajeev Ram from USA.

Love of Pi
Meet the girl who steals young Pi's heart in Ang Lee's Life Of Pi. Shravanthi Sainath, a 17-year-old from Chennai,had not faced a movie camera before auditioning for Lee.She clinched the role of Anandi,a Tamil girl from Puducherry,who catches Pi's eye at a dance class.What's next for this ne wcomer? For now,it's a project called Class 12 Board Exams.Good luck.

GOING UP
Virender Sehwag's gold collection, with DDCA rewarding him with 100 gold coins to mark his 100th Test cricket match. Happiness in director Rohan Sippy's household. He had a daughter on November 27.

Take Two
It's been a while since the frenzy over Peepli [Live] died down.Its writer-director Anusha Rizvi,has meanwhile been steadily working on the screenplay of her second project, Opium,
PHOTOGRAPHS BY YOGEN SHAH

based on Amitav Ghosh's novel Sea Of Poppies.While husband Mahmood Farooqui is again on board as co-director,she is filling the producer's shoes too. The differences with Aamir Khan,her last producer,are clearly not forgotten.


GOING DOWN
Chances of a peaceful settlement,with Rajesh Khanna's family summoned to court over a complaint filed by Anita Advani. The remake of Zanjeer, with producer Amit Mehra running into legal trouble over rights.

Compiled by Nishat Bari and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

88 Volume XXXVII Number 50; For the week Dec 4-10, 2012, released from Friday onwards

NEW

KPN

