SURVEY 2012

CITY REPORTS

BHARAT SURPRISES INDIAWITH ITS

SEXY SECRETS
THE HINTERLAND IS WHERE THE TRUE CONNOISSEURS OF PLEASURE THRIVE. FROM KOLHAPUR TO KOTTAYAM, VIGNETTES OF LIFE ON THE SEX LANE.
adapti Ladkiyan, playing in Moradabad, is a skin film, or "sacksy (sexy) film" as a theatre manager puts it. It has two kinds of posters. Outside the cinema, a topless blonde shields her ample bosom with her left hand. In others across town, her chest is blacked out, while her face and legs are visible. "It always happens," says the manager. "Just outside the theatre the bare breasts are okay, but in the city it is not." The precinct of the cinema is private; the canvas of the city is public. Skin show is welcome. But it all depends on location, location, location. Sexuality in India is like a bikini: It's a battle between what you can reveal and what you conceal. At a sex education talk in Kolhapur, Maharashtra, a sexologist thinks his audience is too shy to talk about sex. So, he tells them to write questions anonymously. The first question a Class X asks the doctor is if she can contract HIV. Her quandary: She has two men in her life and a thing for threesomes. Indians may shed their clothes, but not their traditions. A mother-ofthree commercial sex worker in Salem wears her mangalsutra while doing business. Kottayam folks in Kerala (which literally means the land of coconuts) love refined coconut oil for their rub-downs. In other settings, sex departs from the grid of custom. Mizo society has a courtship ritual called `in rim', in which a suitor can call on a woman at her home and spend time with her under an elder's watch. Now, men and women meet in Aizawl without parental guidance. Guntur's lovers lured their sweethearts with jasmine flowers once. Now, they watch porn together and hook up at the Suryalanka beach. Are we living in an age where individual anxiety surrounding sex is finally over? After all, ours has been a culture where mainstream films had no problem with depicting rape, but were coy about kissing. It is the same culture in which you could be killed for loving a person of an unacceptable caste or religion. Is lust okay, and love isn't? The 2012 INDIA TODAY-Nielsen Sex Survey is now out. The respondents include 5,246 men and women from four metros and 12 towns. At 63, Kota has the highest percentage of those who have tried anal penetration. Jamnagar has the highest rate of people going on blind dates and tops the charts for oral sex. Ratlam has the highest number of people who have attempted threesomes. Kottayam people use sex enhancers the most. Ten per cent in Asansol think wife swapping is an acceptable adult game. Guntur folks love the French kiss: 76 per cent have tried it, the highest among all towns. Do small towns beat the metros as the heroes of India's Real Dirty Picture? Skim these pages and find out. by Rahul Jayaram

T

salem

FORBIDDEN FRUIT TOO JUICYTO MISS IN MANGO CITY
There are several profiles to choose from on Cyberdating.net. The sexually repressed: "Hi, I am Mani and am looking for sex with you... only for sex... bcz i am sex lover... so contact me soon for real sex or video chat... my mailbox," reads one. The sensitive lover: "Hi Girls, I am Charming, Sexy, Handsome Man. I want 2 make friendship with girls. I want to Mindblowing Sex with girls. I Respect Girls Feeling, I Understand the Girls Feeling, try to make her happy with Friendship and Sex," goes another. And, even swingers: "We are straight couples 36M 36F. Looking for another couple 30 to 40yrs for soft swinging, swinging, naughty talk, Cyber Sex etc." Each profile is accompanied by a phone number or an option to directly message them. Some have blurry pictures, most don't. What may surprise you is these promises of mind-blowing, naughty, swinging, sexcapades all come

from a city located 340 km from Chennai: Salem. Also known as Steel City or Mango City, Salem's official website states it is surrounded by hillocks--a geologist's paradise. Clearly, there is more to the city. Who would be the most shocked to find out that these profiles were from Salem? The people of Salem themselves. There's an outward innocence about the people, still too shy to openly talk about dating, let alone sex. Rebuffed by stammering men and blushing women, we turn to the professionals. Rohini A., 32, has a deadbeat husband, three children and has been a commercial sex worker for five years. She still wears her mangalsutra and doesn't sell sex at night. Her children might suspect something wrong, she explains. She calls her trysts with men `meetings'--she has about 10 a week."I always have to be naked for them. They ask me to remove my clothes one by one," she says. Sumathi G., 29, says they come to her because she gives them what they want: Blow jobs."They tell me their wives never do it for them," she says. Some men prefer male sex

workers. Ramu M., 36, a male sex worker since he was 16, says most of his clients aren't closet gay men in unhappy marriages."Actually, most of them are straight, I can tell," he says. So, why do they come to him? "Because they want to have anal sex with someone and their wives don't let them," he says. So, why not go to female sex workers? "I'm not sure. I think this does not count as cheating on their wives. Or, maybe, oral sex from me is better than getting it from a woman," he says with a giggle. He gets clients through mobile phone as well as online."It scares me a little, because all the info is right there. But work is work," he says. Just to make sure the profiles online are real, we decide to call a few of them. The one who promised mind-blowing sex does not pick up (probably busy having mind-blowing sex) and the swinger couple's phone is off. Finally, the one who called himself a `sex lover' picks up."I created that profile in college. I work at a software company now. I'm not married," he says. "Do you live in Salem?" we ask. "Yes. Do you?" Needless to say, we hang up.
by Lakshmi Kumaraswami

48%
INDIVIDUALS SURVEYED IN SALEM PREFER SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES AS A MEDIUM TO LOOK FOR A DATING PARTNER.

8%
DON'T EXPECT EQUAL PARTICIPATION FROM THEIR PARTNER WHEN THEY HAVE SEX.

Illustrations by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

32

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

SURVEY 2012

CITY REPORTS

Kottayam

SEX ON THEIR MINDS, BUT MUM'S THE WORD IN PUBLIC
The survey shows 41 per cent people in Kottayam think it is fine to have flings outside marriage as long as the spouse does not get to know. One person in 10 uses sex enhancers, and half the people think sex is hugely important in life. The percentages of such responses are higher than those from the other centres surveyed. But their apparent vigour between the sheets finds no vocal articulation from the townsfolk, mostly tradition-loving Syrian Catholic Christians. Incidentally, Kottayam's Meenachil was where Arundhati Roy anchored her Booker Prize-winning novel, The God of Small Things, and invited the community's wrath. Roy was sued for obscenity by local lawyers Sabu Thomas and G.M. Idikkula, who felt the book "excited sexual desires and lascivious thoughts" , with pages devoted to the sexual love between a Syrian Catholic girl and an untouchable Hindu man. The author was able to obtain a favourable court order. Kottayam is known for other peculiarities too. It is called the town of letters, lakes and latex.The hub of Kerala's media and publishing industries has many of the state's beautiful lakes and a flourishing rubber trade crucial to its economy. Some of the rubber ends up at Hindustan Latex a couple of hours away in Thiruvananthapuram. Nirodh condoms are made for the country there. Affluence, however, has not changed Kottayam's conservative face. Sex is not something one could expect to have a casual conversation on. A chemist on the bustling KK Road says there is nothing to suggest people in the town use significantly more sex enhancers than others."We have customers for Ayurvedic aphrodisiacs just as in any town. Some use even refined coconut oil as a lubricant for sexual purposes. But it's hardly anything special here," he says and directs further queries to two neighbouring pharmacists, who express similar nonchalance. What about sex outside marriage? "Unbelievable," says a senior priest, who has been hearing out the laity's private confessions for two decades and would be privy to some of the town's intimate thoughts."I would not have hesitated to say so if there were signs adultery was catching on. It is preposterous to say more than one-third of the people think adultery is okay, if discreet," he says. That gets some endorsement from the medical world too."I have seen no signs of Kottayam people putting sex higher than others elsewhere among life's priorities," says Dr K. Pramodu, chairman of the Institute of Sexual and Marital Health in neighbouring Kochi, claimed to be the country's first multi-discipline centre for sexual health. He maintains a database of more than 10,000 patients, including from Kottayam. "There are no signs of extramarital sex rocketing there either. Kottayam is still fairly conservative and we have not seen big changes in sexual behaviour or concerns there. If anything, Malappuram and Kozhikode, about 200 km north of Kottayam, might fit the survey findings about the emphasis on sex better. Sex still has near-sacred cultural connotations in those parts, even for people in their 60s," says Dr Pramodu. by Rajeev P.I.

guntur

FROM FLOWERY FOREPLAY TO USED CONDOMS STREWN ON DOORSTEPS
There was time when a husband bought a jasmine gajra (flowers for the hair) for the wife as a gesture requesting sex that night. Things have not remained that subtle in Guntur any more. A source from a well-known medical college, who requests anonymity, says sexual indulgence is definitely on the rise. A town with a number of educational institutions, Guntur sees students coming in from everywhere."While earlier, students would live mostly in hostels on campus, these days more and more opt for apartments. Easy access to the opposite sex is a big factor. Many of these institutions are on the outskirts, with several not-so-frequented areas around. The students don't feel inhibited; kissing and heavy petting are quite common," the source says. She says another significant factor is that PEOPLE IN GUNTUR even now there aren't many enterTHINK ONE-NIGHT tainment spots in Guntur. There STANDS ARE OKAY, are no discotheques or pubs and only a few shopping malls. MUCH MORE THAN "Theatres and parks have become IN OTHER CENTRES. the perfect destinations for sexual indulgence. Besides this, they either watch porn extensively, a big influence in itself, or amuse themselves by hanging out together, which eventually leads to kissing, touching, romancing over the phone and cyber sex." Libraries open 24 hours are hot hangouts at night and used condoms lying outside hostel doors are seen at times. Says IT professional Susheel Jain, 38, from Guntur, now settled in Hyderabad,"Youngsters from Guntur frequent Amravati and Suryalanka in the vicinity. These destinations, especially Suryalanka, a beach getaway, are perfect spots for private time. And also perfect for sexual encounters." by PVB Bhaskar

48%

41%
RESPONDENTS SAY EXTRAMARITAL SEX IS ACCEPTABLE AS LONG AS ONE'S SPOUSE DOES NOT GETTO KNOW

9% RESPONDENTS IN
THE TRADITION-LOVING KERALATOWN ALWAYS USE SEX ENHANCERS WHILE HAVING SEXUAL INTERCOURSE.

34

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

SURVEY 2012

CITY REPORTS

KOTA

ANONYMITY GIVES SWOTTING STUDENTS LICENCE TO THRILL
Twenty-one-year-old Anulekha made the somewhat convoluted train trip from Raipur 15 months ago to discover a delightful anonymity amid thousands of bright young people like her in Kota. Finally free from her protective family back home, the charming youngster found herself a boyfriend by the end of her first week at a coaching centre."I took a whole year to discover myself.This year, I am going to study," she declares much to the dismay of her friends, many of them evident suitors hoping to replace boyfriend number four. Folklore has it that the Chambal infuses rebellion in men and women who drink from its placid waters. But the mighty river that once spawned bloodthirsty brigands like Man Singh, Nirbhay Gujjar, Sultana and Phoolan Devi is now engendering a new kind of insurrection, the kind that bucks the straightjacketed conservatism of long-standing social mores. It's a quiet but happy explosion into a new sexuality willing to give just about anything a go minus the frowns. Every year, a tenth of Kota's million-strong population renews itself, with 100,000 fresh footfalls from Delhi, Punjab, Haryana, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra. The two-decade-old coaching industry is the cumulative force that drives the city's economy. Allen Careers Coaching Centre, the largest such establishment in town, enrolled nearly 50,000 students this year, earning roughly Rs 250 crore. It is estimated the students contribute twice of what they pay in tuitions (Rs 1,000 crore) annually to the local economy in rentals, food bills and transport costs. It is hardly surprising then that the townspeople--residents, shop owners, politicians and policemen--go out of their way to "protect the kids" . There are numerous stories of auto drivers bringing drunk girls safely home and policemen thrashing local hoodlums trying to take advantage of a coaching student. Shop owners at City Mall, the essential evening hangout place for young couples, are more than indulgent. The guards at Chambal Garden, a green haunt along the river bank, happily look the other way while the young surrender to raging libidos amid the shrubbery.

63%
RESPONDENTS IN KOTA SAYTHEY HAVE TRIED ANAL SEX,THE HIGHEST PERCENTAGE ANYWHERE. SAY THEYWOULD FORGIVE THEIR SPOUSE FOR HAVING AN EXTRAMARITAL AFFAIR.

40%

58%
RESPONDENTS ARE OKAYWITH THE IDEA OF DETACHING EMOTIONS FROM SEX.

Forty-eight year old Congress leader and former district NSUI chief Naresh Hada is not in the least surprised with the survey findings. Not even the one that says 63 per cent of the respondents have tried anal sex. He says,"Marriages are delayed. Boys and girls are well in their 30s by the time they want to settle down. But their hormones kick in on cue." A Rajput, Hada is straight-faced when he says, "It would be unfair to insist on a virgin bride for my son." Sachindra Singh, 27,Amit Patni, 37 and Amit Singh, 28, three old friends at the mall's coffee shop, admit Kota is unrecognisable from the years when they were in school. Dating and long drives down Bundi Road or Baran Road are common. But the real change, they say,"is happening behind closed doors" . In the old days, Kota was mythically described as the spot where "a goat and a tiger could coexist in harmony" . Coaching students have rediscovered the city as the place of the `Kiss Of The Angel' , where despite appearances, anything's possible.
by Asit Jolly

44%
RESPONDENTS IN KOLHAPUR SAYTHEY ALWAYS HAVE AN ORGASM WHILE HAVING SEX.

Kolhapur

aizawl

WHERE BIGGER IS BETTER
During a sex education talk, Dr Rahul Patil, a well-known sexologist in Kolhapur, was confronted with this problem written anonymously by a Class X girl: "Sir, I have two boyfriends. I have sex with both of them at the same time. I go down on one of them, while the other goes down on me. I am scared I will contract HIV. Please help." The times they are a-changin' in Kolhapur. After Baleshwar, Kolhapur has the highest percentage (59) of people who are open to visiting a sex therapist. Dr Rajsinh Sawant, a sex therapist who sees 60 patients a week, says,"Many men are worried they have small penises and want a bigger size." He explains the Western penises they see in porn films are exaggerations, with participants having had implants. Female patients regularly seek advice for bigger and shapelier breasts. A medicine shop owner says, "Women regularly ask for lubricants. We didn't have them, but we have started stocking some now." "Through pornography, people have become more aware of how to satisfy themselves and their partners," says Patil, who is doing a PhD on the subject, wherein he will defend the use of porn for sexual and psychological healing. Kolhapur is a city known for its sharp, hot cuisine. It's not averse to spicing up the hot stuff between the sheets either.
by Rahul Jayaram

MULTIPLE PARTNERS COCK A SNOOK AT MORAL POLICING
Aizawl is the only centre surveyed with more than 10 per cent people who have had more than five sexual partners. Expectedly, the percentage of those who have had only one sexual partner is the lowest (34) in small town India. Aizawl also has the highest percentage of individuals (33) who have been in live-in relationships. The narrow, winding roads of the town buzz with the macho aggression of young men in their twenties, zipping across on motorbikes, bodies revealed in tight sleeveless undershirts showing off fancy tattoos. Girls are absent as pillion riders inside the town area. But make no mistake; just 20 minutes

11%

HAVE HAD MORE THAN FIVE SEX PARTNERS; 34% HAVE HAD JUST ONE.

from the main town on the boozy stretch towards Lenpui airport is Rangvamual, where female pillion riders are seen aplenty. Local community groups are not amused with that. The most influential such group,Young Mizo Association, often raids sexual hotspots and rounds up `women of the street' . But that's no deterrent. At pharmacies, the morningafter pill is the most sought-after item. Youngsters use fake names and Facebook profiles to hook up on fantasy group pages. Mizo society used to practise the `in rim' custom, where suitors could call on young women and interact under a chaperoning elder's presence. That has given way to private dates, and even casual sex. by Chitra Ahanthem

36

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

SURVEY 2012

CITY REPORTS

ratlam

IN CITY OF SLEAZE,ORGIASTIC DELIGHTS COME WITH EASE
11%
RESPONDENTS IN RATLAM HAVE TRIED THREESOMES, THE HIGHESTAMONG ALL SMALLTOWNS.

14%
RESPONDENTS ARE OKAYWITH HOMOSEXUALITY EVEN IF IT INVOLVES ONE'S SPOUSE.

Pornographic movies have been banned from the talkies in Ratlam and tawdry blue-film DVDs are available only at select stores, but scratch the surface and a netherworld of amateurs indulging in furtive pleasures makes itself known. From homosexuals who meet surreptitiously to eye young lads to 13-year-olds watching hardcore porn in seedy cubicles, as reported by a cyber cafe operator in Do Batti market, this sleepy town in middle India surprises with its sinful libido. Over two years, Dr Abhay Ayohri, nodal officer for HIV/AIDS at the district government hospital, has come across at least 900 cases of men who have sex with men. He attributes the trend to the city's proximity to the opium belt."The highway stretching across Ratlam, Mandsaur and Neemuch in the Malwa region of western Madhya Pradesh is home to acres of legally produced poppy. Men engage in homosexual acts after drug use, often by force," he says. Sunny, 40, a cycle store owner who performs at Ram Leelas, discovered he was gay at the age of 18. A father of two, he talks with comic exaggeration about his escapades with men. He claims to have about 150 `friends'and says they wait like college students for someone's house to be available for some action."These sessions are not restricted to two men. Some prefer anal sex, some like oral sex, some keep it at fingering and kissing," he adds casually. The quiet junction town put on the map by Imtiaz Ali's film Jab We Met in 2007 was derided as the city of sleaze. But Pawan Sharma, bureau chief at an evening Hindi newspaper, trashes his hometown's fleshpot image."Such activities are limited to the highway stretch near Neemuch, 35 km from the city, where sex workers line up on the road," he says. However, Vitthal Rao Bele, a worker with local NGO Samarpan Sanstha, cites an increasing number of domestic maids reporting HIV-related issues."They are gradually succumbing to consumerist aspirations and straying into prostitution. They expand their web of clients through word of mouth and service colonies they are employed in." Within this community, most people have worked out ways to realise their fantasies.As per the survey, at 95, Ratlam has the highest percentage of people who have had their sexual fantasies played out in reality.And the lowest percentage (13) of those who have shared these fantasies with their regular partners. by Sanhita Sinha Chowdhury

38

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

