CR IME

PONTYCHADHASHOOTOUT PONTYCHADHASHOOTOUT
In 1985, Fauji dropped out of school after failing his Class XII exams and found employment as a truck driver. Keen to see his `wayward' son settle down, Roor Singh bought him his first truck in 1987. But out to make quick money, former associates say Namdhari employed the vehicle to smuggle illicitly felled khair trees for use in the pan masala industry. "His truck was impounded on two occasions. Both times he escaped prosecution," says his classmate. But the trucking days were evidently only a means to his eventually chosen calling of a gun-toting henchman--something that in time also gave him a much-coveted entry into Uttarakhand's politics. After a brief stint with Deendayal Singh Bhullar, the former Bazpur block pramukh, Namdhari joined Kashipur legislator Harbhajan Singh Cheema as his personal bodyguard. Cheema, who had considerable stakes in local mining operations, needed protection in a land dispute with Gurbachan Lal Sharma aka `Pandit', then a dreaded don heading Bazpur's forestry mafia.

Sukhdev Singh Namdhari, once Ponty Chadha's most trusted aide, may have let greed get the better of him
By Asit Jolly

THE MAN WHO KNEWTOO MUCH
e fired the final shots in the gory climax to the years-old family feud that left liquor baron Ponty Chadha and his younger brother Hardeep Singh dead on November 17, casting a curtain of uncertainty over the siblings' Rs 20,000-crore business empire spread over seven states. Forty-five-year-old Sukhdev Singh Namdhari, the last man to see the Chadha brothers alive and a crucial eyewitness to their deaths at the disputed Chhattarpur farmhouse, 42 Central Drive, is now in custody of the Delhi Police. He has been charged with murder and destruction of evidence. Delhi Police investigators claim indisputable evidence that Namdhari shot Hardeep and are said to be awaiting the coroner's report to determine if any of the fatal bullets extracted from Ponty's body were fired from his weapon, a .30 bore pistol. But who is Sukhdev Namdhari? A much-feared man in Uttarakhand, who, until his ignominious arrest from Bazpur on November 23, enjoyed unhindered access to the highest political corridors in the nascent hill state. Thanks to his evident clout with the Sangh Parivar and BJP, in 2006 Namdhari was appointed state president of the RSS affiliate Rashtriya Sikh Sangat, a position he still holds. He also served as chairman of the Uttarakhand Minorities Commission since 2010 and was unseated by the incumbent Congress government on November 20 only after his name figured in the Chadha killings. Premised on the evident proximity

NAMDHARI

H

between Ponty and Namdhari, investigators have pieced together a treacherous scenario where Namdhari stood to gain stupendously in case of Hardeep's and particularly Ponty's death. Ponty not only trusted him enough to let him handle his business operations in Uttarakhand but allegedly also to invest crores in property held benami by Namdhari and many of his relatives. A remand application submitted by the police in Delhi's Saket Court on December 2 claimed Namdhari had `admitted' that properties were bought in Haldwani, Nainital and Rudrapur. Delhi Police are also in touch with authorities in South Africa to verify reports that Ponty had purchased 2,000 acres there in Namdhari's name. The son of a marginal farmer, Roor Singh of village Talli near Bazpur, Namdhari grew up under the shadow of rising militancy in neighbouring Punjab in the early 1980s. An undisputed gang leader with an early fascination for guns at the Bazpur Inter College, he adopted the alias `Fauji' (soldier) in Class IX. "It was how the boys began addressing him after his father bought him a pair of olive green jungle boots," says a former class fellow. "He loved it and the tag stuck."
PONTY (LEFT); HARDEEP CHADHA

I TWO FEUDING FACTIONS
NAMDHARI'S ARRIVAL FUELS VIOLENCE IN TERAI Namdhari's associates recall that his arrival on the scene instantly stepped up the ongoing hostility between the two feuding factions. The years 1993 to 1995 witnessed a spate of killings wherein Pandit and his men openly targeted local Sikh leaders including one particularly daring shootout within the Kashipur Court complex where Kewaljit Singh Bhullar and Gurnarain Singh Bhatti were shot. Cheema and his clan, including Namdhari, fled to Punjab and did not return until February 1995. Pandit was shot dead on February 7, 1995. Seven people including Namdhari were booked in the case wherein former militant Bakshish Singh `Sheesha' also figured. Cheema claims "Pandit was killed by Sikhs seeking revenge". The Pandit assassination was seen as Namdhari's real coming of age in Uttarakhand's growing criminal-politician nexus.

46

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

PARVEEN NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

CR IME

PONTYCHADHASHOOTOUT PONTYCHADHASHOOTOUT
PRAVEEN KUMAR BHATT

In early 1996, the Pandit and Cheema camps made peace with each other. Fauji would have been left without a mentor but for the fateful appearance of Ponty Chadha, who was then looking to expand his hold in Uttar Pradesh. Namdhari, feared by common folk and avidly wooed by politicians of every affiliation, was just the man Ponty was looking for. Starting with the Chadha family's mining interests in Haridwar, in a 16-year-long association that ended only with Ponty's death on November 17, Namdhari was gradually given complete control of liquor baron's business operations in Uttarakhand. Ponty was involved with sand and rock mining, stone crushers, liquor and real estate in the state. It helped that the henchman was linked closely with local politicians. His proximity to BJP's former Bazpur MLA Arvind Pandey is said to have given Namdhari a direct line to the then chief minister, Bhagat Singh Koshiyari. Alongside promoting Ponty's businesses, Namdhari used his BJP connections also to fulfil his own political aspirations. In 2006, he was made state president of the RSS-affiliate Rashtriya Sikh Sangat and just four years on in 2010, the then BJP chief minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank inducted him as chairman of the Uttarakhand Minorities Commission, a constitutional position. "He even began dressing like a neta," says a former associate alluding to Namdhari's white kurta-pyjama--a change from his earlier shirt-and-trousers style-- and signature flat-front turban in the style of the Namdhari sect. But following his arrest in the Chadha killings, Pokhriyal and Arvind Pandey, who represents the Gadarpur constituency, have distanced themselves from Namdhari. "Namdhari's name was recommended by the party organisation," the former chief minister told INDIA TODAY. Insisting that he only knew Namdhari as "a party colleague", Pandey in fact derided his former `friend' saying "his working was always suspicious and therefore I parted company with him". Though after his arrest, BJP revok-

ed Namdhari's membership on November 26, party leaders including Uttarakhand state President Bishen Singh Chufal and Leader of Opposition Ajay Bhatt publicly protested the state government's decision to remove him as chairman of the minorities commission. "The party will stand by Namdhari until the charges are proved against him," Chufal had bravely stated.

NAMDHARI (SECOND FROM RIGHT) AT AN RSS SHAKHA AT BAZPUR IN THE LATE 1990s

I PONTY PROTECTION
DESPITE CRIMINAL CASES AGAINST HIM, NAMDHARI WAS UNTOUCHABLE It is perhaps such patronage that helped Ponty's henchman escape conviction despite being booked on charges that include murder, dacoity and criminal intimidation. There are 15 cases still pending in three police stations--Bazpur, Kashipur and Rampur (Uttar Pradesh). Successive district magistrates at Bazpur have failed to act on police recommendation to suspend his licences for a rifle and a double-barrelled shotgun since 2003. More recently in 2011, state excise officials delayed initiation of recovery proceedings worth crores following a raid on a stone crusher owned by Namdhari. Investigations in the wake of his arrest have thrown up even more startling revelations including that he used

a fake address and ration card to procure a passport from the Jalandhar Passport Office. He allegedly used that passport to accompany Ponty on several overseas excursions over the past five years. A probe by the Punjab Food & Civil Supply Department shows that no ration card was ever issued to Namdhari. District Food & Supply Controller T.S. Chopra says the document used to get the passport was fake. Incredulously though, the verification report submitted to the RPO by the Jalandhar police falsely confirmed that Namdhari was a "bona fide resident of Janian Village" in Punjab. The Delhi Police's claim that Namdhari was the root of the dispute between Ponty and Hardeep is denied by those who knew the brothers. "Ponty's reliance on Namdhari may have rankled Hardeep but his essential dispute was over the apportioning of the massive family assets," says a senior Punjab politician adding that the henchman was no outsider and almost a member of the Chadha family since 1996. As for Namdhari, Ponty represented the proverbial goose that delivered a steady but unending supply of golden eggs. Did he turn greedy and slaughter the bird? 

48

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

