SIGNATURE
L O C O M O T I F

S. PRASANNARAJAN

FEAR OFTHE FOREIGN I
deology is dead, and let ideas flourish. Unless you are a resident of such an exotic place as Pyongyang or Havana or Caracas, it is unlikely that your life will be subordinated to the higher truth of the Book. For all practical purposes, even in China, Mao sells more in the souvenir shop than in the power corridors of Zhongnanhai. God in the marketplace is no longer the bearded Jehovah of socialism in spite of all the fashionable blather about the return of Marx as the saviour of governments made poorer by capitalism. Here in India though, strange stirrings of ideology are reducing the distance between what should otherwise be politically incompatible. The party most experienced in the management of power has always been more comfortable on the left of Centre. For Congress with a Gandhi at the helm, the Nehruvian middle path after Nehru has always meant an adherence to the bad habits of socialism. When Manmohan Singh got the top job, he, like his erstwhile master Narasimha Rao, was a lucky outsider, but the reputation of the technocrat was formidable. Even if his first term as prime minister was not exactly "the moderniser at play", his daring position on the nuclear deal with America marked the beginning of political Manmohan, and his refusal to be browbeaten by Marxists--still floating in the borrowed slogans of anti-imperialism--put him on the right side of history. Well, briefly. Manmohan Part Two was a project in unmaking his own legacy as moderniser. Once feted abroad as the new wise old man of the East, he suddenly became the patron saint of one of the most unashamedly corrupt regimes on earth. In spite of the pretence about global aspiration, India was again that Third World stereotype sustained by a

bloated, discredited ruling elite. Then FDI in retailing happened. That was a dying regime's last gasp for redemption. Nevertheless, the reform born out of desperation rather than conviction brought back a flash of vintage Manmohan. It also set off the most regressive ideological configurations in Indian politics. Predictably, the last proofreaders of the redundant red Book saw in this a betrayal of the nation--and the invasion of imperialism. As red flags of national defence fluttered over the endangered Indian bazaar, it was a sight to behold: you rarely get a chance to see Indian comrades as nationalists. But when saffron joined red, the counterargument to foreign investment in retailing resulted in the strangest of ideological brotherhoods. Once again, BJP has proved that it is not worthy of being a claimant to the right political place in India. There was a time when the party bought its ideological wares from the archival sites of a vandalised history or the black market of mythology. The party did outgrow that idyllic make-believe of Ram Rajya--only to land in the comfort zone of our neighbourhood grocery shop. It is a great leap in self-defeatism. If BJP aspires to be the right wing party of twenty-first century India, it cannot afford to continue as a party of shopkeepers. The Indian right has never won the culture war, and the right anywhere seldom did. It is now in danger of losing the economic war as well--and it is a war the right has traditionally won. It is not Mulayam and Mayawati who keep Manmohan modern. The prime minister is just an item on their negotiation table. It is the Indian right, frightened by the foreign and abandoned by ideas, that sustains a cracked icon of diminishing market value.  aired by a local television channel, creating nationwide furore. DROPPED Yuvraj Singh, Harbhajan Singh and Zaheer Khan, from the Indian team for the fourth and final Test against

IF BJP ASPIRES TO BE THE RIGHT WING PARTY OF TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY INDIA, IT CANNOT CONTINUE AS A PARTY OF SHOPKEEPERS. THE INDIAN RIGHT HAS NEVER WON THE CULTURE WAR, AND THE RIGHT ANYWHERE SELDOM DID. IT IS NOW IN DANGER OF LOSING THE ECONOMIC WAR AS WELL--AND IT IS A WAR THE RIGHT HAS TRADITIONALLY WON.

S I G N P O STS
RESIGNED MP Upendra Kushwaha, from Janata Dal (United) to "protest the dictatorial attitude" of Bihar Chief
KUSHWAHA

Minister Nitish Kumar. CONVICTED Eleven of the 16 accused in the July 9 Guwahati molestation case in which a young woman was assaulted outside a bar and the footage was

England at Nagpur. APPOINTED Senior NCP leader Ajit Pawar, as the deputy chief minister of Maharashtra.
PAWAR

18

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

