YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

Pandit Ravi Shankar and the sitar are practically synonymous. Even at the ripe old age of 92, he performs at concerts. Taking Indian music to global audiences and incorporating Western elements in his repertoire, Shankar has successfully passed on his glorious lineage to his daughter Anoushka, 31, who performs with him besides charting out a successful independent career. From the days of her first public performance when she was only 13 to her latest album, Traveller (2011), Anoushka is the face of a new wave of Indian classical music that marries tradition with contemporary innovation. The duo will be competing against each other at the 55th Grammy Awards, with both being nominated in the same Best World Music Album category. In an email conversation moderated by INDIA TODAY SENIOR CORRESPONDENT TITHI SARKAR, they reminisce about the early years of the father-daughter and guru-shishya relationship between them and how classical music has evolved.

ANOUSHKA SHANKAR WITH FATHER RAVI SHANKAR

PANDIT RAVI SHANKAR AND ANOUSHKA SHANKAR

"Teach classical mus ic in kindergarten"
"Gurus who abused students and tied them to trees are history

Pandit Ravi Shankar

now. But the essence of the relationship remains"Anoushka Shankar

CONVERSATIONS PANDIT RAVI SHANKAR AND ANOUSHKA SHANKAR
YEARS
SHARAD SAXENA /www.indiatodayimages.com

RAVI SHANKAR WITH WIFE SUKANYA IN 1990

difference between the way traditions are maintained in the north and the south. However, I feel more able to speak of my own experiences in north India, and Delhi in particular. What I find difficult to accept is that in the media, classical music is often forced to occupy the same space as other genres, meaning that we rarely get sufficient airtime on radio or TV. India is driven by media marketing and this means classical music struggles to get a piece of the pie. RS There is so much music out there. I have not heard it all but of what I have heard, some of it is extremely good. I have also been very impressed by some film music. Today's musicians are keen on experimentation, but they should know the essence of classical music. AS I don't think one can generalise "the younger generation" in classical music. Just as there are many artists who are young and dedicated to the classical form, there are also those who are all for experimentation. The problem begins with overwhelming media attention on experimental works, which creates a bottleneck that forces artists into doing the same thing again to further their career. RS Technology has enhanced presentation and made our lives easier, but sometimes over-amplification spoils the quality of the voice or the main instrument, more so when accompanying instruments are as loud as the tabla or harmonium. AS Of course! I often find it difficult to listen to recordings of classical concerts as it is not the kind of music you

"There is so much music out there.I have not heard it all but of what I have heard,some of it is extremely good.I have also been very impressed by some film music." Ravi Shankar

"Just as there are many artists who are young and dedicated to the classical form, there are also those who are all for experimentation." Anoushka Shankar
it's not just Hindustani. It is amazing to see the wonderful state Carnatic music is in. The classical tradition has been given a new life by young musicians. You see this wherever a south Indian lives, whether inside India or out. But we do have a problem with Hindustani, though Mumbai, Kolkata, Pune, Delhi and some other cities are better placed because some of the great living musicians stay there and classical music events are also held. Delhi is spoiled, though; the people pay for all other kinds of music, but don't buy tickets for classical music. Anoushka Shankar (AS) There is a big

WHAT'S NEW

Pandit Ravi Shankar (RS) Questions about the current scenario of classical music in India and other countries should ideally be answered by true lovers of Indian classical music, with sufficient knowledge and appreciation for all other kinds of music. I find it difficult to give my views as a hardcore Indian classical musician myself. Whatever experiments I have done are all based on classical music. There is a world of difference between India's two classical forms--the Hindustani system of the north and the Carnatic system of the south. When we say classical Indian music,

THE NORTH-SOUTH DIVIDE

"It is amazing to see how wonderful a state Carnatic music is in.You see this wherever a south Indian lives,whether inside India or out. But we do have a problem with the Hindustani classical genre." Ravi Shankar
"There is a big difference between the way traditions are maintained in the north and the south." Anoushka Shankar
132
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

CONVERSATIONS PANDIT RAVI SHANKAR AND ANOUSHKA SHANKAR
YEARS

AN UNEQUAL MUSIC

"It is a pain when you hear two extremely talented artists collaborating just for commercial gain. You have to keep the two spheres separate." Ravi Shankar

"I often find working as a musician in a corporate environment extremely frustrating. I'm often directed to collaborate with artists who have little connection to my style of music." Anoushka Shankar
want to be bombarded with. It's interesting to compare Indian classical music with its Western counterpart, because the latter is never amplified; all their instruments were designed and built to be performed and heard in concert halls. Ours were built for use in smaller venues. RS Today's musicians have an advantage over us. We could only learn from our guru or by listening to senior musicians. There were no tape recorders or computers, TVs or DVDs, except for a few 78 rpm records and radio. However, to learn classical Indian music it is essential to have a guru. I was with my brother Uday Shankar's troupe from age 10 to 18, touring all over the world as a musician and dancer. Two wonderful musicians, Timir Baran and Vishnudas Shirali, enlightened me about classical music during that period. I then went to stay with Guru Baba Allauddin at the remote Maihar in Madhya Pradesh for almost seven years to learn classical music in the old gurukul system. You (Anoushka) started learning from me when you were about eight. In the beginning I used to teach you fixed compositions or bandishs and you would pick them up quickly. Sometimes when I used to improvise on the same compositions, you would complain that Bapi (dad) is playing all wrong. It was different between us, as it was not only guru and shishya, but also father and daughter. While we would get serious in the music room, you being very close to me would put your feet up on my lap, not stand up (in deference) every time I walked by, or offer pranaam like my other disciples.

US AND THEM

"Technology has enhanced presentation and made our lives easier,but sometimes over-amplification spoils the quality of the voice or the main instrument,more so when accompanying instruments are as loud as the tabla or harmonium." Ravi Shankar

"All Western instruments were designed and built to be performed and heard in concert halls. Ours were built for use in smaller venues." Anoushka Shankar
RAVI SHANKAR WITH AYOUNG ANOUSHKA

AS I believe the guru-shishya relationship has evolved with time. The centuries-old stories you hear about gurus as tyrants who abused their students and tied them to trees, feel completely unacceptable today. This is similar to evolution of parenting techniques. However, I believe the essence of the relationship remains the same and the magic of being able to pass on a living tradition and culture down generations, from one dedicated person to another, is still there. RS More than ever before there is an abundance of talent today. I am speechless watching some of the talent shows when I get time. Training in classical music should start at the kindergarten level, with basic melody structure and rhythmic compositions like "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star". The ones who turn out to be talented and interested can later learn classical from competent teachers. AS I think claiming our time as one of change is shortsighted. It is safe to say the feeling that the world is changing around us is ever-present in all generations. That said, talent, when nurtured, will blossom. RS Whatever genre of music one plays, if it touches the soul or the senses of the listener, it is successful. Speed and virtuosity is always attractive and exciting, but when a quiet note touches the heart or brings a tear, for me, that is a higher level. AS I think classical music will always have its place in our cultural landscape. But we do need to make sure that it gets more support and continues to try and reach new audiences. 

134

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

