GLASS HOUSE

by PRIYA SAHGAL

NO MATCH FOR HOODA

OVERHEARD
The first successful case of direct cash transfer by UPA happened during the vote on FDI in retail.

H

aryana Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda invited the visiting tennis star Boris Becker for a game at the Delhi Gymkhana Club recently. To Becker's surprise, Hooda returned volley for volley. "The boy plays well," said Becker to a

friend who was accompanying him. The grey-haired Hooda was not amused. "When were you born?" he asked Becker, who told him it was the year 1967. "I was born in 1947," replied Hooda, "so I am not the boy here." Game, set and match.

New Dimension
hat do Narendra Modi and P.V. Narasimha Rao have in common? Turns out that filmmaker Mani Shankar, one of the men behind Modi's 3D holograms, was an image consultant to Rao while he was prime minister. Among his subtler campaigns were pictures of Rao with military hardware designed to make him appear strong and decisive. As long as the 3D holograms work better than his non-starter movies.

W

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

SAMEER GARG

Battle for Legacy

Beyond the Scindias
n a party built on dynasty, there is a new father-son equation. On December 10, when Jyotiraditya Scindia visited his constituency Guna to inaugurate a party office, he was pleasantly surprised to see Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh waiting for him. Digvijaya told the assembled gathering that "Maharaj is like my son" . In return, Scindia referred to Digvijaya as his "father figure" . Now what prompted this sudden bonhomie between the two rivals?

E

ven 17 years after TDP founder N.T. Rama Rao's death, the fight for his legacy continues. His daughter, Union Minister of State for Commerce Daggubati Purandeswari, is taking credit for getting a green signal to install his statue in Parliament before NTR's birth anniversary on May 28. She says she has achieved what brother-in-law N. Chandrababu Naidu failed to do in the five years (1999-2004) he supported the NDA government. Now Naidu is campaigning for a Bharat Ratna for NTR. Watch this space for Purandeswari's comeback.
PURANDESWARI

I

SCINDIA (LEFT) WITH DIGVIJAYA

Rahul's `Bhaiya-log'

RAHUL

I

f Rajiv Gandhi ran a babalog government, Rahul Gandhi can be said to run a bhaiya-log party. During an election rally on December 11 in Jamnagar, Gujarat, he narrated a conversation with the visiting former president of Brazil Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, which went thus: "Bhaiya, batao apke desh mein democracy kaise chalti hai (Brother, tell me about the state of democracy in your country)." But the question is will Rahul bhaiya make an impact in Narendrabhai Modi's state?
PTI

SIPRA DASI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Cabinet minister Farooq Abdullah is not amused with historian Ramachandra Guha's comment that he is wasting his time in office playAGAIN ing golf."I haven't played golf in the last two years," he said in amazement."If I had then perhaps my health would be in a better condition."
SAY
T H AT

16

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
FREE FOR ALL
by R. Prasad

The Wrong John

S

amajwadi Party MP Jaya Bachchan distributed mouth fresheners to Rajya Sabha MPs during the FDI retail vote. She offered some to Ram Gopal Yadav and N.K. Singh. Unfortunately the freshener couldn't energise N.K. Singh enough, for he tripped over his economists when he spoke, confusing John Maynard Keynes with John Kenneth Galbraith. It was the Prime Minister who gently corrected his mistake.

JOKE
OF THE WEEK

Doctor of Politics
unjab Agriculture University's move to confer a doctor of science degree on Parkash Singh P Badal on his 85th birthday didn't meet with the gratitude that was expected. The Chief Minister suggested the honour was a trifle inappropriate. "I could never be a doctor of science. I am just an ordinary graduate," he declared adding that "doctor of politics" would perhaps have been more fitting given his six-and-a-half decade long stint with netagiri in Punjab.
A PRABHAKAR RAO

The best thing that happened to the Indian economy was that Pranab Mukherjee became President of India.

Hot Seat
BADAL

P
SIPRA DASI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Naidu's Double Talk
n public, TDP chief N. Chandrababu Naidu claims his party is against FDI in multibrand retail. But soon after the Lok Sabha cleared the FDI in retail, Heritage Foods India NAIDU Limited--the Rs 1,400-crore retail and dairy products company owned by Naidu's family--declared that it was ready to bring in strategic partners, both Indian and foreign. The next day, three TDP MPs from Rajya Sabha--Y.S. Chowdhary, T. Devender Goud and G. Sudha Rani--abstained themselves from the FDI vote. Naidu clearly needs to balance his company's interests with those of his party.

Party Loyalist

I

BHURIA

adhya Pradesh Congress chief M Kantilal Bhuria had to skip his son's wedding ceremony on December 5 to be present in the Lok Sabha for the FDI debate. Bhuria could get to his son's reception in Indore only around 11 p.m. Such party loyalty.

ranab Mukherjee's son Abhijeet has suddenly become the most popular man in Parliament. The reason? The first term MP has been allotted a seat behind Rahul Gandhi. This gives the other MPs an excuse to chat up Rahul by pretending to say hello to Abhijeet. Now that's what is called a seat of power.
ABHIJEET
YASBANT NEGI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

with AMARNATH K. MENON , ASIT JOLLY, DEVESH KUMAR, LEMUEL LALL AND SANDEEP UNNITHAN
DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

17

