NEI GHBOURS CHINA

XI JINPING (LEFT) AND LI KEQIANG AT THE GREAT HALL OF THE PEOPLE IN BEIJING
GETTY IMAGES

CONTINUITYAND CHANGE IN BEIJING
O

Domestic challenges will have an impact on new China's relationship with India

the potential impact on China's foreign policy. It ver the last year, there have been leaderGUEST is rare to hear the phrase "I don't know" from forship transition processes in four of the five COLUMN eign policy pundits, but it is an oft-heard one in permanent UN Security Council members. response to questions about the attitudes of the In East Asia, leadership elections or selections leaders who will be taking over in Beijing. will have taken place in China, Japan, South Significant turnovers in leadership in any counKorea and Taiwan over 2012. The transition in try give rise to questions about policy implicaChina has perhaps raised the most questions tions. Experts on Chinese domestic politics about whether it will lead to policy continuity or highlight a few reasons why these are especially change. This is not just because of the high to answer in China's case. First, in oneleadership turnover or because it is a once-in-aTanvi Madan difficult party systems like that of China, individuals do not decade process. It is also because, as a result of China's growing influence in the world and interactions rise to the top by publicly standing out from the crowd. Their with other countries, including India, what happens in worldviews, policy preferences and leadership styles are, thus, relatively unknown. Second, in a system that has been Beijing does not stay in Beijing. What has actually transpired there? The 18th National labelled "one party, two coalitions", how factional politics Congress of the Chinese Communist Party, held last month, will play out in the various leadership bodies is also uncerselected members of its Central Committee. That body se- tain. Third, while PSC members are no strangers to officiallected members of the elite Politburo, seven of whom were dom, having held positions at the central or provincial chosen to be in the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC). From levels, they have not been part of the foreign policy apparathat key ruling body, Xi Jinping has been appointed party gen- tus and their views on international affairs are not evident. eral secretary, the first among equals in what is a collective Another reason for the uncertainty at the moment is that leadership system, and designated president. He and desig- the transition is ongoing. Government appointments will nated premier Li Keqiang are likely to remain on the PSC till only be formalised in March 2013 when the National 2022. Overall, the turnover in party leadership has been sig- People's Congress meets and when we will also get a clearer nificant and, over the next few months, further changes will sense of the foreign policy leadership team. The uncertainty means that we do not know if and when take place at the central and provincial government levels. This turnover has led to much discussion abroad about there will be changes in foreign policy, and what they might

40

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

NEI GHBOURS CHINA
look like. Some have commented on the different style of putes involve countries that India is developing close relasome of the new leaders, but many observers expect broad tionships with, especially Japan and Vietnam. Conversely, continuity in foreign policy over the short term. "Let's wait tension in the east might give China more reason to keep and see" is a common answer to what might happen over things calm on its southern border. the longer term. As for Chinese officials' recent statements, they have largely focused on domestic issues, which are expected to be the priority. On foreign policy, they have been ow Chinese leaders see the US rebalancing towards emphasising continuity and stability. Asia will also likely shape their attitude towards What does all this mean for India? The next decade India. If they continue to see the "pivot" as inflammatory will see greater Chinese and Indian interaction in the and directed against China, they might see India as part of bilateral, regional and multilateral realms. The decisions the problem and act in an assertive manner towards it. made by China's new leaders will play a significant role in There is, however, also the possibility that they might seek shaping these interactions. On the bilateral level, Indian to engage India further in order to limit its relations with officials have echoed Chinese officials' expectations of and the US. On the other hand, Chinese policymakers might desire for "continuity and stability". This has both positive come to see the US as a restraining influence on its allies, and negative connotations. It could mean that the two perhaps giving pause to American partners and allies in sides see continued engagement and no major disruption of the region and reigniting dormant concerns about a G-2. ties, but it could also lead to little progress on key bilateral In the international realm, Chinese leaders' stance over issues like the border, the level and kind of economic the next few years on global norms and institutions will also engagement, and the trust deficit. affect India's interests, not just in the trade and climate We do not know in much detail what the new leaders change realms or at the United Nations, but also in the marthink about India or Sino-Indian relations. PARVEEN NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com itime security, resource security, space, Some are not total strangers to India. Xi cyber-security and food security areas. Jinping hosted President Pratibha Patil Finally, the domestic challenges for a reception in 2010. Some Politburo Chinese leaders are facing will raise quesmembers have governed provinces tions that have implications for India. First, where Indian companies have been acwhat will a potential move away from tive. PSC members Liu Yunshan and Yu China's existing development model focused on exports and investment towards Zhengsheng have led delegations to India. a more domestic-consumption-driven one It is unclear, however, what impressions mean for Sino-Indian economic ties? these interactions might have generated. Second, how will the new regime deal with One has to guard against the tenTibet--where a change in leadership is dency to over-read the tea leaves that are also possible during the next decade? available. The fact that Xi Jinping, as heir Third, what will the impact of domestic imapparent, visited a number of countries peratives be on China's foreign policy? Will but not India does not necessarily reflect the new leaders work towards a peaceful his opinion of India or indicate the trajecperiphery in order to focus on necessary tory that Sino-Indian relations will take. To put this in perspective, he did not visit DEFENCE MINISTER A.K. ANTONY (RIGHT) (but difficult to implement) domestic polit"all-weather partner" Pakistan while he WITH HIS CHINESE COUNTERPART, LIANG ical and economic reforms? Or will a new set of leaders feel the need to be assertive did travel to Japan, a country who he re- GUANGLIE, IN DELHI ON SEPTEMBER 4 abroad either as a response to rising nationalism or to build cently warned should "rein in its behaviour". It is also not clear where India will fall in the leadership's legitimacy or demonstrate credibility or to create a rallyinglist of foreign policy priorities. Not being very high on the around-the-flag effect or a distraction from domestic travails? In a recent speech, Xi Jinping noted, "China needs to learn list, on the one hand, might mean more stability. On the other hand, it might lead to less inclination or attention to- more about the world, and the world also needs to learn more wards finding what National Security Adviser Shivshankar about China." In the years to come, we will no doubt also learn Menon says India seeks: "A new equilibrium" that not only more about its leaders. As we do, however, it is important to recognises and accommodates China's interests and in- remember that it is not just a change in personnel that might bring policy changes, but also changes in international and creased power, but those of India as well. Issues higher on the leadership's priority list such as de- domestic circumstances. Moreover, change might result not velopments in the East and South China Seas might affect from the decisions of the new Chinese leaders, but as a result India. Leaders might react strongly against actual or per- of the ones made in countries like Japan, India, Iran, the ceived Indian involvement in those areas. There is also the Philippines, Taiwan, the US or Vietnam. possibility that the Chinese need to take a strong stance on territorial issues might preclude progress in terms of the Tanvi Madan is fellow, foreign policy, and director of India Project at Sino-Indian border talks. Furthermore, those heated disBrookings Institution, Washington DC

H

42

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

