37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

RITU KUMAR AT HER FARMHOUSE NEAR DELHI
ADITYA KAPOOR /www.indiatodayimages.com

RITU KUMAR AND SABYASACHI MUKHERJEE

"The challenge is to create something for people across generations"
Ritu Kumar

"Many young designers test limits with their designs" Sabyasachi Mukherjee
SUBIR HALDER /www.indiatodayimages.com

SABYASACHI AT HIS STUDIO IN KOLKATA

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS RITU KUMAR AND SABYASACHI MUKHERJEE

She began her career from a tiny village in Bengal at a time when fashion was an unfamiliar word in the Indian lexicon. There were no fashion weeks, no hectic PR agencies and almost no fashion journalists. Fashion wasn't important enough to give column space to. It was, after all, the late 1960s. The enduring star of Indian fashion, Ritu Kumar, 68, paved the way for Indian designers, both in India and abroad. Fast forward to the late 1990s and there was a fashion explosion in India, with new designers launching their lines every other day. While some chose to look West for inspiration, others drew on all that's best in our culture. Sabyasachi Mukherjee, 38, was the quintessential middle-class Bengali. He had no connections, just a burning desire to design his way to success. Having graduated in fashion in 1999, he became a trailblazer, creating edgy ethnic silhouettes and exquisite bridal wear that became the toast of Bollywood. Two fashion designers, born in different eras but with a shared love for indigenous craft and textiles, in conversation with SENIOR EDITOR PRACHI BHUCHAR. India Today (IT) How has the idea of fashion evolved since you started out? Ritu Kumar (RK) When I started, being in fashion was a huge challenge. We could not import a zip or a button or even a piece of elastic as the market was completely closed. We were cushioned from outside influences; so we were forced to go back to our roots rather than go to Google for ideas. Sabyasachi Mukherjee (SM) The younger designers have the world at their disposal. They are so much more technologically savvy and have their look books in place and PR agencies organised. Similar to Ms Kumar, my international exposure was very limited when I started. I think while she had a massive first-mover advantage because of the age in which she was operating, I too was lucky. When I started, there were no new kids on the block for three-four years. IT What were the initial challenges? RK Initially, there was no sense of

"For me personally,too much bling is not a great thing but then there is a market for almost every kind of designer today.With Bollywood,you now have stars who have a distinct personality. They wear designer clothes well.Earlier,it was uniformly ugly." Ritu Kumar

"I have many friends in Bollywood. I have never used them to further my career." Sabyasachi Mukherjee
FOOTWEAR FROM SABYASACHI'S COLLECTION

what constituted Indian fashion or what should. Even in Bengal, you had men wearing a dhoti with a waistcoat or tie. It was a complete potpourri and street fashion as a concept was absent. I was drawn to what was indigenous in our culture because I believed in the richness of Indian textiles. But the initial results were far from encouraging. People thought my blockprinted designs looked like bed covers and they were perhaps right. It was only over a period of time that my aesthetics were honed. SM Unlike Ms Kumar, I did not face

any external challenges but I had another task: Convincing my family that fashion was a respectable profession. IT What were some of your early influences? How big a role has Bengal played in shaping your design idiom? RK My earliest influences were through the craft route. I was an art history student who strayed into the world of textiles. Bengal was deeply influential as it gave me access to my first printing village. SM For me, growing up in Kolkata, designer Rohit Khosla was a huge inspiration. I remember scaling the wall of Saturday Club to see his show and when I saw Mehr Jessia and Arjun Rampal walk the ramp for him I knew I wanted to be a designer. Today, I find many young designers quick-witted and inspiring as they test limits with their designs. IT How have your styles changed? RK I have always done Indian bridal wear but today for a formal occasion you actually have the younger generation coming back to the sari. There was a period when sari sales were down but people are rediscovering the sensuality of the sari. The challenge is to create something people across generations are comfortable wearing, yet something cutting-edge and affordable. I have learnt this from my son, who is now in the business and has helped me think young. SM When I started, I was self-indulgent. Today, one has to be far more disciplined. Now, I don't produce anything that's not scalable. The aim is to be accessible to a larger band of people. 

A RITU KUMAR CREATION

"My parents had no idea what I planned to do. Now, I am used as an example when youngsters try to convince their parents about fashion."
Sabyasachi Mukherjee

144

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

