OPI NION

VIPSECURITY

VIPVIOLATION OFCONSTITUTION
O
minister P. Chidambaram busted the myth of a n January 26, 1950, we the people of India GUEST COLUMN need for security by dispensing with his own segave unto ourselves a Constitution, having curity. And he was at that time heading the effort constituted ourselves into a sovereign demagainst not just terrorism but also Maoism. ocratic republic. The becoming of a republic has, The police can surely make a few roads of in the ultimate analysis, eluded us more than anyDelhi safe for VIPs to travel without closures. We thing else, and our political decay can be largely traced to this failure. We inherited some excellent citizens would feel more secure if we get to share institutions of governance from the English. What the same space. There may be a need to stop trafwas needed was a change in orientation. fic in some areas that cannot be fully secured on On the dawn of Independence, the founding faHarish Salve a regular basis. But it is hard to accept that even thers recognised with trepidation the daunting a handful of roads in the capital city, used daily by task of converting this infant nation (historically, a cluster of the VIPs, cannot be considered secure unless "sanitised" by princely states) into a democracy, and a republic at that. removing us lesser mortals. Besides, if the roads are so unThis would require an evolution not just of its institutions, safe that a VIP in a bullet-proof car is insecure, then what but a revolution of its mindset. about the rest of us? Those who had governed the people--whether as civil The practice of closing roads was started in former servants or as uniformed officers representing the might of prime minister Rajiv Gandhi's time in the late 1980s. In the the Raj--would now have to serve the very people who they three decades that have followed, we could have made at had dominated all these years. This transition would be all least the core of our national capital a safe place. the more difficult in a society where the caste system dicThe situation in the states is worse. A minority commistates hierarchy and where people sion chief was given police cover, are used to accepting divisions in which he was free to use as a priwhich some are superior to the vate army, in the name of security. other by the accident of birth, not The blunt truth is that we by achievement. haven't moved away from our While the evolution of our confeudal mindset. We accept that stitutional institutions has been a those in office are here to rule, not remarkable experiment in emto serve. Dynasty is a legitimate powerment, the Raj culture of basis for electoral politics. It ingovernance has not changed. We conveniences us when roads are continue to use all the trappings of closed to allow VIP convoys to the Raj. Beacon lights, screaming travel in the comfort of traffic-free sirens, and--if you are important roads. It insults our intelligence enough--stoppage of traffic for when we are told this is done your entourage are coveted sympurely as a measure of security. bols of office. The first significant The Central Government (in a office of civil service (in the states, PIL in the Supreme Court) justified the collectors, district magisthe use of beacons by civil serSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com trates) and the first elected offices vants on the grounds that they (market committee chief) upwards, the reward of holding were doing important work and thus needed priority in trafoffice is the beacon light. A few notches higher would earn fic! This perception, in the language of studied moderation, you a personal security officer. The higher you go, the more makes nonsense of the notion of a republic. your symbols--the highest recognition of having arrived Democracy is a constant endeavour, and the political being Y and Z security. system does change--just that it needs a lot of noise of pubDelhi is surely not such an unsafe city that the Prime lic resentment. Nehru spoke of our tryst with destiny. It will Minister cannot travel the short distance from his home to be a pipe dream unless we protest the violation of our conhis office in the South Block without closing all the roads. stitutional fundamentals. If the roads of Washington are safe for the US President If nothing else works, the courts will again be troubled. and if the roads of London are safe for the British Prime But being an incorrigible optimist, I hope this time it will not Minister and the Queen, it is because their police have made be necessary. those cities secure enough for them to travel, at least in the central areas, without much fuss. Our feisty former home Harish Salve is a senior Supreme Court lawyer

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

