LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE PASTIS ALABYRINTH
This provocative Indian journey through history stretches from Gondwana to Gurgaon
By Gillian Wright

T
LAND OFTHE SEVEN RIVERS: A BRIEF HISTORY OF INDIA'S GEOGRAPHY
bySanjeev Sanyal Penguin Price: RS 499 Pages: 331 BETWEEN THE COVERS Sanyal is most interesting when he writes of present day India.He speeds through environmental challenges, the prospects of urbanisation and the enormous possibilities education has unlocked for many of the poor.

he book has a hand drawn cover in the style of the maps Tolkien used to make of Middle Earth. But there is no otherworldly fantasy attached to this 21st century bankereconomist's gallop not so much through Indian geography as through its history from time immemorial. The book's content is summed up best in the four words of a sub-heading of one of the chapters--From Gondwana to Gurgaon. In just over 300 pages Sanjeev Sanyal takes us from the primaeval landmass of Gondwanaland from which the Indian subcontinent drifted slowly away, through dynasties, empires and battles, to the malls and multinational offices of what was not so long ago just another small Haryana town. Naturally, romping his way through millennia, Sanyal has to be selective and to a large extent, simplistic. He accepts for example the "Akbar-good king, Aurangzeb-bad king" norm without looking for any shades of grey in either character. Not being a historian, he lacks historical rigour and tries to convince his readers with emphatic statements. In short, this is an opinionated book, and the reader will lose count of the times the author begins his sentences with `In my view...' While covering the standard figures and periods of Indian history, Sanyal is also fascinated by sidebar stories. He looks at the reason Indian ships were sewn together with rope when nails were available, and follows carefully the development of the `cutting- edge' technology of map-making that helped Europe to its ascendency. Brimming with confidence, Sanyal argues, as other authors have, of the dominance of India and China in the world economy of earlier centuries. Normally, a general reader would nod in agreement, as this fits in well with the
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

assumption of India as the sone ki chidiya--the golden bird. However, when Sanyal starts talking about comparative GDP and per capita income in the world in 1500, common sense rears its head and says--really, and how reliable is the data for, say, South America, Benin or even India in 1500? That being said, this is a highly enjoyable and provocative book. Sanyal has read and travelled widely before putting pen to paper. His writing never flags, he has a light touch and his optimism is infectious. He shows globalisation is in fact an ancient phenomenon, with human populations moving across the world and ideas and languages influencing one another. The flow was, and still is, never one way. He also delights in continuities. Therefore he highlights the genetic studies which indicate that Indians had a mixed bag of genes even ten thousand years ago and uses this to prove that the Aryan invasion was a myth. For him modern Indians are without doubt the heirs of the Harappan civilisation. He finds continuities everywhere--from the man-about-town of the Kama Sutra to idle nawabs of 19th century Lucknow and Bengali zamindars of early 20th century Kolkata, and from Mauryan period imports of Italian and Arab wines to the modern Indian love of Imported Foreign Liquor. He is most interesting when he writes of present day India. In a tour de force, he speeds through environmental challenges, the prospects of urbanisation and the enormous possibilities education has unlocked for many of the poor. And, of course, he writes of Gurgaon. For him Gurgaon is a metaphor for modern India `with its private sector dynamism, the robberbaron element and a government that is struggling to keep up'. But even here he never loses sight of the ancient civilisation of which this is just a passing phase, and that is surely a most valuable sense of perspective to have. 

240

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

