37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

KRISHEN KHANNA AND BHARTI KHER

"Just because you love colour does not make you an artist"
"Even when you are written about, the highlight is always your work sold for X amount. The focus is on the money" Bharti Kher

Krishen Khanna

KRISHEN KHANNA (LEFT) WITH BHARTI KHER IN GURGAON

SHIVANGI KULKARNI

Generous sunlight bounces off leafy trees and angles itself to enter the brick home of artist Krishen Khanna, 87. The living room is just a window to his world and walking through it is like cutting through a gallery and discovering new treasure at every turn. He has a 1951 Husain adorning a wall, a giant-size textured painting that he created just two years ago on one side; other canvases from artists such as S.H. Raza and F.N. Souza who were his contemporaries when he started painting in the late 1950s. His evolution as an artist over the last 65 years is evident on these walls. Impeccably dressed and in clipped English, he welcomes us into his home for a conversation with another prolific artist, Bharti Kher, 43. The bindi, a symbol of fertility, has found a special place in her installations. The two artists grew up in different milieus but as the conversation unfolds, it becomes apparent that they share much of the same philosophy and angst. They bridge the generations effortlessly as they discuss the state of Indian art, their respective journeys and their hope for the future with SENIOR EDITOR PRACHI BHUCHAR. India Today (IT) Change is constant. How do you relate to it as artists? Krishen Khanna (KK) When I meet other artists, I don't think of generational differences even though much has changed. The world and circumstances have changed since Partition but I am not a swinger and don't need to keep up with the latest. For me, belonging to the generation that I did, there are no pressures to keep up. Bharti Kher (BK) Artists belonging to any time have similar concerns which are expressed differently. I am living in a certain milieu and I respond to that. If you look at art through the ages, it is apparent that it stands as a witness of its time.

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS KRISHEN KHANNA AND BHARTI KHER

"Dhoomimal was the only buyer in those days and again buyer in the sense that sometimes he would even provide us alcohol in lieu of money."
Krishen Khanna

KRISHEN KHANNA IN 1980

"What is art today? Nowadays in India most people only think of money and I think that is gauche and nobody else in the world is like that."
Bharti Kher KK The price one pays for art went up for many reasons. The economy started to flourish and when people had money jingling in their pockets, they went out and bought art. Today I find that irrespective of whether they are actually artists, people believe they are. What they think of as art is not necessarily art. Just because you love colour does not make you an artist. There is a certain lavishness and pomposity associated with art today which is completely alien to me. BK I am all for more artists, It's a great thing for art but what is a concern is scholarship. What is art today? Nowadays in India most people only think of money and I think that is gauche. Nobody else in the world is like that. IT The attitude of the government towards art... KK We would not have had such a cultural mess today if the government was different. People need to care about art and ask real questions that make a difference. BK After Independence, someone like

IT What are some of the discernable changes you have encountered since you started off? KK In the 1940s and 1950s, when I was member of the group that included other artists like Souza, Raza, Akbar Padamsee and Husain, there were no galleries, no places to exhibit our art. We, as modernists, presented an alternative and there were takers for it, which is why it blossomed. Raza, Souza and Akbar were the first three from the group who went to Paris to exhibit their work and it was a big deal. BK I completely agree. The early successes are most exciting. When I moved to Delhi from England, the art world here was very school-based. You had to be from the Baroda or Mumbai or Delhi school to be part of something. But we were not from any camp and did not have any mentors. It was difficult but we created our own space. IT Are there a lot more artists today and is it seen as a commercially viable creative pursuit?

"The government is just not interested and treats things of culture as an extracurricular activity along with knitting.There seems to be no plan to integrate culture and create some sort of art memory."Bharti Kher
146
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS KRISHEN KHANNA AND BHARTI KHER

"We have great minds but they are ignored. The artist cannot be the facilitator, writer and educator. The government needs to support them." Bharti Kher

"For seven years I was on the board of the Gandhi Memorial. I kept asking the committee, why can't we look 15 years ahead? But committees don't make works of art. I eventually resigned." Krishen Khanna
Jawaharlal Nehru cared about culture and gave it space but today we have 800 museums, most of which have no directors. The National Museum position has been lying empty for the last three years. Look at National Gallery of Modern Art , it is a laughable joke today. They do shows with big international artists but when was the last time they cared about our own artists? The artist cannot be the facilitator, writer and educator. The government needs to support them. IT Is art the preserve of an elite few today? Is enough discussion and debate happening? BK Delhi is one of the most exciting cities I know. There is so much intellectual debate happening. KK But it is not happening in the public space. BK In India there is a sense of malaise. Things are at a cultural and intellectual standstill. That's why you have issues where art hurts the sentiments of people. Where is the freedom of speech? KK It is ridiculous and horrible. Clearly we are propagating the wrong notion of democracy. BK The sad thing is that the government fails to see how culture can bring societies together. It can be a great unifier. IT Is there a greater appreciation for Indian art overseas? BK It is not that people are not aware here, but in India art galleries and museums are not seen as places of pilgrimage. It is very tragic. I visit the National Gallery like it is a temple.
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

IT Your thoughts on being an artist in 2012. Would you have liked to have started off now? KK I won't say that I am fully satisfied but it has been an active life. I have painted the way I wanted, interacted with people I wanted, and exchanged ideas freely. I am glad I lived when I did. BK I think a lot has changed, especially after the Internet. Change is in some sense good and I don't think I would like to have started off now. What Krishen has experienced is unique, as is what I have. IT How has Indian art evolved, given the general apathy that characterises our system? KK The process of creating art has changed. This happened with the advent of democracy where the individual became more important. It was like liberation of the individual with old institutions falling apart. That changed art. BK The way people patronise artists also changed. If we look at Delhi today, all that was grand architecturally was created by the Mughals. Now nothing matches up and nothing new of that stature is being created. Everything is thought of in terms of the government and who is in office. KK For seven years I was on the board of the Gandhi Memorial but remember, committees don't make works of art. I eventually resigned. BK There is something fundamentally wrong with how we function. You have people with no expertise but they feel the need to interfere. Delhi is exciting and a lot can happen because the desire is there but there is no will to recognise the need for change.
Video available on iPad

BHARTI KHER AT HER STUDIO IN GURGAON

"We have the Kochi Biennale,but the organisers are having to fight hard for support.I'm hoping everything works for them." Bharti Kher

"The economy started to flourish and when people had money jingling in their pockets, they bought art." Krishen Khanna

148

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

