HEAL TH

FATTYLIVER DISEASE

The Missing Link in Obesity Crisis
You can look good, feel good and still have a fatty liver. Recognised recently in India as a disorder, fatty liver disease is brought on by negative lifestyle choices. Prevention is the only cure so far.

to that of westerners with similar body mass index.

TWICE THE FATIN INDIAN LIVERS compared

urban Indians have fatty livers although they are not overweight.

54%

BULGE
By Damayanti Datta

THE NEW BATTLE OFTHE

32%
Sources: Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, Delhi; Gangaram Hospital, Delhi; Fortis C-DOC Centre, Delhi; PGIMER Chandigarh; IPGMER, Kolkata; WHO; FAO; NEJM; Indian Journal of Gastroenterology; Hepatology, 2010-12.

24%

urban Indians are likely to have some degree of fatty liver disease.

Indian men have fatty livers compared to 13% women.

FATTY LIVERS CAN LEAD TO HEARTATTACKS AND STROKES

India has an invisible but deadly obesity problem. Fatty livers are doubling the risk of heart attacks and strokes.

20%

patients with fatty liver disease develop serious liver conditions.

70-90%

people with obesity and diabetes suffer from fatty liver.

t was a day like any other in March this year. But to the bewildered 46year-old it didn't bode well: Try as he might he just couldn't get out of bed. Two days later, when it happened again, Ratan Dharkar knew he was up against a major crisis. As a chartered accountant running his own firm in Mumbai, he had faced his share of challenges. But this was something

I

no balance sheet could capture. Ultrasound imaging found his liver white and bright with fat. Unknown to him, fatty tissues had spread their tentacles, hardening the soft organ. As he entered the painful world of liver biopsies, injections and drugs, he asked his doctors: "Why didn't I ever get a hint?" "It's like that with the liver," they said. If your stomach sticks out more than your chest, if you find it tough to bend and tie your shoelaces, if you can't

keep your shirts tucked in, you know you are piling on the pounds. It's hardly news anymore that Indians are bloating up. But now a raft of new studies are showing that predicting a person's long-term health may not be as simple as measuring the waistline. Doctors are adding a new warning about invisible fat lurking in an organ no one thinks twice about: The liver. Fatty liver disease, in the absence of alcohol intake, is rapidly emerging as a health

crisis in urban India. And every plumped-up liver can lead to heart attack, stroke and even cancer. India's obesity problem just turned deadly. To capture the girth of the nation through its liver, consider the facts: 32% Indians are believed to have some degree of fatty liver disease. 70-90% people with obesity and diabetes suffer from fatty liver disease. 54% people who are neither overweight nor have abdominal obesity

have fatty livers. 24% Indian men are afflicted by fatty liver compared to 13% women. 20% fatty liver patients go on to develop serious liver conditions. Urban Indians suffer from twofold increased risk of dying of heart attack or stroke due to liver fat. Liver fat is the third most common cause of chronic liver disease in India. There is twice as much fat in Indian livers compared to people in the west

with similar weight. The liver is the new front in the battle of the bulge. "Fatty liver damage is no longer limited to people who drink excessively," says Dr Shiv Sarin, director of the Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences (ILBS) in Delhi, who coauthored the global guidelines on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) brought out by the World Gastroenterology Organisation in June this year. "Negative lifestyle choices are creating biochemical reactions that cause NAFLD. If we are not careful, it will soon become an epidemic in India because there is no treatment for NAFLD as yet," he says. Studies show that Indian men might be particularly prone to NAFLD. The liver is the missing link in the obesity crisis. And the pace of new research in this area is accelerating. In the absence of all-India studies, piecemeal research from across the country is creating the contours of this crisis. "While a medical data search of `nonalcoholic fatty liver' on the Internet via PubMed yielded only 14 research papers in 1995 and 36 in 2000, publications on this topic have accelerated to over 200 a year in the last five years," says Dr Anoop Misra, chief of obesity, diabetes and metabolic diseases at Fortis Hospital in Delhi. PubMed is an Internet search and comprises 22 million biomedical citations. "Earlier, fat accumulation in the liver was considered innocuous. But today, it is being seen as a dangerous metabolic state," adds Mishra. According to Dr Ajay Duseja of Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, NAFLD has been recognised as a disorder recently in India. There is still very little published work on it, possibly because of the earlier presumption that it is benign and that the damage does not progress. Also, the attention has been focused on viral hepatitis. It took Ratan Dharkar years of careless eating to wake up to his liver. "I have done this to myself by skipping meals and then binging on junk food," he says. The distress signals-- slight ache in the upper right side of his

234

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

235

HEAL TH FATTYLIVER DISEASE
abdomen, occasional fatigue and nau- researchers at the Institute of Post- cereals while consumption of meat, fat sea--have always been there. "I sim- graduate Medical Education and and sugar has more than doubled Research in Kolkata on a sample in affluent Indian cities since the ply did not take them seriously." That's typical because the second size of nearly 2,000 people shows in- 1990s. The rise of animal products in largest organ of the body is a silent triguing results: 75 per cent of those diet has pushed up the supply of worker, says gastroenterologist Dr with NAFLD had a Body Mass Index dietary energy at a time when physical Samiran Nundy, chairman, Surgical (weight by height square) less than activity has declined as a result of inGastro and Liver Transplant, Sir normal, while 54 per cent were not creasing mechanisation. Liver damage is the body's slow reGangaram Hospital, Delhi. The liver even overweight. does not beat, pulsate, growl or conAbout 90 per cent of heart diseases sponse to this changing nutritional tract. Unlike the heart, it can be are caused by nine risk factors, say challenge. According to World Health counted on to perform even under doctors: Smoking, high blood pre- Organisation, liver diseases snuff out pressure. For all the complex work the ssure, abnormal cholesterol, diabetes, 200,000 lives in India every year. It is liver executes that is vital to good abdominal obesity, psychosocial fac- one of the top 10 causes of death. health, it never signals its presence un- tors, poor diet, alcohol consumption, Hospital records show that fatty livers less something goes seriously wrong. and lack of regular physical account for a third of such cases. "The liver has an amazing ability to re- activity. Now fatty livers are being seen Unfortunately, there is still no cure for generate and repair itself," NAFLD or NASH. With changes in he says. It can keep funcdiet, increase in physical actioning despite damage for tivity and weight loss, prevenyears. But over time, damtion is the only hope. "Weight age can change the strucloss has a remarkable effect," ture of the liver irreparably. says Misra. "It makes livers Doctors are not too sure but a wide range of Hence liver diseases are less fatty." Rapid weight loss, conditions can increase your risk often called "silent killers" however, hurts the liver. by doctors. But it's not all gloom and DISEASES doom where fatty livers are NAFLD starts when fat DIET Fatty liver is linked to type II concerned. Activists as well molecules accumulate inJunk food, binging and diabetes, high cholesterol and skipping meals can pile as doctors are engaging in side liver cells. It is essenhigh triglyceride levels in blood. up excess fat in liver. awareness drives in schools, tially a consequence of walking the corridors of obesity and diabetes. As power to sensitise the nation's research shows, 70-90 per CHEMICALS CONDITIONS high and mighty and alerting cent people with obesity Obesity is the main reason behind Pesticides in food, the international health bodand diabetes suffer from it. NAFLD.Surprisingly,crash diets and steroids and antivirals malnutrition can also lead to NAFLD. ies. The Centre for Science NAFLD can stay as a lowcan cause liver fat. and Environment in Delhi has grade condition for years announced its plans to limit with just vague symptoms. junk food in schools. The But a prolonged build-up can start a cascade of serious liver as the tenth risk factor. An article Delhi High Court has asked the Food damage. Once that happens to a person published in The New England Journal Safety and Standards Authority of who does not consume alcohol, or of Medicine in 2009 argues that liver India to frame guidelines on a PIL seekdrink far less than 20 gm/day, doctors inflammation damages the insides of ing a ban on junk food and carbonated call it non-alcoholic steatohepatitis arteries and makes blood clot. "It's a drinks within a 1,500 ft radius of (steato stands for fat and hepatitis for combination that can lead to heart schools. The Union Ministry of Health inflammation) or NASH. If NASH damages attack or stroke," says Sarin. has requested the Ministry of Human Obesity has invaded India since the Resource Development to ensure the liver irreversibly, it can lead to cirrhosis, liver failure or even cancer. It is 1990s. That's when the first foreign withdrawal of junk food from school impossible to predict who will develop fast food chain opened shop in Delhi. and college canteens. "Junk the junk cirrhosis or cancer, but the longer NAFLD In the last two decades, as income has food" is the slogan that is being heard remains hidden the stronger the grown over fourfolds, so has the girth from the campus. of the nation. At its root is a `nutrition Urban India needs to go on a diet. chances are. transition', as a consequence of glob- But isolated changes will fail to make NAFLD is an obvious outcome of obesity but it does not always manifest in alisation of economies. Food balance a difference without a broader shift in data from the Food and Agriculture our new food culture. For now, doctors obvious ways. Liver fat can hide in people who are Organisation (FAO) of the United are happy that most fatty livers tend to neither overweight nor have abdomi- Nations shows that coarse grains have stay stable and silent. But an inflamed nal obesity. A 2010 study conducted by been largely substituted by polished liver can also mean the end of life. 

What Plumps Up the LIVER?

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

237

