ELECTIONS 2012

GUJARAT

MODI MINI-STATUES AS CAMPAIGN MATERIAL
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

No Sweat on Home Stretch
Narendra Modi's conquest of Gujarat has many hurdles along the way but the Chief Minister is poised to overcome most of them
By Uday Mahurkar

O
22

n judgment day, there can be no hero other than Narendra Modi in Gandhinagar if the mood of Battlefield Gujarat is any indication. The only surprise on December 20 can be about the margin of Modi's victory. Still, Modi's path is not without hurdles. The atmosphere in the Gujarat Congress office in Ahmedabad is bub-

bly. Most leaders and workers are sure Modi is getting the toughest fight from their party this time, with the odd maverick even predicting a Congress victory. As many as 50 seats were decided in 2007 with a margin of less than 5,000 votes, 27 going to BJP and 23 to the Congress. Modi's challenges come from the unlikeliest of quarters. Almost 75 per cent of the 500,000 state government employees on election duty are against

Modi because of his government's refusal to grant them full benefits of the Sixth Pay Commission, making them work overtime on festivals and assigning tasks not part of their regular duty. Modi's decision to keep 75 per cent of his MLAs and all ministers in contention may backfire. He has to fight a possible anti-incumbency sentiment in their constituencies with the force of his own personality. Most pre-election surveys have

shown that Keshubhai Patel, with his Leuva Patel caste plank, will cause some damage to BJP in SaurashtraKutch and reduce its seat share in the region from 43 to 34. If the party's seat share in the region were to fall below 30, it will be difficult to offset that loss through other regions. But on the flip side, the Keshubhai Patel-led Gujarat Parivartan Party (GPP) can hurt Congress chances too. The Muslim support Modi got in a couple of previous by-elections to the state Assembly and the civic elections in 2010 showed that a significant section of the community had turned to Modi, drawn by his slogan of "development without appeasement". Since Modi has not given a single ticket to a Muslim candidate this time,

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

ELECTIONS 2012

GUJARAT

BATTLEFIELD GUJARAT
2002 Gujarat polls Total seats 182
BJP

BJP gave up a chunk of its 2002 lead in 2007 and 75 per cent of its MLAs are still in the fray in 2012
The caste-wise demographic as percentage of the electorate

Zone-wise seats won by BJP and Congress in 2007 polls
Cong

127
49.8% votes

51

39.3% votes

North Gujarat Central Gujarat

Total seats BJP Cong

25 8

33

OBC Kshatriyas Kolis Leuva Patels Kadva Patels Rajputs Brahmins Tribals Dalits

Others

4
2007 Gujarat polls
BJP

10.9% votes

Saurashtra -Kutch

117
49.1% votes

Cong

59

South Gujarat
Total seats BJP Cong

Total seats BJP Cong

31 26

62

38% votes

Others

6 12.9% votes
there is a question mark on the extent to which the community will support BJP in the 11 constituencies where it matters. Though the Congress faced rebellion over the distribution of certain tickets, a close look reveals the party was bold enough to field young and seemingly promising candidates despite strong pressure from powerful lobbies within. Rajesh Chavda, 40, son of former BJP leader Ranjit Chavda, is giving a tough fight to Minister of State for Home Praful Patel in Himmatnagar constituency. In Dholka, senior BJP leader Bhuendrasinh Chudasama finds himself locked in a grim battle with the Congress's Pradyuma Chavda, 28, a fresh face. Manish Doshi, state Congress spokesman, says, "We have fielded much better candidates this time and taken a positive risk. We have done what was actually expected of Narendra Modi when he distributed tickets to his party's candidates." The Congress has fielded three Lok Sabha members as candidates, which shows the might it has put behind its effort to defeat Modi. The party is confident that its emo-

43 14

58

Total seats BJP Cong

18 10

29

Muslims Others (including Baniyas)

16% 10% 13% 5% 6% 9% 14% 7.5% 10.5% 9%

tional slogan, "Ghar Nu Ghar (Own Your House)", will work. It has promised low-cost houses to three million women, if elected. That could turn out to be its main weapon. The Congress believes Modi's "ultra-urban and corporate image" has enabled it to portray him as anti-rural. That, it hopes, will help in rural areas, particularly in Saurashtra. Modi's trump card is his rapport with the people and the magic he has cast over a vast section of the youth and women in the state. He has won them over with powerful oratory, sell-

THE CONGRESS HAS FIELDED THREE Lok Sabha members, which shows the might it has put behind its effort to defeat Modi. It believes Modi's `ultra-urban and corporate image' has helped it portray him as anti-rural.

ing his achievements, capitalising on Gujarati pride and depicting the alleged misdeeds committed by the Congress at state and central levels. Modi told INDIA TODAY, "My Vivekanand Yuva Vikas Yatra two months ago got a superb response. But the surging crowds and their response at my election rallies have surpassed that, surprising even me." A higher turnout on polling day will work to the Chief Minister's advantage. The political temperature rose in the final leg of campaigning in the state, with Congress President Sonia Gandhi, party General Secretary Rahul Gandhi and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh leading the attack against Modi. BJP's star campaigners--TV star-turned-politician Smriti Irani, Hindi film actor Paresh Rawal and cricketer-turned-politician Navjot Singh Sidhu--drew huge crowds too. Rawal put his histrionic ability to good use as he roared, "It is the cubs of a lioness who are fit to rule and not the kids of a goat. You know who the lion is. Vote for the lion and live your life with pride." Despite the odds, the lion is all set for the kill. 

24

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

