FEflTUBE

WHERE
UNIVERSITY
MATHURA
Established vide URAet21 of2010.

EDUCATION
IS ABOUT LIVING
corporate. Each individual has his/her set of preferred mechanism. Some learn by listening, some by reading, some through interactive dialogue, some by solving problems, some by project activity and some by getting their hands dirty and by doing so and so. The care has been taken that we have created all these mechanism for our students to make learning easy, so all have equal opportunity to learn as it suits each mind. A fine blend of young as well as experienced faculty members from such reputed institutions as IITs and NITs helps the students in realizing their potential. The faculty does not play the role of the 'sage on the stage', but they are the 'guide by the side'. We at GLA also believe that 'teaching' is not what we need to focus on. We are concerned about their' learning'. While designing the syllabus we have given due weightage to the reports of NASSCOM, Mckinsey and World Bank mentioning on the issues of employability and skill set of newly graduating engineers in India and courses have been designed to train and develop the graduating students in the areas of communication skills, critical thinking, problem solving, decision making, ethics etc. The state-of-art Infrastructure provided at the University is credible enough. The campus of the University is spread over more than 80 acres of lush green and expansive ground right on the National Highway No.2 (popularly known as Delhi-Mathura Highway), approx 125 km from Ashram Chowk, Delhi. The University is home to more than 5,000 students studying in Institute of Engineering & Technology, Institute of Business Management, Institute of Pharmaceutical Research and Institute of Applied Sciences and Humanities. The establishment boasts of an alumni base of more than 8000 students. The University is currently running various undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral programmes such as B Tech. (CS, IT. EC, EN, EE, ME & CE), M Tech. (CS, EC & ME), BBA, MBA, BCA, MCA, B Sc Biotechnology, M Sc. Biotechnology, B Com (Hons), PhD (Management, Applied Sciences, Pharmacy, Computer Science, Mechanical Engg., Electronics & Communication Engg., Civil Engg. & English).

/"~"\-|-I ·*» vision is to be a pace-setting University of \^s vl-_L Academic Excellence focused on Education, Research and Development in Established and Emerging Professions". Encountering magnanimity in all its possible representations is a rare find, you chance upon such discoveries only when you get an opportunity to marvel at things with an open mind. When caliber matches credibility you establish examples for the newer generations to follow and imbibe. Sprawling in 80 acres of land and reflecting pure institutional excellence, GLA University in Mathura, is one such milestone in the education history of Uttar Pradesh. In the changing economic scenario and dynamism which comes attached with it, it has become imperative for every institution worth it salt to provide contemporary education to its most important stake holders namely the students. GLA University realizes it in depth and hence the syllabi has been specially designed to cater the latest trends in

Add : NH-2, Mathura (U.P.) India - 281406 Website : www.gla.ac.in Email: admission@gla.ac.in Tel.: +91-5662-250900, 250909 Mob.: +91-9690545008

FEUTUHE

The very dedicated fledged training and placement department constantly makes relentless efforts towards enabling the students for pursuit of perfection and thus providing them the best placements. The GLA University prepares the students to reach those heights of education and technical perfection as well .as professionalism, where greater aims deserve them. Various internationally renowned companies like Infosys, Wipro, Tata Consultancy, HCL, Samsung India, Honda Motorcycle, Cummins India, JK Tyre, Tech Mahindra etc visit the University campus to select the best students for various positions. It is really a matter of pride and satisfaction that more than 70% students get selected every year through

campus interviews. Besides this, regular industrial visits, guest lectures, workshops, training programmes, development programmes, conferences, seminars etc. are conducted and highly qualified professionals and experts are invited to share their expertise with students. In this way the students who prefer to opt for their own entrepreneurial ventures are highly benefitted. With such a prolific and near perfect profile for an institution, GLA in its entirety gives us a backdrop of the ideals that are inscribed in the very soul of its founder and chancellor, Mr. Narayan Das Agrawal, who took the initiative to realize the dreams of his father, Late Shri Ganeshi Lai Agrawal by laying the foundation of the GLA University.

:* ·:·,,._

