37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

KAPIL DEV AND VIRAT KOHLI

"Even today the money cricketers make is not enough"
Kapil Dev
VIRAT KOHLI (LEFT) WITH KAPIL DEV IN MUMBAI

One of them is an all-time great of the game and the other a great in the making. As we await Virat Kohli in the living room of Kapil Dev's hotel suite, the room service steward brings a collage of the legendary cricketer's old, action photographs--"a token of appreciation from the duty manager". The great man, now 53, is modest, and very understanding as Kohli, 24, arrives three hours behind schedule. "Koi baat nahin," he says. "It isn't easy being a celebrity cricketer in India. I can understand how difficult it must be for Virat to juggle the demands. This is his time." Kapil Dev was 24 when he led India to its first World Cup triumph. Kohli was 23 when he lifted the trophy in 2011. If Kohli can deal with the inevitable rough patches in a cricketing career, says Kapil, Harbhajan Singh's prediction of 10,000 runs from the Delhi youngster's bat is safe. Kohli bows his head. "Kind of you to say that, sir." In conversation with TVTN SPORTS EDITOR VIKRANT GUPTA. India Today (IT) Kapil, in 2007 you said about Virat, "Bada achcha munda hai (He is a very good boy)." What was special about him? And Virat, did Kapil speak to you? Did he say you would become a big player? Kapil Dev (KD) No, I did not say that to him. He had played in the under-19 World Cup and I had heard his name a lot. I liked his approach to the game and the way he played. Virat Kohli (VK) I remember meeting sir. He congratulated me. Till then I had seen him only on TV.

MANDAR DEODHAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

"Our 1983 World Cup triumph was a revolution, ours in 2011 was a dream"
Virat Kohli

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS KAPIL DEV AND VIRAT KOHLI

PRAMOD PUSHKARNA/www.indiatodayimages.com

ON PUNJABI GENES

"I don't think only a Punjabi has fighting spirit.Everyone has it.But I think in that part of the world,we see more aggression.It's in the way our lives are,so it reflects on our faces quicker." Kapil Dev

KAPIL DEV WITH THE 1983 WORLD CUP TROPHY

"It's for others to judge whether it's about being a Punjabi or coming from north India. But people from the north are generally known to be aggressive and emotional. On the field, if we want to do something, we will do something." Virat Kohli
IT Hypothetically, would you have liked to play cricket in each other's era? KD I would have wanted to play throughout, no matter which era. IT This Indian team wants to win. When you started out, Kapil, even a draw felt like a victory. KD Back then we were babies in international cricket. But we got so much love, affection and recognition. It's the same with today's cricketers. But we had a private life as well. IT Virat, would you have liked to have a private life? VK Yes, very much. But I must mention the quality of fast bowling of the West Indies team or Australia or England in that era was of a different level. I look up to batsman of that era because cricket was so competitive, without adequate gear or protection, and in the worst conditions. IT Virat, Kapil Dev in T20 in IPL. Would you have wanted him in your team? VK He would have been the most valuable player for us. He was a brilliant fast bowler and batsman at the same time. Every team would have wanted him. IT Both of you won the World Cup at a young age. What did it mean emotionally and financially? In 1983, the cricket board did not have funds to honour the team. Lata Mangeshkar did a concert and the proceeds were distributed among the players. How different is it now? KD Money was not so relevant then. Neither is it today. The money players earn may appear huge but what percentage goes to them? I feel even today the money these cricketers make is not enough. IT Virat, during the World Cup, you actually cried on the ground.

VK It was my first World Cup. I was proud to be part of the team that won it. Of course, I cannot compare my feelings with that of sir because he was the captain and led the team to World Cup victory in 1983. That was the start of cricket, the religion, in India. It was a revolution. When we won it in 2011, it was a dream. KD I can only say we didn't dream. We couldn't dream. IT They had pressure. You didn't have any pressure. KD No, we couldn't dream that far. Our only dream was to qualify. Sometimes things just fall into your lap. Today's cricketers can dream. Experiencewise, they are far better. IT What does playing against Pakistan mean to both of you? KD There was huge pressure on us. At that time, Pakistan were better than us. They had a ruthless approach that we lacked. The all-time great Pakistani cricketers were from that time. They had everything. They had Imran Khan. He was the difference between India and Pakistan. IT Is India able to frequently get the better of Pakistan now because the mindset has changed or is it that Pakistan has lost good players? VK The rivalry has always been there. We've been inspired by previous games between India and Pakistan. A ruthless attitude is needed and it needs to be collective. IT Kapil, you were very young when you became captain. Did you change yourself to lead illustrious seniors? KD I realised that when you are captain, you have to give orders. Off the

"If you are good, you will be good in any era. I personally feel life has become tougher for cricketers now than in our era.We used to play 5-6 months a year and they play 10 months a year." Kapil Dev
"I wish I had the ability to bowl fast and bat at the same time. I didn't have the physique to do that. I dreamt of holding the bat and winning games for India." Virat Kohli
120
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS KAPIL DEV AND VIRAT KOHLI

"It was my first World Cup. I was proud to be part of the team that won. I can't compare my feelings with that of Kapil sir because he was captain and led the team to victory." Virat Kohli

"I wasn't a ladies'man. Ravi Shastri and Dilip Vengsarkar were the heartthrobs.These days girls like cricket a lot and these guys have a huge following. If these guys have good looks and play well, why not?" Kapil Dev
field, I would offer my chair to the seniors out of respect. But on it, my tone would change as I took charge. IT Virat, would you be as frank if you are made captain? VK I have seen this mindset in M.S. Dhoni. I asked him once what it was like to captain the likes of Sachin and Viru (Virender Sehwag) and he said the same thing: Respect off the field, execute your own plans on it. But I can't even think about captaincy right now. I am happy just playing. IT Kapil, the Sachin Tendulkar you know is different from the one Virat Kohli knows. He took baby steps when you were playing for India and he is the big daddy of Indian cricket now. KD Back then he would eat all the time. I remember the England tour when he was due to take his school exams. He took his books along. I don't know how much time he got to study. When I would come back at night, he would be fast asleep, books on his chest. I used to feel sorry for him, that he should be with his parents rather than playing cricket abroad. He used to be a very quiet person and still is. VK When I first got to see Sachin in the dressing room, he was sitting in a corner. I just kept looking at him for 15 minutes. When he looked at me, I looked down because I didn't know what to say. He congratulated me on my first series and I breathed a sigh of relief. It's great to play with a guy who inspired me to take up the game. IT Virat, is it difficult to imagine life post-Sachin Tendulkar? VK You can't even think of that sort of thing. We have lived in a time when people worshipped him. When he leaves, it will be a sad day.
GETTY IMAGES

TEAM TALK

VIRAT KOHLI (LEFT) WITH SURESH RAINA AFTER INDIA'S 2011 WORLD CUP VICTORY

"In our time,senior cricketers would talk to the youngsters at team meetings. The youngsters just listened.Now, they should feel lucky they have Dhoni as captain." Kapil Dev

"There are no restrictions. You are welcome in the dressing room and there is no rule you can't talk to a senior player."Virat Kohli

IT Kapil, besides being a great player, you were a heart-throb. Virat is a heart-throb now. KD No, I wasn't. These days girls like cricket a lot and these guys have a huge following. In our time, Ravi Shastri and Dilip Vengsarkar were the heartthrobs. I wasn't a ladies' man. If these guys have good looks and play well, why not? Enjoy your life and play hard.
Video available on iPad

122

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

