NA TION

AJMALKASAB

CASHING IN ON

KASAB
O

UPA Government has caught

its critics by surprise by hanging the lone surviving 26/11 terrorist. But it will now find it difficult to further delay a decision on the controversial Afzal Guru.
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Kiran Tare and Aditi Pai

AJMAL KASAB

n November 21, India woke up to the astounding news that the face of the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attack, Ajmal Kasab, had been hanged. Operation X, as it was unimaginatively named by the Government, was carried out at 7.30 in the morning in complete secrecy. The Government showed unusual and unprecedented decisiveness in executing Kasab, a Pakistani national. Home Minister Sushilkumar Shinde was beaming as he spoke to the media a little later, giving the sequence of events. "President Pranab Mukherjee rejected Kasab's mercy plea on November 5. I was away (for an Interpol meet) in Rome. I signed it immediately after I returned on November 7. The next day, I forwarded it to Maharashtra," he said, adding that a tough message needed to be sent on terrorism. Mukherjee also made it clear that he was not going to be a mere rubber-stamp President. He could have simply sat on Kasab's file, the way his predecessor Pratibha Patil did on two dozen others during her five-year term. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) rejected Kasab's mercy plea on October 23. Mukherjee acted on it in less than a fortnight. It also reflected a

toughening of the Government's resolve, with the prospect of an early Lok Sabha elections looming large. The execution stunned Pakistan and left BJP floundering for an appropriate response. External Affairs Minister Salman Khurshid claimed the Pakistan government had been informed about Kasab's impending execution, and that a message to Kasab's family had been conveyed through diplomatic channels. "I do hope the message to the world is that India stands by the rule of law, whether a person is our citizen or not," Khurshid told a TV channel. "We have fulfilled our obligation. Hope rule of law prevails in Pakistan as well," he added. Realising that it was not exactly the right time to host Pakistan's Interior Minister Rehman Malik, India on November 20 asked him to postpone his scheduled visit on November 22-23. The Pakistani side had proposed these dates for Malik's visit to operationalise the newly liberalised India-Pakistan visa agreement. It was to replace a restrictive 38-year-old visa agreement, paving the way for time-bound visa approval and greater people-to-people contact and trade. There is little chance of the visit taking place anytime soon, as India has not suggested any new dates. Though New Delhi cited the winter session of Parliament, starting on November 22, as the reason for its inability to host Malik, Shinde did not want to be seen hobnobbing with him days before the anniversary of 26/11. Sources say Islamabad's failure to punish those involved in the terrorist attack was the main reason. In an operation that was strictly based on a need-to-know principle,

Khurshid was kept in the loop only because diplomatic issues were involved. The swiftness and secrecy of the operation worked well. Shinde spelt out the reasons. "The Government did not want any untoward incidents in the run-up to the execution," he said. But even in his finest hour, the home minister made a gaffe. When asked by the media if the Prime Minister was aware that Kasab was going to be hanged on November 21, Shinde responded with a "no, no... only the home ministry and the President knew of it". This was later contradicted by Maharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan, who told TV channels

THE MANMOHAN SINGH GOVERNMENTWANTED TO DISPELTHE NOTION THAT ITWAS SOFT ON TERROR, OR WAS INCAPABLE OFTAKING DECISIVE ACTION.
that the Prime Minister was aware of the decision. Gaffes aside, the entire process--from September 18, when Kasab filed the mercy plea to the President, to the execution--took just over two months. The mercy appeal of Afzal Guru, an accused in the 2001 Parliament attack, though, is pending since October 2006. BJP tried to take the wind out of Congress' billowing sails by referring to it. "What about Afzal Guru, who attacked the Parliament, our temple of democracy, in 2001? That offence predates Kasab's heinous act by many years," tweeted Gujarat Chief Minister

Narendra Modi soon after. Kasab did jump the long queue of convicts waiting on the death row. In the list of 15 pending mercy petitions, Kasab's was the last. Guru was at number six. In June 2009, then law minister M. Veerappa Moily had eloquently declared, "You cannot pick and choose and hang." There was no escaping the queue system, he had said. Clearly, it is not the same anymore. The Manmohan Singh Government wanted to dispel the impression that it was soft on terror, or is a weak dispensation, incapable of taking decisive action. Congress leaders may have refrained from chest-thumping and claiming credit for the execution, but they did snatch the initiative from BJP. However, they conceded that Guru will be back at the centre of political discourse. Sources revealed that Mukherjee is keen to clear the other pending cases at the earliest. "He has already sent the other 14 files back to MHA for clarifications. They had been pending with his predecessor Pratibha Patil for a long time. He wants MHA to look at them afresh," a home ministry official said. However, Congress may not find it so easy in the other cases. A senior lawyer said that UPA could afford to make these noises only because Kasab was a foreigner, which differentiated him from others on the death row like Guru. "It is not going to be that easy in Guru's case. He has the potential to influence a vote bank," he said. However, the pressure to execute Guru has definitely increased on the Congress. It will have to do a delicate balancing act, keeping potential pitfalls in mind. "If they don't execute Guru, it will amount to an admission

DEADLY WAIT

Politics has stalled death sentences in sensational cases
AFZAL GURU MURUGAN, SANTHAN, PERARIVALAN
Crime Co-conspirators in Rajiv Gandhi assassination in 1991. Execution was slotted for September 9, 2011. Status Hangings stayed by Madras High Court on August 30, 2011. Opposed by DMK and AIADMK.

BALWANTSINGH RAJOANA

Crime Babbar Khalsa militant, he Crime Conspiracy. plotted the 1995 assassination of Jaish-e-Mohammed Punjab CM Beant Singh. terrorist plotted Execution slotted for March 31,2012. December 11, 2001, Status Opposed by SAD-BJP governParliament attacks. Execution was slotment in Punjab. Home ministry stayed sentence on March 28, 2012, after SGPC petition and ted for October 20, 2006. Status Still on death row. UPA fears state-wide bandhs. Refused appeal for mercy. impact on J&K and Muslim vote. Declared `living martyr'by clergy in March 2012.

AP PHOTO/MUMBAI MIRROR, SEBASTIAN D'SOUZA

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

NA TION

AJMALKASAB
ing," says an official. Kasab's mother Nooree Lai had expressed her desire to visit him in April 2009. It never materialised owing to diplomatic procedures. On November 5, Arthur Road Jail officials spread the news that Kasab was down with fever. There was speculation he was suffering from dengue. It was said that he was subjected to a thorough medical examination and blood tests, which found that he neither had dengue nor any other infection. It has now become clear that the jail authorities used dengue as a ploy to check whether he was medically fit to hang. It is mandatory in India to check a convict before he is hanged. A last-minute medical examination was also carried out, an hour before he was executed. Kasab was taken from Mumbai to Pune on a special flight in the early hours of November 19. The entire operation was closely monitored by 10 senior state police officers, including DGP Sanjeev Dayal, IGP Deven Bharti and Joint Commissioner Himanshu Roy. When they reached Kasab's cell in Arthur Road Jail, the terrorist looked frightened. "We saw fear on his face for the first time in the last four years," the official says. Jail officials read out to Kasab an MHA order pertaining to his hanging. He was asked to sign the order before he was handed over to officials of Yerawada Jail. Minutes before he was hanged on the morning of November 21, Yerawada Jail officials found him "upset". He prayed for a minute and asked the officials whether they had informed his family about his execution. He did not want to make a will or final testament. According to sources, Kasab did not show much emotion in his last nine days since being informed of the date of his execution. "He remained in his special cell and did not talk to anyone, as he used to in the past," a source says. Kasab's last few minutes were spent in prayer. He didn't have any special last wish, nor did he want to speak to anyone back home. "Quiet and nervous", he walked to the gallows after he was told there was no further scope for appeal. The lone surviving terrorist of the 26/11 attack on Mumbai was later buried in the same premises, as no one

PRESIDENT PRANAB MUKHERJEE

POINTOFNO RETURN

Pakistan says it will contact India for Ajmal Kasab's body only if his family asks for it. But there is no sign of his family.
JUD LEADER HAFIZ SAEED

HEMANT CHAWLA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

that Kasab was a soft target. If they do, Congress will have to be wary of its political fallout, and risk losing its critical vote bank," the lawyer added. The decision to hang Kasab on November 21 was taken at a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) on November 8, attended by Manmohan Singh, Shinde, Finance Minister P. Chidambaram and Defence Minister A.K. Antony. According to sources, CCS had considered executing Kasab on November 26, to mark the fourth anniversary of the terrorist attack. They decided against it, as it would appear as if India was trying to prove a point. "It was decided to make it quick and painless," disclosed government sources. In Maharashtra, only two prisons have execution facility--Nagpur's Central Jail and Pune's Yerawada Jail. The latter was chosen because of its proximity to Mumbai, where Kasab was lodged in the Arthur Road prison. Kasab was informed about the decision to hang him on November 12 by a jail official. According to sources, Kasab broke down, saying, "Allah kasam aisi galati dobara nahi karunga. Allah mujhe maf kare (I swear by Allah, I will not repeat the same mistake again. Allah, forgive me)". "He told us that his ammi (mother) in Pakistan should be conveyed a message about his hang-

DEATH BY NUMBERS
Justice for 26/11 victims was a long-drawn and costly affair

GETTY IMAGES

Rs 50 cr 55
is the amount the Maharashtra government spent to keep Kasab alive until his execution.

people have been executed in independent India. Ajmal Kasab is the first foreigner.

1,456

Number of days Kasab spent in jail since November 26, 2008, the day of the Mumbai attack.

akistan once again admitted that Ajmal Amir Kasab was indeed its national, even though indirectly. At 10.30 PST, the stateowned Associated Press of Pakistan quoted foreign ministry spokesman Moazzam Khan as saying: "The Indian Deputy High Commissioner informed us about Kasab's execution. His family has not yet contacted us to claim his body; however, Indian authorities can be contacted on the family's request." He signed off with a statement on Pakistan's condemnation of "all forms of terrorism" and "pledge to cooperate with the interna-

P

tional community". This was in line with what Interior Minister Rehman Malik, one of the few officials who spoke about the hanging, said: "If someone has done an act of terrorism, he should meet his logical end." There were a few voices of regret as well. "As a Pakistani, I feel ashamed of what he did, and seek apologies from all those whom he deprived of their loved ones," said Senator Pervez Rashid, spokesman of Nawaz Sharif's PML-N. There was no word from Jamaat-udDawa leader Hafiz Saeed, said to be the mastermind behind 26/11. Pakistan's electronic media--Geo

News, Dawn News, ARY News and Samaa News all quoted Indian media as they ran stories of the execution. A local TV news channel ran an audio tape quoting an LeT commander as saying Kasab's hanging would inspire more Pakistanis to emulate him. "Kasab was a Mujahideen role model: His death will inspire more attacks." Tehreek-i-Taliban spokesman Ehsanullah Ehsan called the death a big loss. Word of Kasab's execution spread like wildfire through Faridkot, his native village in Punjab. Relatives and neighbours poured into his home, now occupied by his uncle Abdul Ghafoor Kasab. There is, however, no sign of Kasab's family. Kasab's death has ended a tug-ofwar between Pakistan's Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) that is pursuing the case against the 26/11 accused, and Lahore's anti-terrorism court. FIA wanted the court to declare Kasab a proclaimed offender to speed up the trial against seven other LeT accused it chargesheeted in 2009 with planning and helping execute the 26/11 attack, including its military commander Zaki ur Rehman Lakhvi, Hammad Amin Sadiq, Jamil Ahmed, Younas Anjum, Zarar Shah, Abu al-Qama and Shahid Jamil Riaz. The execution could complicate the release of Indian `spy' Sarabjeet Singh, who was to be freed in July 2012 after President Asif Ali Zardari commuted his death sentence. "Pressure from extremists will make it difficult for Islamabad to release him," says Pakistani journalist Omar Farooq Khan. by Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad

The President rejected Kasab's mercy plea on November 5. I signed it as soon as I returned from Rome on November 7 and forwarded it the next day."
SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE Union Minister of Home Affairs

claimed the body. "It was a fitting end to a man who had butchered so many innocents," said Assistant Commissioner of Police Dilip Mane, who sprang from his chair in his Panvel home when he heard of the execution. On the night of November 26, 2008, Mane, then a senior inspector in charge of the Government Railway Police station at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus, rushed back to discover the concourse scattered with bodies. The faces and screams of the

wounded passengers were seared into his mind, he says. Ajmal Kasab and Ismail Khan had entered the station to spray bullets and fling grenades that killed 58 people and injured 104--a third of the 166 people who died in the Mumbai terrorist attack. Kasab and Khan continued their murderous spree after they left the station. They killed nine policemen: Two at the Cama Hospital, six in a police vehicle, that included ATS chief Hemant Karkare, Ashok Kamte and Senior

Inspector Vijay Salaskar, and later, the gallant Assistant Sub Inspector Tukaram Omble, who grappled with him at Girgaum Chowpatty. Social worker Kishore Bhatt was one of the first people to see Kasab in police captivity, late on the night of November 26, 2008. "He was brought to Nair Hospital for treatment and kept begging the policemen to kill him, as he had accomplished his mission," Bhatt said. The Indian state finally granted his wish.
with inputs from Devesh Kumar

48

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

NEW

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

