MAIL

Disunited States of America
NOVEMBER 19, 2012

Barack Obama will lead a fractured nation after a close popular vote

Obama will hopefully strive for a better economy and better tomorrow during his second term as US president. India must strengthen its strategic ties with the US.
HARPREET SANDHU,
Ludhiana

YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

President's Rule
The euphoria surrounding Barack Obama's victory four years ago was evidently missing this time ("Obama's Divided America", November 19). Now, the focus is on unresolved issues and the president will be under more pressure to perform. While Obama deserves encomiums for the manner in which he has dealt with and contained terrorism, the job of bringing peace in Afghanistan and Iraq is far from over. Obama has promised Americans that the best is yet to come. He is expected to bring about distinct change in social security, healthcare system and employment scenario. We in India hope Obama will work on IndoUS relations with a balanced approach and not make empty promises.
CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore

Rahul Must Act
It is high time Rahul Gandhi played a vital role in party affairs ("Rahul Begins the Party", November 19). During his political internship over the years, he has mellowed down. Moreover, with the diminishing role of Manmohan Singh, he is the best consensus candidate--at least in the Congress--to lead the country. His focus will help take forward the reform agenda of the Prime Minister.
VIRENDRA T., via email

Obama's victory has not been an easy one this time around and he must fulfil the American dream of retaining its superpower status, reversing recession and improving the job scenario in the US. He also has to win the Afpak conflict successfully besides containing the burgeoning power of China. With experience on his side, he should be able to deliver better this time than before.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Rahul Gandhi should come forward, rejuvenate his core team, restructure the organisational set-up to make it more effective. Most importantly, a communication system needs to be established with the masses and the party's grassroots workers to yield success.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

The people of US have given Obama another opportunity to help the country prosper. With deep divisions in the House and Senate, and many debilitating challenges in the pipeline, the Republicans and Democrats need to cooperate on every policy to perk up the economy and the country's relations

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

``

``

MAIL
with other countries. Either party opposing each other gratuitously without finding workable solutions will prove unhealthy for the nation, particularly when the balance of economic power is shifting slowing towards the east.
SANJIV GUPTA, Australia

35
will come out of it for either of the warring parties. Bal Thackeray could have played a great role in bringing Raj back into the fold to strengthen Shiv Sena, but unfortunately that is no longer possible. Uddhav has not been keeping well, so it's best for him to make peace with Raj.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

India has very little to cheer about Obama's re-election to the White House because be it on the issue of outsourcing of jobs or the stringent immigration laws, the Obama administration's relations with India have been less than lukewarm. One only hopes that New Delhi will not be coerced to toe the US line on Iran.
NALINI V., Thiruvananthapuram

The Shiv Sena needs to think afresh and bury differences with the workers of Maharashtra Navnirman Sena. This will be in the mutual interest of both parties. A united Sena can pose serious political threat to the Congress and NCP.
R.D.DESHPANDE, Bangalore

Gateway to Hell
The agony of Kerala-based Rubina and the cruel fate she had to endure when she was sent as a domestic help in the Gulf sends a shiver down one's spine ("One Way Ticket To Hell", November 19). It is unfortunate that helpless women are lured with job offers and forced into flesh trade. The story points to a greater decadence in our society which fails to provide for the poor, often forcing the needy to tread the wrong path. In this case, Rubina did not even know that she was being sold as a prostitute and had to undergo months of ordeal. It is high time that the government takes these matters seriously and secure future of women like Rubina.
ZOYA KHAN, Mumbai

Election of the US president is always an important factor for deciding the future of not only the US but even other countries including those in South Asia. But it is unfortunate that like in India, vote-bank politics based on class, race, gender and other minority issues became crucial in the victory of the US president this year.
S.C. AGARWAL, Delhi

Rubina's horrendous experience should come as a warning to many Indians who fall in the trap of greedy, lecherous agents who force women into the flesh trade under the pretext of offering them jobs. Even if one is desperate for work, it is essential to carry out adequate background checks on the person who is offering the job and also the middlemen involved, if any. Also, travelling with fake passports is a big no as it will close all legal doors. As it happened with Rubina, she was unable to approach the police despite being raped and abused. Also, welfare groups and NGOs in places like Kerala, where a large number of people tend to travel abroad for jobs, should screen the population and help raise awareness about the problems one can face in taking up jobs outside the country without doing proper background checks of employers.
ISABELLA THOMAS, Kottayam

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
DECEMBER 16-31, 197 7

Splitting Crisis
Brinkmanship is practised by political gamblers with an eye to overawe their opponents. Mrs Gandhi has in the present phase of the internal crisis of the Congress been persistently resorting to brinkmanship. After delivering a propaganda sheet in the form of a letter before the Shah Commission trying to justify her absence from proceedings, she went to the Congress Working Committee on December 5 to block the presence of other Congress leaders before the Shah Commission. Exploiting Home Minister Charan

Breather for Maya
With the Allahabad High Court dismissing criminal charges against Mayawati with respect to the Taj Corridor case, BSP must be heaving a sigh of relief. Mayawati should now redesign her strategies and carry out face-saving exercises to win back the confidence of her supporters. They should also keep UPA in good humour to be assured of their support.
ISHANI GANGULY, Durgapur

MRS GANDHI-- RESORTING TO BRINKMANSHIP

Time to Unite
Ego does not have any place in politics, hence it is better that both Raj and Uddhav Thackeray reconcile and unite again ("The Tiger's Dilemma", November 19). Their division will only benefit opponents and no good

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

Singh's rather indiscreet statement in Bombay--almost speaking on behalf of Justice Shah--Mrs Gandhi's three daredevil supporters, Devraj Urs, A.P. Sharma and B.P. Maurya demanded that the Congress Working Committee must put a total ban on any Congressman appearing before the Shah Commission. The absurdity of this move was exposed by Kerala Chief Minister A.K. Anthony who pointed out that a number of Congress leaders from the party president downwards had already submitted written affidavits before the Commission.

10

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

