COVER STORY

GUJARATASSEMBLYELECTIONS

NEXTSTOP DELHI?
As Modi wins Gujarat and begins the battle for India, time for him to realise the uses of reconciliation
By S. Prasannarajan

TOTAL SEATS 182
BJP

115
Congress

61

A
PTI PHOTO

new legend in Indian politics is being written on the banks of the Sabarmati. As Narendra Damodardas Modi soars over the wreckage of his challengers, it is more than a triumphant testament of the politics of prosperity. In a country where the attitudes of its ruling class are invariably incompatible with the aspirations of its people, his hat-trick in Gandhinagar essays the possibilities of leadership and the rewards of conviction. The size and sweep of his conquest shows in three-dimensional clarity that power, even absolute power, when wielded by a politician with integrity and vision, doesn't necessarily corrupt; rather, it becomes a mandate for

CHIEF MINISTER NARENDRA MODI ADDRESSES THE PEOPLE AFTER WINNING THE ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS, IN AHMEDABAD ON DECEMBER 20

Voters have an eye on the future

Narendra Modi

Click to watch Modi through Narsimha P's cartoons, at www.indiatoday.in/modi-toons
DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

17

COVER STORY

GUJARATASSEMBLYELECTIONS

change. Today, in an India of calcified reputations in governance, change becomes Modi, and going by the velocity of his ascent, his domain is bound to be larger than Gujarat. So this victory is only a pause before the next battle, the bigger one, for the highest seat of power. But the armoury is unlikely to be different. If there is only one man standing in Battlefield Gujarat on the day of judgment, it is a vindication of the politics perfected by India's most popular chief minister--and BJP's only regional leader with a national fan following. In Moditva, the bestselling idea of Indian Right, merges the uses of good economics and the reach of evangelical politics. Modi is that rare Hindu nationalist who doesn't shop in mythology for his political wares in spite of being labelled as an ideological zealot; he buys his goods for mass consumption from the marketplaces of twenty-first century. Modi on the stump has never been a salesman of the Great Yesterday unlike desperate right wingers elsewhere. That is why the overwhelming vote for Modi Part Three is also a mandate for the moderniser who has reaped the biggest demographic dividend of the country: The youth. He ensured them a future. At a time when the professional politician is struggling to overcome the trust deficit, Modi's record in governance highlights the essential virtues of a ruling politician: Honesty and an ability to deliver on economic promises.

INTERVIEW NARENDRA MODI

"People want work,not words"
An impressive victory under his belt, Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi spoke to Senior Editor UDAY MAHURKAR on the verdict and the changes it could trigger in Indian politics. Q. How do you see your victory? A. The BJP victory in Gujarat is a landmark development in Indian political history. People today want definite results. They want actual change at the ground level. Just words don't work. Voters need the confidence that you are working for their good. If you pass this test, they accept you. This victory proves we have passed the acid test. Q. What does it augur for India as a whole? A. The Gujarat poll result is set to bring a paradigm shift in Indian politics. It has given a message to one and all-- leave the politics of divisiveness and play the politics of development. Voters elsewhere in the country will evaluate their own political parties and leaders in the backdrop of Gujarat's development. Q. Many now believe your march to Delhi has already begun. A. Such debates are the preserve of political pundits and we should leave it to them. My responsibility is towards the voters of Gujarat. My focus is on how well I can fulfil the aspirations of the people who have reposed faith in me. At the moment, my mantra is only Gujarat, Gujarat and Gujarat. Q. Why were you constantly targeting Sonia and Rahul during the campaign? A. I was not targeting them but replying to their negative campaigning. In the entire campaign, they tried to portray my Gujarat in poor light instead of talking about
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

andate 2012 in Gujarat, in that sense, was a referendum on Brand Modi. As it was in 2002 and 2007. In the beginning, though, it was a different story, darker and daunting. He first led the Assembly elections in Gujarat a decade ago in the aftermath of post-Godhra communal carnage. For the aggrieved political Hindu, the burning train in Godhra was a less spectacular version of the towering inferno of 9/11. The rejoinder was nothing less than the bloodlust of a militant majority, and Modi's administration did not come clean. Then, Modi was far from being the "vikas purush"; he was the action hero of Hindu nationalism. He won Gujarat 2002 in the name of the nation, and there was of course Mian Musharraf as a saleable

M

their government's achievements. I expected Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to speak on development but instead he chose to dabble in vote-bank politics. When I went into the history of the Nehru family, I was only responding to what Rahul said about his own family. I was forced to show them the mirror. Q. Many believe that you shouldn't have raked up the sensitive Sir Creek issue in the poll. A. I had first raised it in the National Security Council meeting in Delhi in April. I had to rake it up again during elections as I came to know that the UPA Government was planning to give concessions to Pakistan in the Sir Creek area in the meeting with Pakistan's Interior Minister Rehman Malik on December 15. It is because of my public intervention that the meek Government has been prevented from giving a concession. Q. Many still think of you as anti-Muslim. A. My aim is all-round development of six crore Gujaratis. I see the poor as poor and not as Hindus and Muslims. What's wrong with that? Why should the nation be divided along Hindu and Muslim lines? Today Gujarat is number one on 20-point programme implementation. Are poor Muslims not its beneficiaries? My government has raised the rate of institutional deliveries from 40 to 98 per cent. Muslim women are also the beneficiaries of this success. The Gujarat result means the beginning of a process that will sound the death knell for vote-bank politics in the country.
For full text of interview, go to www.indiatoday.in/modi-interview; for an intimate portrait of Modi by Uday Mahurkar, go to www.indiatoday.in/modi-close

ROAD AHEAD
Now that his political size is bigger than Gujarat, Modi's unstoppable journey to Delhi begins.Also his new battles.

He cannot afford to alienate Nagpur, which still holds veto power in the Sangh Parivar.As his popularity soars, RSS under Mohan Bhagwat may be left with no choice but its extraordinary swayamsevak.
MOHAN BHAGWAT

He has to win his own party suffering from an embarrassment of leadership riches. Though there are so many prime ministerial ambitions within, nobody can match his stature now. Can he match their cunning?

The 10.5 per cent Muslim vote may not have mattered for him in Gujarat.As national leader, he will have to overcome the trust deficit and exorcise the ghost of 2002.The challenge is to become a reconciler.
NITIN GADKARI

NITISH KUMAR

He plays the game solo with devastating effect, but if he wants to play at the national level, he has to learn to be team leader.

He is not popular with the secular allies of NDA such as Nitish Kumar's JD(U). If BJP is not in a commanding position in 2014, allies may scuttle the chances of the party's most qualified candidate.

The Great Communicator has the habit of being carried away by his own rhetoric, and sometimes he trips on his own words which can be dangerous in the television age. Moderation will help.

18

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

19

COVER STORY

GUJARATASSEMBLYELECTIONS

WAYS OF THE MASS MESMERISER
Why Modi on the stump is a class apart



POWER RISE
Modi's assets grew 212 per cent in five years, from Rs 42.55 lakh in 2007 to Rs 1.33 crore in 2012, as per the affidavit filed with his nomination papers. 

NAMO GUJARAT

FACE-SAVER

ICONIC STATEMENT
"Don't look at the candidates. Look at me, my work and vote for me. I am your candidate on all 182 seats," Modi said in his 3D speech.

ULTIMATE DIMENSION



POWER ACCESSORIES
Red bandhini turban, white or saffron scarf, Cross pen and a Seiko watch gifted by a friend.

POWER TEAM

Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Arun Jaitley, former Gujarat home minister Amit Shah, BJP National Vice President Purushottam Rupala, state BJP president R.C. Faldu, BJP spokesperson Nirmala Sitharaman and the state's power minister Saurabh Patel. Modi's aide Rakesh Patel handled his Maninagar seat. Maulik Bhagat, 27-year-old son of state BJP leader Parindu Bhagat, was the brain behind Modi's 3D campaign.

POWER SYMBOL
Cupcakes with the BJP symbol, which were distributed across the state. It was the brainchild of Maulik Bhagat.
ARUN JAITLEY AMIT SHAH

STAR BUDDIES

To watch Modi's power buddies, tap on your iPad edition
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

To watch Modi on social media, tap on your iPad edition

bogeyman. He lost the Muslim vote, and he has not regained it yet. In 2007, he did not abandon the mask of masculine Hindutva, but his weapon of mass mobilisation was development, and the economic indexes of Gujarat, more inspiring than India's, vindicated his rhetoric of yes-we-can. His victory march five years ago marked the arrival of India's most audacious practitioner of development politics. In Gujarat 2012, his pace has become faster, and his words more sulphuric. He was the messenger as well as the message. The messenger, always towering above the rest, a verbal gladiator whose range is broader than his 56'' chest, is Gujarat's Cicero. Magisterial and mocking, acerbic and sarcastic, Indian politics' most effective communicator deploys every trick of storytelling to conquer the minds of his frenzied audience. The message is all about governance and leadership, development and national honour. Gujarat is an example, the larger theme is India. Throughout his campaign, Modi used Gujarat as a model and India of the UPA

Government as a country misgoverned and looted. He never allowed Congress leaders of Gujarat to get into his speeches; they were too small for him. His targets were those who let down the nation: Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and Manmohan Singh. The first two, in his stump speeches, embodied the politics of entitlement; the Prime Minister was a byword for inefficiency and lack of leadership. To maximise the power of his message, he used the wonders of high technology and the time-tested methods of street politics to devastating effect; it was political kitsch three dimensional as well as traditional. Modi wanted to win Gujarat for India's sake. Can he win India? The self-portrait of Modi on the Gujarat canvas to a large extent resembles the leader India is missing today. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, in spite of his belated--and desperate--reinvention as reformer, is not exactly a model of leadership. The overwhelming motif of UPA 2 is corruption, and the Prime Minister, who by nature or

training is not a professional politician, has consistently failed to bring accountability or transparency to governance. Modi has never missed an opportunity to make fun of Manmohan's deadening "maun" (silence). Rahul, the leader-in- waiting and Congress's chief campaigner, has not yet revealed to India whether he will be different; he has not come out with a captivating slogan for the future either. The Indian growth story has already lost its lustre, and the political leadership can't escape the blame for stagnation. Modi's Gujarat, by contrast, shows good economics and good politics can go together. In the end, it all boils down to "It's the Leader, Stupid!" It can be said about BJP too. If Congress never wants to step beyond the sheltering shadow of the Leader with a capital L, the BJP story is about the profusion of leaders, even though the real performers are in the states rather than at the centre. The patriarch, in spite of the heartbreak of General Elections 2009, has not yet left the playing field. The appeal of the so-called Generation Next, which mainly con-

sists of greying apparatchiks, does not reach the grassroots. The party president, with his refusal to step aside in the face of corruption charges, thinks there is no clash between his questionable business interests and his political interests. At a time when the biggest crisis in Indian politics is moral and its most obvious manifestation is the UPA's attitude towards corruption, BJP, the erstwhile party with a difference, has abdicated its moral responsibility by protecting its president.

A

mong the party's successful chief ministers, few can claim national name recognition. Modi stands apart; he is the only brand that sells across the country, as almost every opinion poll has shown. But in a party of clashing prime ministerial ambitions and egos larger than their political worth, he is projected only as one among equals. Now those who are threatened by his stardom have reason to be intimidated by the size of his victory: He has lost only two

20

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Star campaigners Smriti Irani and Paresh Rawal; Ajay Devgn, who moderated Modi's Google Hangout broadcast in September; Irfan Pathan, who appeared with Modi in Kheda on December 12.

MODI WITH IRFAN PATHAN (LEFT)

SOCIAL IQ

The Chief Minister is active on social networks, be it Facebook, Google+ or YouTube. His website, Narendramodi.in, is regularly updated and one can watch his speeches live on it.

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012



NARENDRA DAMODARDAS MODI, 62

On October 4, a day after the announcement of Gujarat's Assembly Election schedule, BJP launched a 24X7 TV channel, NaMo Gujarat, named after the Chief Minister with the aim to promote him. 

The 9-inch statues, available for Rs 100 in plaster of Paris and Rs 750 in resin, show him wearing a saffron kurta and a white jacket. They were designed by filmmaker Manish Baradia, who had also made Modi masks in 2007.



On November 18, a virtual Modi addressed rallies simultaneously from four separate stages across Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Surat and Rajkot. The exercise cost BJP Rs 40 crore.
To watch Modi's 3D avatar, tap on your iPad edition

CHIEF YATRI
Modi did a month-long Vivekanand Yuva Vikas Yatra in November, using the same rath--a Volvo bus--that L.K. Advani used for his anticorruption Jan Chetna Yatra in 2011. He toured 150 of the 182 Assembly segments.







DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

COVER STORY

GUJARATASSEMBLYELECTIONS
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE THIRD WAVE
Narendra Modi's magic has ensured that Gujarat stays firmly in the saffron fold

2012 2007
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Constituency-wise break-up

2012 Gujarat polls Total seats 182
BJP

2007 Gujarat polls
BJP

2002 Gujarat polls
BJP

India Today photographer Shailesh Raval chronicles the rise of Modi through pictures, at www.indiatoday.in/modi-rise

115
BJP CONGRESS OTHERS GUJARATPARIVARTAN PARTY(GPP)
GPP

117
49.1% votes

127
49.8% votes

2
Others Cong

Others

Cong

Others

Cong

6
12.9% votes

59
38% votes

4
10.9% votes

51
39.3% votes

4

61

seats from his 2007 tally of 117. Modi may never admit that he has outgrown Gujarat, but the logical destination of his journey is Delhi. To reach there he has to now win the battle within his own political parivar. It will be much more arduous than the battles he has won consistently in Gujarat, and it is unlikely that he will lead a revolt within the House of Saffron, particularly so when he is not the favourite swayamsevak of RSS. He has become too big and modern for them, a leader who listens only to his own instincts. An RSS official tells INDIA TODAY: "The Sangh knows that he can win the elections for BJP but his dictatorial style will make him bigger than the party and RSS itself. He will become BJP, much like how Indira Gandhi became Congress." Or, much like the way Atal Bihari Vajpayee, with the sheer force of his personality, defied Nagpur--and had

his way. In the end, the party and RSS will have to come to terms with the parivar's most popular son, as they did with Vajpayee. One Gadkari has already cost the family a great amount of goodwill. "The way Modi is, he will never work under Gadkari or any other leader for that matter. He may agree to come to Delhi to lead the party. However, ideally he would like to continue as chief minister and come to Delhi only as the prime ministerial candidate," says a BJP leader close to Modi. Force Modi the invincible is certain to become Modi the inevitable for the Sangh Parivar--if not in 2014, then in 2019. As he leads the politics of change in Gujarat, he himself refuses to change. For more than a decade, he ruled Gujarat like a monarch; he was answerable to none but himself. It worked, and the cult of the maximum leader be-

came larger than the party. But me-alone politics is not the MODI SEEKS BLESSINGS OF HIS MOTHER HIRABEN AFTER HIS VICTORY perfect route to Delhi. Here again, the role model available The rollercoaster has to become the reconciler. Now that for him is Vajpayee, who had set the gold standard for he has proven with such flamboyance that he is not only cainclusive leadership. Modi and moderation do not jell, still. pable of winning, again and again, but adept at managing He is as much a polarising figure as he is popular. For the victory as well, it is the ideal occasion for the conqueror the secular allies of NDA like Nitish Kumar, to undergo a makeover. After all, the Modi story is one of Indian politics' most enduring he is not acceptable as a prime ministerial transformative sagas. He has come a long way candidate. Nitish won't be able to use his veto THE PARTY AND from the politics of emotions circa 2002. But power if BJP is in a commanding position after RSS WILL HAVE the scars of the riots are still etched on national 2014--or if the party is more effective in the TO COME TO memory. "Sorry" is not always uttered by the art of winning new friends. It is not that there TERMS WITH guilty; it can be the magical word of are no potential allies out there. J. Jayalalithaa THE PARIVAR'S reconciliation from a leader who has the and Naveen Patnaik, or even Y.S. Jagan Mohan MOST POPULAR courage to own up the crimes of others. When Reddy of YSR Congress, are not fanatically SON. ONE Delhi is on his mind, a clear conscience will anti-saffron. "It is the perfect time for us to GADKARI HAS make his stride towards Raisina Hill a lot more expand the NDA base. The leaders should be ALREADY COST acceptable. working overtime to forge new alliances and with Bhavna Vij-Aurora THE FAMILYA strengthen old ones. But right now, they are GREATAMOUNT busy strengthening their own positions," How to read and view videos on India Today digital magazine on iPad: (a) Go to Apple laments a party veteran. It is Modi's moment OF GOODWILL. App Store; (b) Search for "India Today to be the leader who can reach out--and Magazine"; (c) Download the App realise the virtues of moderation.

22

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

23

