GLASS HOUSE

by PRIYA SAHGAL

GEHLOT'S SELF-GOAL

OVERHEARD
At the Congress headquarters in Gujarat about Modi's 3D Campaign

R

ajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot can't seem to stop his foot from finding place in his mouth. On November 18, while inaugurating an underpass in Jaipur, he was heard complaining about how the state has to spend Rs 800 crore on funding the subsidy of three LPG cylinders per family. Gehlot told the audience that the state could easily spend that money on welfare schemes instead. As if that was not enough, he turned to his long-time rival, Union minister C.P. Joshi, and said, "I hope Joshiji will convey this feeling to UPA president Soniaji and Prime Minister Manmohan Singhji." Joshi seemed only too happy to comply.
GEHLOT (RIGHT) WITH JOSHI IN JAIPUR

Jo dikhta hai woh hai nahin, jo hai woh dikhta nahin. (What you see is not there, what is there is not visible.)
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

RUDY

Rudy's Flight Plan
ongress leaders Salman Khurshid, Digvijaya Singh and Kapil Sibal, along with RLD's Ajit Singh and BJP leader Vasundhara Raje were seen at a dinner party at Amar Singh's home on November 17, but the guest who raised the most eyebrows was BJP's Rajiv Pratap Rudy, who came wearing his IndiGo uniform. He flies with the airline on an honorary basis. But why wear the uniform to a dinner party? Perhaps the rumours are true and Rudy--a Nitin Gadkari protege--is getting ready to fly the BJP's nest.

C

MUSICAL MAMATA
Salil Chowdhury was part of Indian People's Theatre Association, the cultural wing of CPI. But that didn't stop West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee from celebrating the 90th birth anniversary of the legendary music composer. Now if only she was so kind to CPI.

Saying It with Flowers

D

ANTONY

efence minister A.K. Antony was embarrassed when he drove to late K.C. Pant's south Delhi home on November 15 to offer his condolences. The Pant family wanted a private funeral for the former defence minister. They had already taken his body for cremation soon after he died that morning. There was no relative at home to meet Antony. So he returned after leaving the flowers behind. Fingers are being pointed at a senior bureaucrat within the defence ministry for the faux pas.
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

ON THE CARDS
JD(U) chief Sharad Yadav's daughter Subhashini is getting married on November 27. It's going to be a crossparty reception in the Capital with Sonia Gandhi, Manmohan Singh among invited guests, along with BJP, SP, BSP and Left leaders. Now if only such coordination was visible on the floor of the House.

Modi and Gadkari See the Light

B

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

JP leaders can't seem to get

enough of Swami Vivekananda. First Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi called his campaign roadshow the Vivekananda Yuva Vikas Yatra. Now it's Gadkari's turn to climb onto the Vivekananda bandwagon. The Diwali greeting cards sent out by the BJP president have a portrait of Swami Vivekananda. At least the two agree on something.

MODI (LEFT) WITH GADKARI

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

17

GLASS HOUSE
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

A Job for Krishna

S

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

M. Krishna is yet to be reinstated after his highprofile resignation from the Cabinet. His supporters were hoping he'd be made chairman of the 14th Finance Commission but this found few takers in North Block. Finance Minister P. Chidambaram is apparently not too keen on the candidature of former RBI governor Y.V. Reddy either. In the absence of agreement on chairman, the likely members-- tax expert Parthasarathi Shome, former economic affairs secretary R. Gopalan and former expenditure secretary Sushma Nath--are still waiting.
KRISHNA

India Inc Needs Help
op bosses of apex industry chamber FICCI are breathing easy after the ouster of economist Rajiv Kumar as secretary general earlier this month.The Oxford-educated Kumar, who replaced Amit Mitra in 2011, was seen as too intellectually inclined and unwilling to lobby hard with UPA. Kumar's successor A. Didar Singh, a retired IAS officer, will be at home in the corridors of power. His deputy, Director General Arbind Prasad, is a serving IAS officer on leave from the Government. India Inc seems determined to bring top babus to help its cause.

T

SHARAD PAWAR (RIGHT) WITH SUPRIYA SULE

SOFTER SIDE OF POLITICS
day after attending Bal Thackeray's funeral, NCP chief Sharad Pawar was in a nostalgic mood. He told visitors at his Krishi Bhavan office in Delhi that in 2006, when he decided to field his daughter Supriya Sule as a Rajya Sabha candidate from Maharashtra, he got a late-night call from the late Shiv Sena chief.Thackeray told Pawar that neither the Sena nor BJP would be fielding a candidate against Supriya.A surprised Pawar told him that it was not necessary. But Thackeray retorted that "I have not fallen so low that I will field a candidate against someone who I've held in my lap when she was just two days old." That's politics, old school style.

A

Mithun's Role Call

GETTY IMAGES

Snub of the Week

L

obbying has begun for three Rajya Sabha seats from West Bengal that will be up for grabs next year. All three fall in the TMC quota. Mithun Chakraborty is said to be keen to enter the Upper House and is hoping that both the film actor and son of Bengal card will work with the culturally nuanced Mamata Di.

T

MITHUN

he Rajasthan High Court has pulled up the Ashok Gehlot government. On November 19, Chief Justice Arun Mishra and Justice N.K. Jain criticised the delay in removing encroachments in Jaipur's Amanishah Nullah, and said "there is only jungle raj in the state".

KUMAR

SPOTTED
Nitin Gadkari-baiter Ram Jethmalani was spotted sitting next to the BJP president at Mumbai Mayor Sunil Prabhu's bungalow, a little before Shiv Sena chief Bal Thackeray's funeral. According to sources present, the two exchanged glances but there was no conversation. Later, when they reached the site of the funeral, they avoided even looking at each other.

"All of us in public life should be beyond reproach. I call upon Nitin Gadkari to immediately step down from the post of our party president."
YASHWANT SINHA BJP leader

"I am the bridge between the state and Centre and to try and pigeonhole me as one or the other is simplistic."
OMAR ABDULLAH J&K Chief Minister

"Secular now means approval from all religions and communities. At a point in the future, every scene will have a disclaimer."
ANURAG KASHYAP Filmmaker

with ROHIT PARIHAR, DEVESH KUMAR, DHIRAJ NAYYAR, SANDEEP UNNITHAN, TITHI SARKAR AND KIRAN TARE

18

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

