UP FRONT

BIBEK DEBROY

MORALOFTHE GUJARATSTORY
et's take this in parts. There was reluctance to accept the vironmental disasters along the coast or elsewhere. The growth story is reluctantly accepted, development Gujarat growth story, dismissing it as "hype". Since growth is reflected in data, that growth is finally no story rarely and governance story never. But there is a longer contested. How can objective facts be "hype"? Gujarat governance story. It is partly based on fiscal consolidation and has registered double-digit growth since the 10th Plan (2002- using fiscal space to plug gaps in central sector and centrally 07). Among large states, so have Bihar, Maharashtra and sponsored schemes with state-level ones. The story isn't that Tamil Nadu. Relatively more advanced states find it difficult much about increasing public expenditure. It is more about to find sources for growth, a point to remember for Bihar. Had creating an environment for private expenditure. In both historical trends alone provided momentum, Karnataka education and health, there are instances of moving away should have grown fast. Volatility of growth has also declined from traditional government monopolies in delivery. The in Gujarat, a reflection of agricultural performance. story is also about increasing efficiency of public expenditure. Triggered by roads, electricity (the Jyotigram Yojana) and There is an important e-governance component too, discrewater (inter-basin transfer of water), there has been agricul- tion having been removed for assorted certificates. There is tural diversification and commercialisation in many histori- also decentralisation down to talukas, facilitated by Gujarat's cally deprived districts. Dairy, animal husbandry, horticulture long tradition of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and are examples. Second, the growth story is still misunderstood. participatory planning. Since 2003, Chintan Shibirs are also In popular perception, Gujarat's economic growth is about illustrative, ensuring the government does not work in silos large-scale industry. However, there has been an increase in and departments and enabled cross-fertilisation of ideas the number of factories and MSME (micro, small and medium which resulted in better formulation of schemes and better enterprises) clusters. The share of manufacturing in GSDP has implementation. Transfers, postings and implementation declined. It is the non-manufacturing industry and services have become more insulated from political interference. The that have increased. Therefore, Gujarat's growth is also about governance story is a standard development template that agriculture, MSMEs, non-manufacturing industry and services. any state ought to adopt and implement. It is always difficult to disentangle various factors that Let's move to development, the argument being that growth is not synonymous with development. Gujarat does go into ensuring the growth, development and governance not do well in social sectors. Poverty ratios show sharp de- story. First, there is a legacy factor, and Gujarat governcline in rural poverty between 2004-05 and 2009-10. While ments prior to 2002 have left a positive impact. Second, Gujarat has had a healthy tradition of priurban poverty hasn't declined that much, if SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com vate entrepreneurship and an equally rural poverty has declined sharply, growth healthy scepticism of government. Third, must have been inclusive. Nor is there any in sectors like water and roads, Gujarat has evidence that inequality has increased. also benefited from favourable exogenous In social sectors, the timeline of data is circumstances, including locational and important, since explicit focus on social secgeographical advantages, as it has from tors started in the 11th Plan (2007-12). negative push factors in other states, Gujarat hasn't done well in social sectors automobiles and auto ancillaries being an but have there been temporal improinstance. Having said this, there is no vements over time and have remedial getting away from Chief Minister Narendra measures been taken? As one example, Modi's leadership role. More specifically, there has been sharp decline in the number social sector push, empowerment of of out-of-school children between 2006 and bureaucracy and insulation from political 2011. Those improvements also come across in National University of Educational There is no getting away interference, clamping down on corruption, decentralisation, emphasis on private Planning and Administration's DISE (District from Narendra Modi's sector and message of pride in Gujarat's Information System for Education) dataset. leadership role in social growth and development bear his In health, the percentage of institutional deliveries has risen from 55.87 per cent in sector push, empowerment personal stamp. That part is thus personspecific and not systemic, a phenomenon 2003-04 to 93.5 per cent in 2011-12. of bureaucracy and Immunisation coverage has increased. insulation from political also true of some other fast-growing states. Objective analysis requires that Extremist violence has been contained deinterference, clamping credit should be given. spite geographical proximity with violencedown on corruption, prone states. And despite the emphasis on decentralisation, and industrialisation, refineries and port-led Bibek Debroy is a professor at the Centre development, there have been no major en- emphasis on private sector. for Policy Research, Delhi

L

08

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

