SOCIETY

ASSAM
VEERANGANA COMMANDOS TRAIN AT THE BATTALION CAMP IN DERGAON, ASSAM

Roadside Romeos Meet Their Match
Assam Police sets up India's first female commando unit to tackle rising crime against women in the state
By Kaushik Deka

wenty four-year-old Boby Baishya wakes up at five every morning. Dressed in battle fatigues, she reaches Assam Police's Battalion Training Camp in Dergaon, where a gruelling day awaits her. Over the next five hours, this 5'10'' girl--who represents Assam in volleyball and India in netball--runs 6 km, trains in firing Kalashnikovs and other assault weapons, takes lessons in the Chinese martial art of Wushu and practises dangerous stunts on a motorbike. She follows it with a quick breakfast and an hour-long lecture on the Indian Penal Code. The next session starts at 2.30 p.m. and continues for two hours. "It's a tough schedule, but the pride I feel on being part of this mission makes me forget the physical and mental pain," says Baishya, the youngest daughter of a government employee from Sivasagar. She is not alone. Fortythree girls from various corners of the state have been enduring this rigorous routine for the last five months. Members of Veerangana, which means women warriors in Assamese, these girls form India's first all-woman silent drill commando unit. The special platoon has been raised to check violence against women on the streets of Assam. It will be commissioned on January 26, 2013. Dressed in black fatigues and purple cap, the commandos, divided into groups of six doubling up on three bikes, will initially

T

patrol the state capital Guwahati round the clock. "We will definitely break the myth of masculine supremacy based on physical strength. Whether it's chasing chain-snatching bikers or immobilising potential rapists, we have the skills and strength for hand-to-hand combat," says 22-year-old Pompi Patgiri, taking a break in between her Wushu duel with a fellow trainee. Patgiri was a state-level champion in this martial art before joining Assam Police in 2010. On special occasions, Veerangana commandos will move around in plain clothes to work as decoys in places with

the nation--in which a gang of rowdies brutally molested a 21-year-old girl outside a pub for over 40 minutes-- Mahanta had proposed the creation of a special force to handle rising crimes against women in Assam. Thanks to the initiative taken by state Director General of Police Jayanto Narayan Choudhury, his proposal was instantly approved. On April 18, three Assam Police women recruits were sent to Tamil Nadu for a 15-day-long special training in silent drill. "The next step--selecting the girls who could withstand the rigorous training module especially created for Veerangana--was the toughest," says Hazarika. Fifty-one girls were inducted after a selection test that comprised of a 5-km run, 100 push-ups, obstacle courses, rope climbing and general IQ questions. "We recruited only those with aptitude. As a result, our attrition rate isn't high. Only eight girls have left the unit, all because of personal issues," says Hazarika. On November 9, Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi officially raised Veerangana in Guwahati. The impact is already being felt.

What is a silent drill platoon?
Across the world, silent drill platoons are known for their unique precision-exhibition drill in handling a rifle. The commandos execute a series of calculated drill movements with precise handling of their .303 Mark 3, No 1 rifles, weighing 4.127 kg. It involves a rifle inspection and elaborate rifle spins and tosses. They perform these precise drills flawlessly, without a single verbal command ever being spoken. The only sound they make is the rhythmic slap of rifles caught by leather-gloved hands.
BIJU BORA

"The goal is to make a woman feel confident of her sexual identity. She must not be at the mercy of men to feel safe from other men."
BHASKAR JYOTI MAHANTA, INSPECTOR GENERAL, ASSAM POLICE (TRAINING AND ARMED POLICE)
a history of crimes against women. "I want to build confidence in women about their own abilities, and create fear among men who don't respect women," adds Baishya, who left her graduate studies midway to join Assam Police as a constable in 2010. "After joining Veerangana, I have realised the hidden strength in me. It's like being born anew. I no longer feel intimidated by a man's strength," says Mandira

Chetri, who, along with Baishya, was one of the first three recruits of Veerangana. This 24-year-old from Tezpur joined the elite force a month after her wedding in March. "I do miss my husband, but don't regret my decision," says Chetri, whose coy smile and childlike enthusiasm hides a steely resolve. Satyakam Hazarika, commanding officer at the Dergaon Battalion Training Camp, says, "She had already

joined us before we decided to recruit unmarried women only." According to the National Crime Records Bureau, Assam's rate of crime against women was the second highest in India in 2011. Assam Police officers believe that Veerangana will help the state get rid of this unsavoury reputation. "A victim of molestation doesn't feel comfortable in a group of policemen. Veerangana commandos are

trained not just to take swift action against violators, but also to make a woman feel safe and confident of her sexual identity. She must not be at the mercy of men to feel safe from other men," says Assam Police Inspector General (Training and Armed Police) Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta, the brain behind this special unit. Four months before the G.S. Road molestation case on July 9 that shook

Though the Veeranganas are yet to appear on the streets, Guwahati's parks, pubs and other areas infamous for assaults on women now look deserted after dark. "With local media having already highlighted the unit, the general impression is that the commandos are already at work and may be monitoring activities in disguise. Miscreants are thus either on alert or mending their ways," says Hazarika. 

58

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

