GLASS HOUSE

by PRIYA SAHGAL

SWADESHI NETA, VIDESHI SHOES

OVERHEARD
IN PARLIAMENT
NATH

B

JP spokesperson Syed Shahnawaz

Hussain arrived in Parliament in a brand new bandgala on December 12. "It is my birthday today," he announced to anybody who cared to ask. However, a party colleague known for noticing such things focused on his Italian designer shoes instead. "So that is the reason you are wearing Ferragamo loafers," he remarked. For once, the verbose Hussain was left speechless. "Aap ne kaise pehchaana (How did you recognise them)?" he asked. "Renu ne gift kiye," Hussain quickly added, referring to his wife. What, we wonder, is the Sangh policy on Italian designers? The same as FDI in retail?
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Kamal Nath, Union parliamentary affairs minister, was asked at what time he woke up each morning. Pat came the reply,"First ask me what time I sleep at night."

Always on the Job
journalist asked the Prime Minister's Communications Adviser Pankaj Pachauri about Manmohan Singh's latest bedside read. Pachauri replied, "A draft copy of the 12th Plan." And no, he wasn't joking.

A

SUKHBIR BADAL

Quick Gun Badal
t's no contest. Punjab Deputy Chief Minister Sukhbir Singh Badal is the fastest draw in the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD).When Congress leaders demanded that he quit as the state's home minister after SAD goons shot dead a police assistant sub-inspector in Amritsar, young Badal was lightning quick: "I demand the Prime Minister's resignation for the Mumbai terror attack." A TV reporter who persisted in asking Badal about the involvement of his partymen was dispensed with equal flourish: "Two journalists of a TV channel are charged with extortion. Does that make all journalists extortionists?"Ouch.

I

Power Algebra

I

BUZZ
OF THE WEEK

Guest Appearance
ajya Sabha MP and film star Rekha made a rare appearance in Parliament during the vote on FDI on retail on December 7. Since the treasury benches had issued a whip, it was mandatory for all MPs to attend.When Javed REKHA Akhtar asked her why she didn't come to Parliament more often, she pointed out that she did so every time she was invited.Ah, now that's a novel excuse for missing work.

The hunt is on for a new petroleum secretary as the incumbent G.C. Chaturvedi retires early next year. The PMO has one essential criteria in mind: The candidate should have no links with any business house. PMO officials are still singed by allegations of a businesspolitics nexus when they shifted S. Jaipal Reddy out of petroleum in the last Cabinet reshuffle.
10
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

R

PTI

t was Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh who called it the C-cube and the acronym has caught on. The Congress Coordination Committee (CCC) is the most elite group in Congress today, simply because it is chaired by Rahul Gandhi. Other members include Sonia Gandhi's political secretary Ahmed Patel, Cabinet minister Jairam Ramesh, general secretaries Digvijaya, Janardan Dwivedi and Madhusudan Mistry. Constituted in November, it's already held two hush-hush meetings at 15 Gurudwara Rakab Ganj Road. The algebra is fine, now it needs to get its maths for the next Lok Sabha right. DIGVIJAYA
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

GLASS HOUSE
FREE FOR ALL
by R. Prasad

Out of Tune
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

TRIVEDI

I

Bought But Not Sold
ajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot released a Rs 14-crore advertisement campaign "Chaar saal bemisaal (Extraordinary four years)" to celebrate his four years in office on December 14. The advertisements appeared for two days and GEHLOT were withdrawn. The reason: Gehlot realised that despite the ad bonanza, the media continued to carry `negative' stories about him. And to make matters worse, gave equal space to former BJP chief minister Vasundhara Raje as it did to his press conference of December 13. According to a chief ministerial aide, the advertisements will be released later, only "depending on the media's attitude".
PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

GAFFE
OF THE

R

WEEK
What's common between Delhi Chief Minister Sheila Dikshit and Planning Commission Deputy Chairperson Montek Singh Ahluwalia? Insensitive economics. On December 16, Dikshit commented that a family of five could easily survive on Rs 600 per month, which is Rs 4 a day per person. It beats even Ahluwalia's belief that people in urban India need no more than Rs 32 a day to survive.

n the slippery world of Trinamool Congress politics, Dinesh Trivedi is clearly not this week's flavour. During her Delhi visit on December 17, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee hosted a dinner for industrialists at Banga Bhawan. These included Sanjiv Goenka, Naina Lal Kidwai and Pawan Munjal. Not only was Trivedi not invited, his bête noire Derek O'Brien held sway. A disappointed Trivedi flew off to Mumbai instead to attend a Rashid Khan concert. Soulful music to make up for soulless politics?

Jaitley's Day Out
JAITLEY

B
HEMANT CHAWLA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Code Red
uring winter, MP Gurudas Dasgupta has a dress code for Parliament: Throughout the week, he is seen wearing a red D full-sleeved sweater. Finally a curious, and not too polite, MP
CPI

asked him when he managed to wash the sweater. Dasgupta replied that he actually had six similar sweaters, two of which had been presented to him by late Pramod Mahajan when he was parliamentary affairs minister. Mahajan had gifted him the sweaters with a note saying, "Since you are so fond of red, I want to make sure you are always in your favourite colour."

DASGUPTA

JP leader Arun Jaitley was caught in a traffic jam on his way to Rajnath Singh's son's wedding in Delhi on December 7, and finally decided to walk to the venue. It turned out to be a 2-km walk and when Jaitley reached the venue, in the melee, one of his slippers was torn.A political wedding doesn't offer the comfort zone of a morning stroll in Lodhi Gardens.

with BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA, ROHIT PARIHAR AND ASIT JOLLY

12

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

