NA TION

TAMILNADU

"ITWAS ANEVER-ENDING NIGHTMARE"
itting in his house next to St Anthony's Church at Parvathipuram in Tamil Nadu's Kanyakumari district, the ailing Mariadasan Nadar, 93, told INDIA TODAY in December 2011: "I think God keeps me alive so that I can see my son again." Unfortunately, he passed away soon after. His son, Paul George, 65, was released on November 7 from Dubai's Central Jail, after 27 years on death row. George was UAE's longest serving inmate on death row, after he was convicted of killing nine Pakistanis in 1985. He was granted mercy by Dubai's ruler, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al Maktoum, following a petition submitted in 2009, and after Dubai's Indian consulate informed UAE authorities of George's illhealth. He had a heart surgery last year. A relieved George returned to his family on November 20 to be received by his wife Mary, 58, and daughter Sumitra, 37, at Thiruvananthapuram International Airport. "When the attorney general called on November 7 to inform me of my release, I couldn't believe it," said George on touching down at Thiruvananthapuram. George thanked all who strived for his release, particularly INDIA TODAY for publishing the December 2011 story of his long and agonising wait for freedom. "It was your story that set the ball rolling. There was active movement from the Indian consulate since then," he said. Since the publication of the story, Vayalar Ravi, Union minister for non-resident affairs; E. Ahamed, minister of state (MOS) for external affairs;

Paul George's 27-year-long wait on death row in Dubai ends after Sheikh Maktoum grants him clemency

S

INDIATODAYIMPACT

and Shashi Tharoor, the Union MOS for human resources, took up the case. Since 1996, George's family was involved in efforts for his release, having received letters of pardon from relatives of his victims after they were paid UAE 65,000 dirhams as blood money. As per Sharia, an accused is to be set free after victims or their relatives are paid blood money, and the accused is pardoned by them. George's requests for mercy got delayed, however, as the 1986 order of his execution remained pending before the ruler. "It was a never-ending nightmare," he says. "Both his execution order and mercy petition were pending before the Sheikh," says one-time jailmate Dilip Kumar, who alerted the media to the

GEORGE (CENTRE) WITH DAUGHTER SUMITRA (LEFT) AND FORMER INMATE DILIP KUMAR; (BELOW) OUR DECEMBER 2011 STORY

It was your story in INDIA TODAY that set the ball rolling. There was active movement from the Indian consulate."
PAUL GEORGE, on death row in Dubai for 27 years

case after his 2010 release. George arrived in Dubai in 1977 to work as a carpenter. He was sentenced to death in 1988 after he set fire to the shanty of a Pakistani family near his Dubai workshop on the night of October 10, 1985. Nine members of the family--two women and seven children--were charred to death. According to George, he had committed the act in rage and under the influence of liquor, to avenge an assault on him by two male members of the family. Son S. Subbarajan, who was three years old when George was arrested, is now an engineer in Dubai. Daughter Sumitra, who was 10, also lives there. Both were actively involved in campaigns for George's release. Sumitra says, "All we wish is for father to get a life of rest in his remaining years." In a season of diplomatic fiascos involving NRIS, this is a story MEA can be justifiably proud of. by M.G. Radhakrishnan

