Soc iety

NEW-AGE FADS

GenNext is tapping into global subcultures, from vampire-themed days to hip-hop nights, b-boying on the streets to goth music at home
By Sonali Acharjee and Aditi Pai

n a night-out in November, Urvashi Khullar, a Class XI student from Delhi, traded her little black dress for a red halter top, gleaming demon necklaces, smoky green eyes and artificial fangs dripping blood as Delhi's Hard Rock Café transformed into Transylvania for a vampire-themed bash. In Mumbai, the city's 300-plus Latin lovers flock to Tote on the Turf for their favourite music and moves when TV entrepreneur and salsa enthusiast Chaiti Narula, 26, organises her popular Salsa Nights. Be it `dark' bashes or rumba-and-bachata nights, GenNext is tapping into international fads, fuelling the rise of subcultures that come with their own set of rules--and sometimes, manic following. Gangs are not just about baggy pants, fancy bikes and snazzy jackets. The YouTube-and-Facebook-bred generation is aping youth statements from across the world, and experimenting with new cult icons. If college campuses turn into Manchester United versus Arsenal battlegrounds during the English Premier League championship, bald pates with verses tattooed are the latest goth fashion statement. Even as stiletto-clad young women waltz off for

O

Arpita Kala 23, Delhi Goth lover
LOVES LOOKING FOR KNICK-KNACKS AND PUTTING TOGETHER A GOTH LOOK.
REUBEN SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Soc iety

NEW-AGE FADS Simardeep Gill 25, Gurgaon Manchester United fan
SPENDS UP TO RS 1 LAKH TO GO TO THE UK FOR A MANCHESTER UNITED GAME.

salsa-and-sangria nights after work, Brooklyn's Black-hub-inspired teenagers turn suburban bars into playgrounds hollering rap tunes in their flannel hoodies and track pants. Whether it is the popularity of the Twilight series, the cool quotient of the irreverent rapper Eminem or the sex appeal of footballer Cristiano Ronaldo, young urban Indians have found their very own new-age idols and a passion to swear by. Virtual communities plan vampire meet-ups where `wolves' mingle with humans and Team Edward and Team Jacob battle it out in the online arena. "Students today are much more willing to experiment with new fashion, ideologies and cults than 10 years ago. It could be because their exposure to new thoughts and alliances are greater today thanks to social media networks. Someone in Chennai could easily associate with a fan club in New York," says Dinesh Singh, vice-chancellor of Delhi University. Not all subcultures are fun. If the high-on-life Latino music and dance spell energy and style, the dark Goth cult is all about drawing blood just as aggression is the rite to passage for football fans. "With increased exposure to international trends thanks to social media, a section of society is being drawn to these cultures which are novel and, therefore, exciting and enticing. But sometimes obsession or over association with such cults reflects repressed wishes, anti-social impulses or morally questionable motives," says Priyanka Patel,

really turn me on. Some might think of vampire followers as evil but I don't think that's true," says Niharika Lahiri, 26, a Delhibased professional. The teenage cult comes at a cost. Forty-twoyear-old Kiran Mehra's Mumbai home is filled with over 200 posters of the film Twilight thanks to her teenage daughters' obsession with the world of vampires. "Children are now begging for a trip to Transylvania in Romania," she says.

Bend It like Beckham
What's a cultist who doesn't have deep pockets and big bucks? The sudden spurt in sports bars, licensed football merchandise shops, social media fan clubs and football training academies is fanning the following. If Gooners (Arsenal fans) are busy draping their club's flag as curtains on windows, Liverpool lovers are going crazy over vodka shots which mirror the club's logo and Manchester United maniacs just can't get enough of the new range of fridge mag-

REUBEN SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

30, Mumbai-based youth psychologist and founder of The Looking Glass--an organisation that uses art and dance to work with young adults.

Take Me to Your Lair
Move over movie stars, Spike and Buffy are the pin-up boys of the teenage Twihards (Twilight fans) as young Indians are discovering a real fetish for the once-villainous Count Dracula, often inspired by shows like True Blood, Angel, Moonlight and Blood Ties. "Children and young people have been curious about the macabre and otherworldly. Earlier this manifested

in interest in Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, Frankenstein or Count Dracula. Today's curiosities are Twilight, Harry Potter and The Hunger Games," says Mark Parkinson, director, Kunskapsskolan School, Gurgaon. The modern-day vampire goes beyond the clichéd black cape and hood; students across the country have formed informal vampire groups, which get together to hold séances, write vampire poetry or just snack on marzipan human necks and blood punch. "Vampires are so sexy. There's something about sleek clothes that

nets launched by the club. Gurgaon real estate developer Simardeep Singh, 25, spent about Rs 1 lakh in 2011 to go to the UK for a Manchester United game. "For me, my club is like family. Each time a big match is on, no one is allowed to talk to me till it's over. Yes, the market has certainly opened up in India and fans have more options than 10 years ago," he says. Vikrant Matthew, a student of commerce at Dandekar College, Mumbai, thinks nothing of demanding an Arsenal jersey priced at Rs 50,000 as a birthday gift. "It all started with David Beckham and the legendary treble win when Manchester United won the Premier League, FA Cup and UEFA Champions League in 1998-1999. Once you pledge your loyalty to a club, you never really change," says Sebastian John, 26, from Kochi, who is currently studying at Melbourne University. Manchester United records show that India has more club loyalists than England itself and the club hasn't failed to capitalise on the demand. According to the official website of the club on a social networking site, 470,360 Manchester United fans live in the UK while around 701,900 are from India. Cashing in on the football craze, clubs such as Arsenal, Chelsea,

Liverpool, FC Barcelona and Read Madrid are wooing young Indian with merchandise shops and training schools in the pipeline. For Delhi University student Tanika Goel, 18, her hero David Villa's "smile to die for" has taken on a serious touch. When FC Barcelona lost a game, she didn't get off the bed for a week. "I feel like someone has ripped my heart out each time Barca loses. I know it sounds obsessive but my team means everything to me," she says.

Let's Do the Gangsta Rap
If emotions build a cult, aggression is the founding pillar of the hip-hop junkie. From traffic snarls and broken relationships

Urvashi Khullar 16, Delhi Vampire buff
HAS WATCHED TWILIGHT FILMS OVER 50 TIMES AND REMEMBERS ALLTHE BOOKS BY HEART.

Viraj Manjrekar 24, Mumbai Rapper
WRITES RAP SONGS ADDRESSING SOCIAL ILLS IN HINDI, MARATHI AND ENGLISH.
MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com REUBEN SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Camaraderie
How far would you go for the cult you support?

Fangs Very Much Vasundhra Adani, 21, a student at Amity University, Delhi,wants to spend her first paycheck on flying to the UK and getting her teeth shaped like vampire fangs.

Bald & Beautiful Shaved heads and tattoos are becoming increasingly popular. Goa-based tattoo artist Phalak says,"I've had 14-year-olds come in and ask me to tattoo songs onto their bald heads."

Eye Candy David
Beckham is out and Cristiano Ronaldo is in."I have his face on my phone,wallet cover, key chain and bedroom ceiling," says 18-year-old Delhi University student Divyangana Saxena.

Lip Service Mumbai tattoo artist Vikas Malani is getting requests from girls as young as 18 to have their lips tattooed with their favourite cult symbols--from vampire signs to dark goth patterns.

Mover and Shaker Mahek Shahani, 26, a Mumbai-based Spanish language teacher, took off on a six-week-long solo vacation to Buenos Aires to learn tango and milonga in September 2011.

Soc iety NEW-AGE FADS
more members," says Vicky Shriyan, 21, of the High Down crew who pioneered the b-boy movement in Mumbai by setting up his first group in 2009.

More Than Two to Tango
Its ability to de-stress and rejuvenate is making salsa the flavour of the season across metropolitan India. Narula, who launched the Salsa Nights on the lines of London's Latin bashes, says, "It's an addiction but also a great way to destress and meditate. The music and moves are very therapeutic and fun." Across the city, flamenco, casino rueda and paso doble are more commonly known than Kathak; tapas with sangrias are the new idea of a night-out with friends and Spanish is the cool language to learn. "Earlier people knew just the salsa but with a growing demand for Latin culture, young students come to learn the jive, bachata flamenco and paso doble, an aggressive bullfight dance," says Reesha Dhulap, 35, co-founder of Tanz Verden Ballroom International, a Spanish dance academy in Mumbai, who has seen a sharp rise in students enrolling for Latin dances over the past few years.

Chaiti Narula 26, Mumbai Salsa enthusiast
LAUNCHED SALSA NIGHTS AT TOTE ON THE TURF TO POPULARISE THE LATIN SUBCULTURE IN MUMBAI.
MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

to campus scuffles, any reason is a good reason to howl the latest rap song. "Rap is growing into a big phenomenon as small local groups are coming up. Localities in Dombivli, Malad, Bandra have their own rap groups," says Rajeesh Maraar of Culture Shoq, an event management company in Mumbai that promotes underground culture groups. His monthly `Monster Battles' sees amateur emcees or rappers gather for a night of rhyme-off to showcase their skills. "Rap originated in the Black hubs of America to address social and political issues. But commercial rap is all about abuses; we want to restore it to its former glory," says Mumbai's

Viraj Manjrekar, 24, an animation artist and part-time emcee who writes rap songs in Hindi, Marathi and English addressing social ills.

Care for a Dance-off?
An offshoot of the hip-hop culture is the b-boying cult that is taking root on Indian campuses with around 30 `crews' across Mumbai. The dance is all about challenging your opponent to a face-off on the dance floor with back-breaking moves and loud hip-hop music. "It's still in its nascent stages in India. Earlier, when we danced at events, people thought we were performers from a circus, but now, with a few venues promoting this art form, we are getting

Masters of Macabre
They might not find too many takers in India's GenNext, but goth lovers are content in the tiny groups that "find pleasure in pain" as Delhi's Arpita Kala, 23, describes her group's motto. The theme is dark; so goths dress up in black fishnet stockings and don medieval crosses, shave off their heads and tattoo Edgar Allan Poe's poetry. India's cool, urban subcultures are now turning into cults with a diehard following. Come join the gang. 

52

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

