GLOSSARY by NISHAT BARI

STAR ATTRACTIONS
Showgirls who are making a career out of product launches, fashion shows and parties

IT'S RAINING TABU
Prakash Raj was already hot stuff in the south before he became Bollywood's most popular villain. What makes him hotter now is that he has managed to rope in Tabu for his next film as director and producer, Ulavacharu Biriyani. What's more, she will be paired opposite him in the remake of Malayalam romantic comedy Salt N' Pepper in three languages--Telugu, Tamil and Hindi. She will soon be seen in a small role in Ang Lee's Life Of Pi and then in Bejoy Nambiar's David. The trilingual means there's suddenly a lot more of her to watch. The quirky love story of two middle-aged people hinges on food. Sounds like a treat.
FOTOCORP

TAKE TWO
A troubled marriage brought Karisma Kapoor back to the arc lights with a series of TV ads and special appearances. If only she hadn't picked the dud Dangerous Ishhq as her comeback film. Last seen at the BMW 6 series Gran Coupe launch in Mumbai.

BRIDAL FEVER ITEM GIRL
When Malaika Arora Khan isn't shaking her booty to some item number, she is either sashaying down the ramp, judging reality shows or turning up at promo events in the tiniest, blingiest dress she can get away with. Last seen at India's Got Talent 4 finale. Amrita Rao was the prettiest little thing around when she made her film debut in 2002. But trouble began when she began showing up in more bridal fashion shows and jewellery ads than in films. Last seen endorsing a Bandra café's vegan menu in Mumbai.

FREE SPIRIT OFF TRACK
Neha Dhupia can put on a good show when she tries, think Phas Gaye Re Obama. But she would rather dress up and attend every party in town than put her mind to doing films better than Kismet Love Paisa Dilli. Last seen promoting a shaving brand in Hyderabad. It's a miracle. Sophie Choudry has two back to back songs releasing, one for Preity Zinta's Ishq In Paris and a remix video. But seriously, what does she do apart from attending parties? Last seen at Ekta Kapoor's Diwali party in Mumbai.

YOGEN SHAH

NOTEWORTHY
Before he became popular as the persistent sperm peddling doctor of Vicky Donor, Annu Kapoor, 56, was perhaps best known as the host of Antakshari on Zee TV, a show he hosted for over a decade. He returns to host a special episode of the singing competition for the channel's 20th year, with Zee's most popular actors as contestants. Worth a watch?

HELMET ALERT
Known more for making fashion statements, Sonam Kapoor decided to make a social one for Delhi Traffic Police, promoting the importance of wearing a helmet. Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic) Satyendra Garg made sure that Kapoor endorsed road safety after she and Abhay Deol were snapped riding a bike without wearing helmets while shooting for Raanjhnaa in the Capital. He not only succeeded in chastising them for flouting traffic rules, but also managed to get the two stars as brand ambassadors for road safety. Deol is next in line to promote the cause.

IN BETWEEN SHOTS
Remakes of big films come with bigger responsibilities but Telugu actor and superstar-politician Chiranjeevi's son Ram Charan Teja, 26, seems quite confident about taking on the role of Amitabh Bachchan in the remake of the 1973 super hit Zanjeer. Confidence aside, there's the small matter of language proficiency. Between takes he and his pretty co-star from Bollywood, Priyanka Chopra, take language classes. The film is being shot in Hindi and Telugu simultaneously and while he needs to brush up on his Hindi dialogues, she has a coach to help her learn her Telugu ones. Such dedication.

GETTY IMAGES

FOTOCORP

FOTOCORP

GETTY IMAGES

FOTOCORP

YOGEN SHAH

SEPARATED AT BIRTH

LOOK WHO'S BACK
We don't get to see as much of Rahul Khanna, 40, as we'd like, his last film appearances being cameos in Wake Up Sid and Love Aaj Kal. All that changes with a lead role in Sabal Sheikhawat's Fireflies, about two brothers whose lives are affected by a childhood tragedy. There's also Arjun Mathur, Shivani Ghai and Monica Dogra.

LITTLE STAR
Ayush Tandon is the young Pi who finds himself alone at sea with a Bengal Tiger. Ang Lee's Life Of Pi is his big break but the 14-year-old from Mumbai's St. Augustine School has done scores of TV commercials, won a reality show and acted in 7 Khoon Maaf. Busy child.

WARSI

KHAN

Arshad Warsi began growing a beard nearly a year ago to look the part of a toughie in Zilla Ghaziabad. Too bad Imran Khan was so wrapped up in preparations for his new look for Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola that he failed to see that he had exactly the same facial fuzz. Now the matching aviators, scruffy clothes and earrings make them look like they have stepped off the same assembly line. Who's going to be the first to call the other copycat?

CRIMINAL STREAK
Zeeshan Qadri all but disappeared after putting a bullet through Faisal Khan in Gangs Of Wasseypur 2. He's been anything but idle, putting finishing touches to scripts for two crime-based films--one, based on a real-life incident in western UP for director Supan Verma, and Rock And Roll based in Mumbai."I am acting in both," he adds.

YOGEN SHAH

70

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

with Mona Ramawat and Bhavna Vij-Aurora

PARVEEN NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

