NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA

Stylistic Error
The French fashion elite love US First Lady Michelle Obama's fashion sense. So they showed their appreciation with a "racist"blog post. In Black Fashion Power, French Elle fashion writer Nathalie Dolivo wrote that with Obama, "chic has become a plausible option for a community so far pegged to its codes of streetwear".The post caused a storm in the pristine world of American couture critics and forced the magazine to remove it from the website. Writer Dan Lybarger tweeted: An idiot writing for French Elle laments blacks weren't stylish until the Obamas. Blogger Lindsay Goldwert: While Obama has been known to wear African-influenced jewellery,it's inaccurate to call her wardrobe `batik'robes and turbans. Fashion blogger Claire Sulmers: We (African Americans) are not one monolithic group to be written about like zoo animals.

app alert

Top of the Lot
Health, news and fun--this week's apps round-up has it all. Make room for these on your iPhone and iPad: Flipboard brings data from your Facebook, Twitter and Google Reader accounts to one place. With Photoshop Express, you can edit photos on your iPad and iPhone. Lose It helps you count calories and keep track of your workout.

MICHELLE AND BARACK OBAMA

web wow

GETTYIMAGES

viral video

Find Out How
Celebrate, dwellers of the online world. YouTube and your go-to-intimes-of-crisis/curiosity website www.ehow.com had a baby and it's called Howcast. Launched in 2008, www.howcast.com features only instructional videos and you'll find everything from "How to Avoid Makeup Men Hate" to "How to Eat Pasta and Still Lose Weight" and "How to Vacation with Moody Teenagers". With the addictive nature of these videos, is this the next website on your office tech guys'`to-block' list? We hope not.

Surprise Aboard
The passengers of the Finnair Helsinki-Delhi flight were in for a surprise on January 26.After boarding was complete,the cabin crew,dressed in colourful kurtis and saris,started dancing to Deewangi Deewangi from Om Shanti Om.Avideo of the dance,which was Finnair's way of celebrating Republic Day,went viral and the airline's effort received much appreciation.The performance was flight attendant Helena Kaartinen's brainchild.Anice gesture to earn some brownie points and if Facebook statuses are to be believed, many new customers too.

buzz feed

Private Goes Public
The new Google privacy policy, which will come into effect on March 1, is facing criticism across the world. Bashers call it a massive invasion of privacy and say the changes will piece together information from Gmail to YouTube to the Google Plus social network. Technology site Gizmodo said that the change was the end of Google's "don't be evil" motto.

blog watch

Here,There, Everywhere
Blogger Geraldine DeRuiter turned a nightmare into a fantasy when,after being laid off from her job,she started travelling with her husband and writing about it.Keeping everywhereist.com different from a typical travel blog,DeRuiter writes about everything from confusing bathroom fixtures,inexplicable foreign TVshows and obnoxious airplane passengers to picturesque towns and exquisite restaurants.Avisit to New York City didn't feature clichés like Times Square and the Statue of Liberty,but a tour of Hook and Ladder 8,the fire station featured in Ghostbusters.Her advice to bloggers? "Write because you love to write."

smart sheet Tennis Shining

TWO GEMS FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

With the just-concluded Australian Open tennis championship and Novak Djokovic's spectacular near-six-hour win,there may be no better time for Jason Gay to write Why Tennis Rules the Earth on The Wall Street Journal blog The Couch."That 2008 Wimbledon twilight five-setter between Federer and Nadal set a glorious standard, but since then there's been a steady stream of classics, on all surfaces,between the big three,and even (Andy) Murray,too," writes Gay.

Bigger is not Better
In a www.huffingtonpost.com blog post,freelance writer Charlotte Skeoch discusses the threat that the new PIP breast implants pose to women's health.The humourous piece says,"Around 40,000 women in the UK alone are wandering around with water bombs of infection bobbing about in their chests,with a greater potential to burst and leak mattress material into their stuffed-up bodies if prodded with enough gusto."

AFP

NOVAK DJOKOVIC

