UP FRONT

CAPTAIN G.R. GOPINATH

WE ARE THE CHANGE WE SEEK
he former lokayukta of Karnataka and Team Anna plain common sense then that we need systemic changes member, Justice Santosh Hegde, completed his term more than just change of governments or crucifixion of ina few months ago. A former Supreme Court judge dividuals from the ruling party or civil society to reduce corwas appointed to take his place. Embroiled in a contro- ruption or abuse of power. We have to strengthen as many versy--two housing society sites were allotted to his institutions as we can and make them independent, rather wife/family which was alleged to be irregular and im- than dilute them, especially because even the best among proper--he resigned within weeks of taking oath. The us is not free from greed for power and pelf. When BJP, the ruling party in Karnataka, was exposed next man who was tipped to take charge was not keen and shied away from public scrutiny. The new lokayukta is yet in scam after scam, just as the ruling party at the Centre, to take over but he is already in the eye of a storm for al- the chief minister and other ministers had a stock answer-- leged impropriety. When asked, Karnataka Chief Minister "The chief minister and ministers before us, in previous govSadananda Gowda said, "I'm helpless. What can I do. ernments, from Congress and Janata Dal, have also allotted Everybody has some allegations." sites to their children, given mining licences. We have not Then, there are accusations about irregularities and done anything different." They brazenly justified corruption fudging of travel bills by Team Anna member Kiran Bedi, on the grounds that their predecessors were also corrupt. and charges against Arvind Kejriwal of diverting funds from When asked about BJP's double standards, senior leader Anna Hazare's movement to his own trusts. There are also Yashwant Sinha, without batting an eyelid, said, "Politics is Anna's quixotic views on drinking and the continuing at- the art of the possible. Political parties have to be realistic tacks on his RSS affiliation. The Congress, yet again, seems and there are compromises", forgetting conveniently the to be working at cross purposes. While the Prime Minister party's scathing tirade against Manmohan Singh when he sends a conciliatory, respectful letter to Anna, party admitted that "coalition dharma" had its compulsions. So today we find ourselves at a crossroads. When illspokespersons and the agencies under the control and influence of the Government attack Anna, try to gag the press, gotten wealth finds respectability in society, when we and make it blatantly obvious that those who criticise will fawn upon people who abuse power and don't feel deincur the wrath of the ruling party. Such actions, while not meaned, when we have no qualms in bribing or taking creating a very salutary impression about the Congress bribes, and when it is difficult to find anyone among us who has not sinned, society may party, may succeed as a distraction SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com have crossed the danger mark from the main issue--the urgent of decadence and may be reachneed for a robust Lokpal Bill. ing a stage of terminal illness. It The debate, drama, diversionis a wake-up call to all of us, to ary tactics and ruckus witnessed bring about far-reaching sysin Parliament have exposed all potemic changes to save society litical parties--they are all driven from falling apart. by their own political agenda Congress can still turn the and none seem genuinely committables on the Opposition, take ted to bringing in systemic the wind out of Team Anna's changes for a strong and indesails by gifting the country a pendent Lokpal. It will be naive of stronger Lokpal Bill than what Anna's team to collar the Congress was tabled and win back the as the sole renegade party which confidence of the people. sabotaged the bill. Looking at the various governGranting, for a moment, that ments in the states, in the event the allegations against Anna and of the Congress losing power, the his team are true, then is it not obnext government may be worse vious that the demand for a strong than the present. So, changing Lokpal is all the more stronger and urgent. We are discovering that It is common sense that we need the government is not the anmost of us are tainted, and that as systemic changes more than just swer. We have to change the way human beings, we are weak and change of governments or cruci- we govern ourselves. selfish and we yield to temptation fixion of individuals from the ruland commit acts which benefit us Gopinath, the pioneer of low ing party or civil society to reduce cost aviation in India, is the author at the cost of society or at times decorruption or abuse of power. fraud the state exchequer. It is of Simply Fly: A Deccan Odyssey.

T

10

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

