Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

WAR AGAINST CANCER
India now has all the latest tools to beat cancer. Here are five new diagnostic trends that have changed the face of cancer treatment.

1

2 Immunohistochemistry
DOCTOR'S DESK
Harit Chaturvedi, Chief DrConsultant & Director Surgical Oncology, Max Healthcare, Delhi. cancer patient's quality of life has improved dramatically. That's because all the new developments are focused on accuracy and precision, to reduce patient trauma. Minimally invasive surgery, the gold standard now, is advantageous to both patients and surgeons. A huge area of symptom management and care strategies has opened up. It is now possible to minimise symptoms of advanced disease and side-effects--from bloodcount fall, pain, secondary infections to depression. The focus now is on organ preservation--from breasts, voice box, jaws to limbs--thanks to modification in surgical techniques.The whole approach has shifted from being predominantly medical to one where psychological and sociocultural aspects of a patient play a major role.
as told to Damayanti Datta

Adiagnostic method to analyse and identify cell types--from where the tumour originated,its characteristics,distinguishing between benign and malignant tumours and so on.Finds wide-ranging use now.

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

PET-CT and MRI scans Help doctor locate and stage the cancer accurately and learn how far it has spread.

A RADIATION SESSION IS ON AT THE TATA MEMORIAL CANCER CENTRE IN MUMBAI

A

3 Targeted Chemotherapy

The problem with chemotherapy is that healthy tissue also gets damaged.Because cancer therapeutics are commonly delivered through the blood,only a fraction reaches the target tumour.Also a high dose of drug has to be given to have therapeutic effect.Alot of effort has been devoted recently to making anti-cancer drugs more tumour-specific.One approach is to `aim'chemotherapeutic drugs selectively at the cancer cells by placing `tags' . Another is to encapsulate the drug,so that it persists longer in circulation and is not immediately removed by the liver or kidneys.

Radiation Therapy ( ) 4 Intensity-Modulated
IMRT In radiotherapy treatment,radiation is given around the cancer cells and results in healthy cells also getting affected. IMRT has been introduced to overcome this and focus accurately on the cancer-affected area. IGRT)

5 Image-Guided Radio Therapy (

IMRT has its limitation--it does not find the correct

parts of the cancer if the tumour cells move during treatment.In IGRT,this problem is overcome. High-resolution X-rays pinpoint tumour sites and track any patient movement that may affect treatment.This benefits high-risk patients,as it is one of the least invasive methods.The power and precision of the system also means shorter therapeutic durations.Particularly good for breast,liver,lung,spine, head and neck,stomach and prostate cancers.

64

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

