GLOSSARY
SMOOTH CONQUEST
We know Aditi Rao Hydari can plant feisty kisses, Yeh Saali Zindagi was proof of that. Well, she can sing too. Her film London Paris New York has two songs with her vocals-- Dekhne mein seedhi saadhi, and the romantic pop-rock number Thehree si zindagi with Pakistani actor singer Ali Zafar, 31. Her co-star Zafar can't stop gushing, "We were mesmerised when we first heard her sing. She has a very silky, smooth voice texture." He plans to use Hydari, who charmed as the quiet Rama bua in Delhi 6 and the spunky journalist Sheena in Rockstar, in his next album. Unless someone more mesmerising comes along.
YOGEN SHAH YOGEN SHAH

DIVAS PLAY COVER-UP
From the low-key Kiran Rao to the highflying Sonam Kapoor, Bollywood damsels replaced sexy cholis with the demure old-fashioned blouse.

Anushka Sharma The leggy lass played good girl on the red carpet with Sabyasachi's opaque velvet palla and neck-grazing, cover-me-up blouse. She looked pretty but the ensemble seemed to be pleading for innovation. Sonam Kapoor Basking in the international limelight, the Aisha girl went from androgynous for Jean Paul Gaultier to super girly for Elie Saab all in one day. Her pink Deepti Pruthy sari would have been downright precious had she not added the long-sleeve Elie Saab shrug.The host is happy and so are we.
YOGEN SHAH GETTY IMAGES

Kiran Rao Mrs Aamir Khan is the perfect model for this look."I am a glamorous activist," it seems to declare and the new mom is just that.The addition of a brooch is unnecessary but permissible.
YOGEN SHAH

ALL IN THE FAMILY
Being Mahesh Bhatt's daughter, it was only a matter of time before Shaheen, 24, found herself working on a film set. "I have grown up around films and always wanted to work in them. I'm a good writer," she says, having clearly inherited her father's lack of modesty. The arts graduate from Jai Hind College in Mumbai had already begun writing scripts long before daddy announced that she would be an assistant director to Vikram Bhatt in Raaz 3. She has co-written Jism 2, another home production, and assisted in writing the Ajay Devgn-starrer Son Of Sardar.

BOMBAY BLUES
After the success of Sahib Biwi Aur Gangster, Mahie Gill and Randeep Hooda are back together for Satish Kaushik's next film, Mayanagari. The film will focus on the seedy life of migrants in the maximum city. Hooda will play the role of a male prostitute with whom Gill, who plays a socialite, has an affair. The psychopath from Murder 2, Prashant Narayanan will be seen playing Gill's other partner. Based on Hindi novelist Surendra Varma's Do Murdon Ke Liye Guldasta, the film will be scripted by Dilip Shukla of Dabangg fame. Rumour has it, that Hooda is busy meeting male prostitutes to understand his role better. We hope he doesn't take method acting too far.

Kareena Kapoor While sister Karisma went for a bustier blouse, the future Pataudi bahu chose quite the opposite companion for her sparkly Manish Malhotra number. Is the change of choli an attempt to change the hot-bod image? The bare belly suggests otherwise.

YOGEN SHAH

SALMAN RUSHDIE
OF THE

WEEK

30 yrs ago @ImranKhanPTI was a fan at my 1982 Delhi lecture and 100% secular. Now my work "humiliates" his "faith." Which is the real Imran? Mallika Sherawat The Murder girl is about to get a whole lot more eyepopping on the cover of 3D Hollywood magazine WMB (World's Most Beautiful) for which she has been shot by celebrity photographer Nick Saglimbeni. The first from Bollywood to land such a cover, she was chosen to represent India because she had managed to land up at the Oscars and meet President Barack Obama. Perhaps her stint in Los Angeles was useful after all.

SLAPSTICK HUMOUR
"Shah Rukh, Gauri, Farah and I met for three hours this evening and cleared the misunderstanding that had been brewing for two years," declared Shirish Kunder barely a day after Khan apparently slapped him senseless at Sanjay Dutt's success party for Agneepath in Mumbai. If it sounded like an official ceasefire of hostilities by one of two warring nations, it was. Khan and Kunder had Bollywood's juiciest fight in recent times. So thrilled was Kunder at their newfound bonhomie that he brushed off the fight as an unfortunate incident that arose out of a drunken state, high tempers and lack of communication. But that won't stop us from LOLing at the jokes that flooded the web. Here are some good ones:  Ram Gopal Varma visits Aurus lounge with special team. He now wants to make a movie based on the attack.
FOTOCOP

 What Farah Khan could not do in four years of marriage with Shirish Kunder, SRK did it with one slap, make Shirish famous.  SRK clarifies that the Shirish Kunder slapping incident was part of marketing promo for Ra.One sequel, Kha.One.  While Salman Khan is Being Human, SRK is Being Salman.

Poonam Pandey After the warm (read hot) welcome to the PMO with a picture in a bikini, the wannabe celebrity is back in the news. This time with a bold promise to get dirtier than Vidya Balan did in The Dirty Picture in her untitled debut film. Speaking too soon, are we?
FOTOCOP

FOTOCOP

by Avantika Sharma, Nishat Bari and Kruttika Kallury

70

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

FEBRUARY 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

