Mail

Greed Vs Guns
JANUARY 30, 2012

Corrupt politicians and power-hungry generals turn Pakistan into vendetta land.

Chaos in Pakistan
The cover story reads like an absolute political thriller ("Greed Vs Guns", January 30). The only difference is that all the characters are real, and so are the situations. On the one hand is the danger of a military coup, and on the other legal action against the PM should the court reject his argument on the immunity of the President. In the event of an ouster of the present government, imposition of military rule would be a disaster. The role of the ISI in 26/11 has been exposed thoroughly and this will always pose a danger to India. Neither would it be too comfortable to see General Musharraf or Nawaz Sharif coming to power. The only hope seems to be with Imran Khan's party gaining as-

Gag Order
The litmus test of a democracy is its ability to tolerate and allow views that are outrageous and even at times bordering on the lunatic ("India's War on Cyberia", January 30). It's the web today, it could be something else tomorrow. India needs more, not less, freedom and therefore it need not take any lesson on authoritarianism from China.
PADMINI RAGHAVENDRA, Secunderabad

India has one thing that China lacks--democracy. But now the Government has decided that since it cannot close the gap between India and China in other spheres, it can at least ape China in curtailing the freedom of expression, a fundamental right under the Constitution.
S. LAKSHMI, Chennai

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

``

``

Pakistan is not politically mature enough to have an elected government. Its inherent instability offers conditions which are ripe for extremists and fundamentalists to take advantage of.
K . V. R A G H U R A M ,
Wayanad

cendancy, with support from Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry.
MILIND KHER, Mumbai

The Pakistan military and the ISI play their nefarious roles in destabilising the elected government and encouraging jihad and cross-border terrorism in India. General Kayani should be aware that a coup now is not feasible, unlike earlier when the military effortlessly took over the reins of power.
ANUPAM SHARMA, Noida

Blast From Past
People have not forgotten the incident in 2006 involving Nikhil Gowda ("Grand Dreams for Grandson, Jauary 30). But like any other politician's son or grandson, Nikhil too will walk the power corridors some day.
SUMAN H.V., Bangalore

Mail
Honour at Stake
It is disheartening to read the derogatory contents of two recent articles on the Chief of Army Staff (COAS) ("Self Before Service", January 16, 2012 and "Lies of the General", September 11, 2011). The headlines, "Lies of the General" and "Self Before Service" are highly disregarding, especially since the author, Sandeep Unnithan, has attempted to support his disparaging interpretations with a series of views/opinions from unnamed Ministry of Defence (MoD) officials and retired officers, which unfortunately will neither get confirmed nor denied. It is strongly felt that this method of `incognito' attribution or anonymous straw polls on some seriously damning opinions grossly violates the standards of journalistic ethics. Some of the offending contents/ remarks, which amount to professional misconduct, are elaborated in succeeding paragraphs. "Self Before Service" The title of the story is spiteful and outright malicious. The professionalism displayed by the COAS and his impeccable service record are indicative of his selfless devotion and dedication to the army and the nation. This title is in sequence to the previous spiteful theory and further sensationalises the age issue. The derogatory title of the story was tantamount to unsubstantiated character assassination. "Army Chief's Pettiness Hurts India's Best Institution" The singular aim of the COAS in ensuring that his age is corrected as per records and on merits of the case, is to protect his personal honour and integrity. The previous article "Lies of the General" maliciously labelled him a liar without substantiating a single issue. "The only change General Singh wants is to have his date of birth changed from May 10, 1950 to May 10, 1951 so that he can stay 10 months more in office" This opinion in the story has been attributed to officials in MoD, without naming any person, with the sole objective of sensationalising a personal issue. It has been reiterated by the COAS on a number of occasions that tenure is not an issue. "Under Fire: Army chiefs have been in the news for the wrong reasons" The author, to show army chiefs in poor light and in turn viciously malign the Indian Army, has most irresponsibly attributed as controversies a few happenings/contractual complications in the country to the previous chiefs and contrasted them with some routine functional tasks undertaken by the army as achievements, thereby grossly trivialising the performance of the Indian Army. The author seems to insinuate that all chiefs mentioned have underperformed. This is a direct accusation on the institution of COAS. It is widely felt that the misrepresentation by INDIA TODAY has done intense harm to the army's good name, despite the article mentioning that the army is a fine institution. Most periodicals and newspapers, while raising contentious articles involving the army, have shown the magnanimity to share the article and include the other party's views, but it is disheartening that India's leading periodical chose to adopt a partisan stand to condemn the army.
MAJOR GEN S.L. NARASIMHAN, Additional Director General Public Information, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army)

35
YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
M A R C H 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Restoring Ancient Glory
The temple of Lord Jagannath with its bamboo scaffoldings and rhythmic sound of hammers and chisels nostalgically carries one back to the days of Konarka when 12,000 masons were trying to carve out music in stone in the neighbourhood of the tremulous sea.They were creating a Konarka then. But now a Konarka is emerging in the outer walls of the great temple of Lord Jagannath. Magnificent sculptures with lively natas and naris depicting various aspects of life were unearthed when the 300-year old plaster of the Jagannath temple was peeled off in several places.Any visitor to Puri knows that the temple was reeling under the burden of layers of plaster, which was increasing year after year. Some two-to-three years back when the invasion of plasters reached an alarming level and the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) refused to take Puri in their fold on the ground that it has lost its historical nature, the people became conscious of the imminent danger.Thereafter, the public campaign to save this temple became so intense that the ASI grudgingly took it over.
by Ashok Kumar Dash

The story was based entirely on correspondence between the army and the MoD. As for the issue of General V.K. Singh's battle being only an issue of honour and not tenure, I would like to draw your attention to page 68 of General Singh's Supreme Court petition. He requests the birth date be changed to 1951 "and grant all consequential reliefs thereto". It is very clear that the immediate consequential relief is a 10-month extension in office.
SANDEEP UNNITHAN,
INDIA TODAY

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

KONARKA--SUN TEMPLE

FEBRUARY 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

