AnimPACTreature

mm

n

I HO
YOUR. FAMILY

FO

For those who like a tryst with royalty, an experience at Jaypee Palace Hotel & Convention Centre, is the perfect holiday choice in the historic city of Agra.Just a stone's throw away from the hotel isTaj Mahal - a reverie in white marble, world famous architectural phenomenon built by the Mughal king, Shahjahan, in memory of his beautiful wife Mumtaz Mahal. A hotel par excellence, Jaypee Palace blends the luxury of five star comforts with the timeless world of Mughal opulnece.The majestic hotel is a glorious structural blend of red sandstone and marble, spread over 25 acres of elegantly landscaped luxuriant greenery.The 341 well appointed plush rooms with private balconies overlooking beautiful landscaped gardens, palatial suites & the exclusive architecturally stunning Presidential wing surpasses the highest standards of magnificence. For the true food aficionado, the hotel has excellent specialty restaurants namely Paatra presenting a culinary journey from Amritsar to Lahore, C'est Chine for authentic Chinese.The Grand Buffet with an elaborate spread of Indian & continental varieties, The Tea Lounge, Pavilion Cafe - 24 hour resto cafe,a well stocked bar called Tapas and the poolside seasonal bar be que, Aqua Grill. A wide range of leisure opportunities that include a scenic swimming pool, bowling alley, leisure mall, a discotheque, tennis, squash, mini theatre make Jaypee Palace Hotel a destination in itself. Known for extensive banquets and organizing special theme dinners, many royal weddings and world class conferences have been hosted here. You will enter a sanctuary of indulgence and complete holistic rejuvenation with Tamaya - Spa, Salon & Wellness Centre that has the choicest of ancient Indian, oriental and western therapies. The special leisure packages have been designed keeping in mind the interest of all age groups. The hotel with unbridled luxury and diverse entertainment options is perfect for a royal holiday to spend quality time and bond with your loved ones.

Leisure Mall

C'est Chine

AnimPACTfeature Agra Fact File Season to visit: October to March Festivals: Taj Mahotsav, Sheetla Fair, Kailash Fair.Bateshwar Fair,Urs Fair Places to visit: Taj Mahal, Fatehpur Sikri, Agra Fort,SikandraAkbar's Fort, Moti Masjid, Sheesh Mahal, Itam-ud-daulah or Chini ka Roja an example of fine Persian architecture, the Radha Soami headquarters and the historical Gurudwara Guru ka Taal. A little outside the city are Keetham lake, Bateshwar - a constellation of temples on the Ghat, the Chambal Safari and Bharatpur Bird Sanctuary. Where to stay Jaypee Palace Hotel & Convention Centre
Fatehabad Road, Agra 282 003 Tel: 91-562-233 0800 E- Mail: reservations.jpa@jaypeehotels.com

MMMIlU., .. 3ML,I Unl EKd.

Fatehpur Sikri

Corporate Office
Jaypee Hotels
r-

#& * ^ § ^**.>?^^s-, °^J°^. ·sSs'JliiSssslsfe*

' < ^«-~S.JJ«,H,-Wrts.<i.wP

Guest Bedroom

J A Annexe, 54 Basant Lok.VasantVihar New Delhi 110057 Tel: 91 - 1 1 -26148800,46008800 sales@jaypeehotels.com | www.jaypeehotels.com Toll Free Number: 1800-11-9900

Jaypee Palace Hotel & Convention Centre, Agra

