GLOSSARY BACK HOME
As local designers gear up for fashion week season, Orissaborn international designer, Bibhu Mohapatra, 39, will show at Mumbai Fashion Week for the very first time. A regular at New York Fashion Week, Mohapatra studied at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York. Celebs like Angelina Jolie, Salma Hayek and Cate Blanchette flaunt his fun prints and impeccable cuts. Will he manage to woo desi damsels? We hope so.
AP

THEYALLWORE WHITE
Remember how wearing white at an Indian wedding used to be the biggest faux pas? The Riteish Deshmukh-Genelia D'Souza wedding set a trend of its own.

ART SMART
Amol Parashar, 26 He played Ranbir Kapoor's best friend Sai Sekhar in Rocket Singh: Salesman of the Year. Here, you saw him in the play Dirty Talk. He has Bollywood dreams, but he knows his limitations, "I'm not rich and don't have a producer daddy."

Meet the terrific trio who made their debuts at Mumbai's 13th Kala Ghoda festival
Susheela Raman, 38 The British-Tamil musician combines Carnatic and Sufi music with English tunes. "Music is cathartic, it helps you find yourself," she says. At the festival, she performed with her guitarist husband Sam Mills and the Jaipuri qawwals. Milind Sovani, 47 After 12 years in Singapore, the chef reconnected with India this year. It was his idea to introduce a food section at the festival. "Food is also an art form as it is also about the right mix of colour," says the chef, who specialises in modern Indian cuisine.

Genelia D'Souza The spunky bride-tobe glowed in a white Manish Malhotra ensemble.The typical Indian bride's wardrobe is dominated by pinks, reds, greens and the occasional blues. Looks like Genelia decided to break rules and her guests turned faithful followers. Asin She wowed us with her demure Kasavu sari and gold jewellery. Stylist Rhea Kapoor drew inspiration from Asin's native Kerala and not sister Sonam's look in the Gal Mitthi Mitthi song in Aisha, also styled by her, as Rhea clarified. Learn from Vidya Balan and trade those ghastly dresses for saris,Asin.
Photographs by YOGEN SHAH

Soha Ali Khan The Pataudi princess's choice was pretty but boring. But then again, she is not really known for her exciting fashion sense, is she? Suzanne Roshan Nothing works better than a statement piece of jewellery to perk up a plain outfit. Mrs Roshan gets full marks in that department.

FIRST LOOK OF THE WEEK

PAYAL KUMAR

FIRST TIME
Director Rituparno Ghosh's next project, Taak Jhaank, will bring Jaya Bachchan back to the big screen. This will be the first time Bachchan will work in a Ghosh venture, where she will share the screen with Naseeruddin Shah, also a first. After her 2008 film Drona, this will be a comeback of sorts for Bachchan. With two of the finest actors of the industry, the satire on magic realism, slated for an April release, looks like a winner.
YOGEN SHAH

SUPER WOMAN
Her 2010 reality show wedding to Rahul Mahajan made her a household name and now, Dimpy Mahajan is all set to debut on the small screen with the TV show Kahani Chandrakanta Ki on Sahara One. The model-actress plays the role of `Icchadari Naagin' , who is plotting revenge against a dacoit. Ask her why she chose to give the saas-bahu soaps a miss to play a naagin in an adventure-fantasy show and the 23-year-old says, "Playing a naagin has proved lucky for actresses like Reena Roy and Sridevi. I am hoping this will be my lucky charm." With Bollywood on her wishlist, Mahajan is going all out to attract Lady Luck.

TWEET VS TWAT
Ayesha Takia's rant about Kingfisher Airlines'staff misbehaving with her sister turned into a showdown when Sidhartha Mallya decided to hit back.
Sidhartha Mallya Been getting retweets about Ayesha Takia & KFA. Not too sure who she is, an actor of some sort? Don't know why she is tweeting so much when she wasn't even present. Pipe down love. Ayesha Takia My sister is travelling economy so of course you won't bother. I will rant Sidhartha Mallya.This is your way of dealing with a hospitality business! Wow! Learn manners and respect!
FOTOCORP

SECOND TIME LUCKY?
Dhanush'S second track is out and this time it's dedicated to master blaster Sachin Tendulkar. Energy drink Boost got the Kolaveri Di singer to pen and sing a Tanglish track to honour its brand ambassador Tendulkar. The song, called Master Blaster...you are our Boost, was composed by Anirudh Ravichander, 21, who was also behind Why this Kolaveri Di? The video stars Dhanush, 28, and actress Anushka Shetty, 30, dancing at a railway station in Goa. Nice gesture. But will it strike a chord like Kolaveri did?
by Avantika Sharma, Nishat Bari, Aditi Pai and Kruttika Kallury
FOTOCORP

SPIDEY SUMMER
If you were dreading that director Marc Webb would turn your favourite superhero into a shoe-gazing, adorable loser, breathe easy. The Amazing Spiderman's first trailer is quite the opposite, except maybe the adorable part. It has fascinating sets and the kind of action that you won't expect from Webb, since you probably remember him for (500) Days of Summer.Any doubts about Andrew Garfield's capabilities to play Spiderman were also dispelled as he expresses the angst of a young man only too well.We also get to see the desi addition, Irrfan Khan, for a . split second.As the trailer declares, it is "the untold story" So forget what you've been told before and wait for more.

What does a movie's first look hope to do? Get people talking about it? Well, Kochadaiyaan did that and more. Rajinikanth's fab abs leap out at you and put Shah Rukh Khan and Salman Khan to shame. Katrina Kaif was rumoured to star opposite the Robot star in the film. But now, news is that leggy lass Deepika Padukone has bagged the role. The 3D film is directed by Rajinikanth's daughter Soundarya R. Ashwin and written by K.S. Ravikumar. Maestro A.R. Rahman has composed the music. Does the movie allude to Lord Shiva or a Pandya king? The poster seems to point at the former. Only time will tell. Or indeed, Rajinikanth.
FOTOCORP

38

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

NEW

