Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N BOOKS REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Lasting Impression
This year's US National Football League championship game,Super Bowl,promised exciting football and pop queen Madonna at half-time.She came,she conquered,and then she brought out two minions-- American musician Nicki Minaj and Sri Lankanborn UKrapper MIA.While Minaj behaved like one should in the Queen's presence,MIAdecided to get noticed and showed the finger to the crowd.Fans continue to guess what they'd done to deserve this from MIA.But please remember folks,she did collaborate with A.R.Rahman on the Oscar-winning soundtrack of Slumdog Millionaire.

HOLLYWOOD BOUND
Priyanka Chopra, 29, has become the first Bollywood star to sign up with American talent management giant Creative Artists Agency, that handles titans such as Oprah Winfrey, George Clooney and Steven Spielberg. Says Chopra, "They have a keen understanding and passion for the business and I am looking forward to working together to create new milestones." An album deal with Universal Music, mega hit Agneepath and now this. PC is going places.
R RAJKUMAR

FOTOCORP

SECOND INNINGS
Actor Arvind Swamy, 45, who debuted in Mani Ratnam's Thalapathi in 1991 and stole many hearts as the lead in Roja and Bombay, is coming back to films after a six-year hiatus. Playing a crucial role in the film Kadal (The Sea), starring Gautham and Samantha, he will be working with Ratnam after 12 years (he last made a guest appearance in Alaipayuthe). The romantic film is set to release this November.

FILMMAGIC

Messed Up
It's great that Hollywood actors Uma Thurman,41,and Debra Messing,43,donned Indian wear for an episode of the new American TV show Smash.The good part ends there. Will and Grace star Messing got away with a shiny sari.But Kill Bill actress Thurman was a complete mess in her shocking pink salwar kameez and heavy jewellery oddly worn over the dupatta like an afterthought.Heard of stylists,anybody?

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND WHAT MATTERS
MUST SEE WHO'S COOL

The chemistry between Imran Khan and wife Avantika as they shake a leg in a song in Ek Main Aur Ekk Tu.
MUST NOT

Veteran actor Clint Eastwood in the Chrysler `It's half-time in America'ad during Super Bowl.
WHO'S NOT

Sherlyn Chopra posted an open invitation to the world for her birthday party on Twitter.

Footballer David Beckham's noticeable discomfort in a new underwear ad.

80

Volume XXXVII Number 8; For the week Feb 14-20, 2012, released on Feb 13

I Compiled by Nishat Bari, Avantika Sharma and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

