N. Srinivasan

Subrata Roy

DECISIONS MISFIRED
Did not allow Pune Warriors any leeway on auction after news of Yuvraj Singh's illness. No broadcaster for home series after Nimbus fired. Refused Sunil Gavaskar his Rs 4 crore IPL dues. Forced Anil Kumble to quit National Cricket Academy.

TROUBLED RELATIONS
Pune Warriors were not allowed by BCCI to hike IPL purse to replace Yuvraj Singh. Was prevented from claiming a discount on IPL franchise fee despite playing fewer matches than promised. Paid sponsorship money despite its logo being banned in 2003 World Cup and three other tournaments.
NEHA NATH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Sp orts

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

CRICKET

SAHARABECOMES DESERT
Subrata Roy's threat to pull out of cricket brings BCCI chief's mismanagement to the fore
By Shantanu Guha Ray

oard of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) President N. Srinivasan is losing control over the game. Since taking over BCCI in 2011, he has alienated senior players, lost its domestic broadcaster, scrapped an IPL team and entered into a protracted legal battle with two other franchises-- Kings XI Punjab and Rajasthan Royals. On February 4, he was on the verge of losing Indian cricket's most consistent backer, Sahara India, who threatened to walk out of IPL and a Team India sponsorship over not being allowed extra money to bid for a replacement for ailing Pune Warriors captain Yuvraj Singh. Sahara India spends Rs 560 crore on Team India's sponsorship and Rs 1,720 crore on its IPL team, Pune Warriors. Its with-

B

drawal will punch a big hole in BCCI's annual revenue of Rs 4,000 crore and put a question mark over the continuance of the Board's cash cow, the Indian Premier League (IPL). Season 5 begins on April 4. Srinivasan had to call veteran Jagmohan Dalmiya, president of the Cricket Association of Bengal, to mediate between him and Sahara India chairman Subrata Roy. Dalmiya will now meet Roy on February 12 at Mumbai's Sahara Star hotel along with IPL Chairman Rajeev Shukla. BCCI will try to convince Roy to change his decision. Roy, it is reliably learnt, has agreed to retain his Rs 1,720 crore investment in the IPL team but

he is scrapping the Rs 560 crore sponsorship of Team India. "We will not let a good partner walk out in anger," said Shukla. If Sahara India moves out of Pune Warriors, the departure would mean fewer IPL matches and fresh deals at lower rates with broadcaster Set Max (currently paying Rs 820 crore per year for a 10-year deal signed in 2007), title sponsor DLF and other advertisers. "A muchhyped brand is now facing some tough questions from advertisers who want to know what's in store," says analyst and Future Brands MD and CEO Santosh Desai. The current season is critical for

SAHARA'S WITHDRAWAL WILL PUNCH A BIG HOLE IN BCCI'S ANNUAL REVENUE AND PUT A QUESTION MARK OVER IPL'S CONTINUANCE.

56

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

NEW

Sp orts

CRICKET
IPL and if the T20 leagues do not fare well

ON COURSE ATLAST
Between the need for privacy and fervid public curiosity, too many claims have clouded the truth on Yuvraj Singh's health
oes Yuvi have cancer?"When a top Sahara India official asked INDIA TODAY that question with unremitting intensity in November 2011 as cricketer Yuvraj Singh's health troubles hit the headlines, the big picture was still unclear. Pieces of the puzzle came together on February 4. Just as news leaked out that Yuvraj was battling cancer, Sahara India, the main sponsor of Indian cricket team, threatened to pull out. The official reason? Yuvraj's health. The news, leaked by an unexpected source, Yuvraj's own physiotherapist, Dr Jatin Chaudhury, was confirmed on February 6. His oncologist, Dr Nikesh Rohatgi of Max HealthCare, Delhi, said in a press conference that Yuvraj had an unusual cancer, a mediastinal seminoma. After months of stony silence, the BCCI went public the same day, "Please respect Yuvraj's privacy." Easier said than done, when an unfamiliar disease label does the rounds."It's a tumour of the testis," says thoracic surgeon Dr Arvind Kumar of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences."But in extremely rare cases, it can also appear on its own in other parts of the body, say, the abdomen or the chest." Going by his reports, Yuvraj has a fairly large lump outside the left lung, which is sandwiched between the heart and the lung, in the mediastinum, that is, the middle section of the chest cavity."It's a cancer that affects males primarily between the age of 20 and 35," Kumar says."It's a rising menace, and for reasons not understood yet, seems to affect affluent sections of society." But a worryingly long time has gone by since Yuvraj's problem started."That's because they are asymptomatic," explains Dr Raja Dhar, respiratory physician with Fortis Hospital,
GETTY IMAGES

D

Kolkata."Early symptoms--shortness of breath or swelling of the face--often go undetected." Research also shows that late detection is typical in people leading hectic lives. Between the need for privacy and fervid public curiosity, far too many claims have complicated the issue. Who came up with the concept of a "non-malignant lymphoma" in November 2011? Lymphomas are by definition malignant. His mother, Shabnam Singh, has called it a "soft tissue growth" , yet a Delhi doctor is claiming that he detected "malignancy" in MayJune 2011. Chaudhury is asserting that detection got delayed by "wrong diagnosis" and reports being stolen from his car. Yuvraj is being his typical self, exchanging banter with the hospital staff at the Cancer Research Institute in Boston, US, says his father Yograj Singh. His doctors in the US and in India have sent out a word of reassurance: "It's 95 per cent curable. With the help of therapy, Yuvraj should be back on track by May."
by Damayanti Datta
YUVRAJ

financially, it is in for big trouble. "Once, the inventory was sold five months in advance. Now the interest is very low," says managing partner Navin Khemka of Zenith Optimedia, a media buying firm. Ratings of IPL4 have dwindled to 3.94 from a high of 5.29 in IPL3 in 2010, according to TAM Media. Former cricketers claim something must be seriously wrong with the way the board has allowed its ties with various stakeholders to deteriorate. "BCCI needs a drastic overhaul," says former India captain Bishan Singh Bedi. Top BCCI officials have approached Bharti Airtel, India's top telecom company, for a quick deal for 18 months left over from Sahara India's three-anda-half-year contract. In May 2010, Sahara India, the team sponsor for the past four-and-a-half years, had bid Rs 3.34 crore for every Test, one-day and Twenty20 match against Bharti's Rs 2.89 crore. What triggered the latest controversy? Sahara India's grouse was that the BCCI ignored some of its genuine concerns with regard to Pune Warriors. BCCI refused to add Yuvraj Singh's Rs 8 crore price to Pune Warrior's auction purse. The addition could have allowed the team to bid for a top player. Sahara India has also paid more for the team than older entrants Mumbai Indians and Royal Challengers. Yet they played only 74 matches instead of the stipulated 94 promised by BCCI during the auction. Sahara India's Head of Corporate Affairs Abhijit Sarkar says the group is studying the Board's conciliatory tone and weighing its options before the February 12 meeting. Even if the two sides patch up, a reunion looks difficult. "Sadly, we never found BCCI believing in genuine give and take," read a statement issued by the group. "Any relationship does not break over a single issue," an enraged Roy said. In London, Srinivasan's worst critic, former IPL Commissioner Lalit Modi is enjoying his discomfiture. He wrote on his website: "A carefully made edifice is being shattered by one man--Narayanaswami Srinivasan, who is unmindful of the consequences of his actions." I

58

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

