Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

THE LIGHT DIMS ON PC
SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

Chidambaram is not guilty, for now. He is diminished, forever. The matter of his involvement in the 2G scam will go to a higher court. But the shadow of the 2G scam will not go anywhere. The Home Minister is diminished because, for all his flaws, he once commanded stature. In July 1992, Chidambaram resigned as commerce minister when it was discovered that his wife had invested in shares of a firm that was involved in the executing of the infamous Harshad Mehta stock market scam. Then, Chidambaram seemed to appreciate the high principle of ministerial accountability. He reentered the council of ministers only after he was absolved by a court of any wrongdoing. He had other virtues, his firm conviction for market-oriented economic reform being the most prominent. This was rare in a Congressman of his generation. His most stellar contribution was sustaining the momentum of liberalisation as finance minister in the unstable United Front government of H.D. Deve Gowda and I.K. Gujral. A weaker, unconvinced and dithering minister might have surrendered to the populist instincts of that coalition. Chidambaram has never been a politician with a mass base. He has won Lok Sabha elections only with the support of one of the Dravidian parties. Yet, what he lacked in a popular base, he made up by the quality of his intelligence and his reputation for competence. Judge Saini's ruling which acquitted him of criminal conspiracy puts a dagger through both. In Saini's view, the novice (politician and lawyer) A. Raja pulled wool over the then finance minister's eyes while carrying out the biggest scam in independent India. Surely, any intelligent citizen, who reads the newspaper daily, would have

P

known exactly what Raja was up to in the last three months of 2007 and first three months of 2008. It seems Chidambaram did not. Kapil Sibal agrees with Saini. The then finance minister is not a crook. He just didn't get it. The 2G paper trail and Saini's judgment have also revealed how Chidambaram threw away his hard-earned reputation as a firm believer in free market principles. In January 2008, he abandoned his earlier insistence on auctions of 2G spectrum. He also concurred with Raja on pricing spectrum in 2008 at 2001 prices. Raja's decisions on first-come, first-served and pricing were throwbacks to the era of arbitrary state control that Chidambaram had tried to dismantle through the 1990s. Chidambaram should have opposed them tooth and nail and resigned if he was being forced to look away for reasons of political expediency. Having not resigned then, Chidambaram could have stepped down in late 2010 or in 2011 after the revelations of the CAG report, and the unearthing of the 2G paper trail, citing ministerial accountability, just like he did in 1992. If he was not hiding anything, he would have been absolved of wrongdoing and re-inducted into the Cabinet later, on a moral high ground. Perhaps, in the twilight of his political career, the Home Minister was overcome with the insecurity of leaving office. There may have been no comebacks like in the 1990s. If only he had realised that there are no comebacks from a shattered reputation. Chidambaram could have been exceptional. Now, he's just like the rest. He may not have been involved in a criminal conspiracy but like his boss, the Prime Minister, he has sacrificed much of his own worth in a conspiracy of silence.

IN THE TWILIGHT OF HIS POLITICAL CAREER, THE HOME MINISTER WAS OVERCOME WITH THE INSECURITY OF LEAVING OFFICE. IF ONLY HE HAD REALISED THAT THERE ARE NO COMEBACKS FROM A SHATTERED REPUTATION.

S I G N P OSTS
DEAD One of Mumbai's best-known historians, Sharada Dwivedi, who authored a series of books on the city's his-

tory. Dwivedi, 69, was actively involved in several conservation projects in Mumbai. She had been suffering from flu for a week. DEAD Producer-director Raj Kanwar, in Singapore due to postkidney transplant complications. Kanwar gave Shah Rukh Khan,

Priyanka Chopra and Lara Dutta their bigscreen breaks. NOTICE Issued to the Central Government and the Medical Council of India by the Supreme Court, over illegal clinical trials of untested drugs by multinational pharmaceutical companies on Indian patients.

DWIVEDI

AWARDED V. Shantaram Lifetime Achievement Award to India's veteran environmental filmPANDEY maker Mike Pandey, at the Mumbai International Film Festival 2012.

18

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

