Feature
International thali which in itself is an innovative concept. International Thali includes various dishes from all over the world like Indian, Chinese, Japanese, Lebanese, Italian and Mexican dishes which are all combined in one thali. "We came up with the idea of a World Cuisine Restaurant & Bar as we felt it would be a perfect place for a city like Delhi where people recognize fine dining. We want people to keep coming back often to enjoy the sumptuous dishes dressed in a unique way. We at Tapas world serve cuisines like Thai, Oriental, Lebanese, Japanese, Chinese and European delicacies etc." Says Manav Malik .Owner of Tapas World. "Cocktails and mock tails are other important aspects that are well taken care by us, we have a huge list of beverages to meet the requirement of our customers." he added. With an aspiration to create a new benchmark to serve authentic and delicious cuisine Tapas World brings together a rustic simplicity, with the refined ingredients of World gastronomic delights.. .that are presented to you in stylish and intimated vaulted restaurant. It is a perfect destination where you can sit back and relax on soft leather seatings with Golden and silver tones and enjoy the food of your choice.

Modern Indian Cuisine
ugust Spice is a chain of casual dining and delivery restaurants in Delhi NCR(#49449999). On offer to the food aficionados is a rich collection of traditional Indian culinary delights, complimented with the best of the world cuisine that continues to humble Indians taste buds. So much so, they even coined a phrase to describe it - Modern Indian Cuisine. And best of all is the value you get for your rupee. Just a few months in its making, August Spice is an off-shoot of its popular face, the August Hue Banquets & Catering Services (# 49449966), known widely for its peerless branding, exclusive themes, unwavering quality of its offerings and diversity in world cuisine, playing host to weddings, parties and corporate events alike. Just a step inside either one of their outlets presently at Shalimar Bagh in north Delhi and the others in southern part of the city, at Dilli Haat (INA), Friends Colony & SDA, the tasteful aesthetic decor and the smiling 'ever eager to welcome' countenance of the service personnel immediately draw attention of any visitor, making them secretly wanting to have more of such stores, near their own place. With the finest of the ingredients, low fat cooking mediums, combined with loads of pioneering cooking techniques to preserve nutrition, and the ever so consistent taste that is bound to linger long after, it's only a matter of time before you too would become an addict.

A

A TRUE ICON SAKURA

lapasworld
INTRODUCES INTERNATIONAL THALI

nhancing a legacy is no simple task. After a decade of vowing guests with authentic Japanese food, now The Metropolitan Hotel & Spa has renewed the rich tradition of Sakura Japanese cuisine by adopting a new look, a new menu by celebrated Japanese Master Chef Tetsu Akahira and a whole new attitude. Sakura in chic The Metropolitan Hotel and at Time Tower, Main MG Road, Gurgaon is India's first Japanese eatery. This award-winning fine-dining restaurant with its three elegant private dining rooms, offers the best of Japanese cuisine - prepared from the freshest food flown in from Japan. The ultimate expression of flavour, that's the focus at Sakura's Japanese Kitchen. Sakura, decorated in a contemporary Japanese manner, creates a visual effect of serenity and relaxation. The window blinds are deliberately designed to resemble with Japanese interior accents common to most houses in Japan. Japanese cuisine has always been an enigma wrapped in layers of mystery the more you uncover, the more there is waiting to be discovered. Here, at Sakura, guests can unravel their own part of the enigma to relish exquisite Japanese food, lovingly prepared by renowned Japanese Master Chef, as it was always meant to be. Exotic flavours from the finest and rarest ingredients get enhanced with the most impressive repertoire of Japanese Sakes. Visually stunning Sushi Bar treats guests to the best of Japanese gastronomic delights. The artistic integrity of this world-class Japanese restaurant ensures the guests of a spiritual and a purifying experience indulging all senses and providing them with a complete Sensuous Pleasure. Come and explore the unmatched dining experience at Sakura,

E

T

I

he foodielicious Delhites can now look forward to fine dining at the Tapas World, World Cuisine Restaurant & Bar in Main market, Defence colony, Delhi. Tapas world has recently introduced

