Nation

CENSORSHIP

WEED OUT THE TWEET
The Government is bringing in silent censorship through the back door, getting Twitter to stamp out "objectionable" posts
SIBAL
GETTY IMAGES

By Kiran Tare and

Bhavna Vij-Aurora witter has succumbed to Congress-led UPA's armtwisting tactics. The popular micro-blogging site has been unofficially helping the Government to censor "objectionable'' tweets for the past five months. On January 28, when Twitter unveiled a plan for countryspecific censorship, it had already fine-tuned the technology to weed out tweets critical of the Congress, its party President Sonia Gandhi and General Secretary Rahul Gandhi. Internet giants Google and Facebook are also falling in line in compliance with a court order. In fact, Google announced its countryspecific content filtering policy on February 1, three days after Twitter had done so. Google informed the Delhi district court on February 6 that it had removed certain objectionable web pages following court directions on December 24, 2011. Google spokesperson Paroma Chaudhry, without specifying the contents, said their review team viewed and disabled the content from local domains of search, YouTube and Blogger. Facebook, too, informed

T

the court that it does not control or operate the servers that host the website as they are located in the US. Not satisfied, the judge asked them to submit proper compliance reports, detailing the steps they had taken to block offensive content, within 15 days. The next hearing is on March 1. Twitter took the lead without any legal provocation. An online query by INDIA TODAY sent on February 1 seeking a comment from Twitter on this went unanswered. IT Minister Kapil Sibal said he wasn't aware of unofficial censorship by Twitter. But Sibal did not summon Twitter among representatives of social networking sites, including Google and Facebook,

on September 5, 2011. Several Internet surfers claim their tweets criticising Congress and the Government are either being delayed or removed within three hours. They are facing problems in re-tweeting and commenting on trends critical of the Congress, Sonia and Rahul. Prabir Purkayastha of Delhi Science Forum says, "Internet has now become heavily regulated, even more than print media, which has established legal safeguards in place." It is all about business interests. "India is a huge market for social networking sites and they don't want to lose eyeballs in the country,'' he adds.

"I could not understand what was happening. Later, it became clear that anti-Congress, anti-Government tweets were being censored."
JAYMIN PANCHAL, Event management professional, Mumbai

"I found that those who talk harshly about the Government suddenly get 70 to 80 followers. If their anti-virus is not strong enough, their handle gets hacked."
ANIL KOHLI, Blogger, Mumbai

46

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

Nation
Surfers say they first noticed censorship in September 2011, a few days after Sibal's meeting with Google and Facebook officials. Sibal reportedly showed them some pages criticising Sonia and told them to censor such things privately. If they failed to do so, the Government had the power to make things difficult for them, he warned. They are facing criminal prosecution in Delhi courts even as Twitter announced compliance with the country's laws. Mumbai-based Jaymin Panchal, a 29-year-old event management professional, initially thought it was a technical glitch when his tweets criticising Sonia and Congress began disappearing. "I could not understand what was happening. Later, it became clear that anti-Government tweets were being censored," he says. Tweets of opinion-makers as well as those who have a large number of followers are also being monitored. Senior journalist Sagarika Ghose, too, complained on her Twitter account that her tweets criticising the Government had disappeared. "How strange! Can't find my tweet on the rather sycophantic Congress ad in my timeline. Can it have been deleted? But by whom? Big Brother?" she tweeted on January 3. "Twitter is creating a base for activism. People are exchanging views. The Government feels threatened,'' says Panchal. Jiten Gajaria, 36, president of BJP's Intellectual Cell in Mumbai, predicts the people's war with the Government will intensify. "The majority of people on social media are young and restless. This group showed its ability to hit the streets with as much conviction as hitting the `Enter' key. That has unnerved the Government," he says. Statistics available with the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology show that 35 million Indians use the Internet at home. The number is expected to go up to 400 million in the next 10 years. If the surfers organise themselves into a coherent group through social media, then the government could be in for serious trouble. I

ANDHRAPRADESH

SCRAMBLE FOR SEATS
ALVI

Lobbying for the six Rajya Sabha seats turns intense as vacancies open up in April
CHIRANJEEVI

ix Rajya Sabha seats from Andhra Pradesh will fall vacant on April 2. Jockeying is intense. While the Congress is poised to win four seats, given its strength in the 294-seat Legislative Assembly, rival Telugu Desam Party (TDP) may win the other two comfortably. The Congress has promised to send K. Chiranjeevi, 57, to the Rajya Sabha after the unconditional merger of his Praja Rajyam Party with the Congress in 2011. This leaves three seats available, the competition for which is intense. Andhra Pradesh party leaders are opposed to giving another term to Congress spokesman Rashid Alvi, 56, dismissing him as an outsider. Alvi, from Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh, has already served for more than six years. His clout springs from his proximity to Sonia Gandhi's Political Secretary, Ahmed Patel. With the party expected to finalise the nominees after the results of the Uttar Pradesh elections, Alvi is taking no chances and has already started paying visits to Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy and Andhra Pradesh Congress Committee President Botsa Satyanarayana to ensure his seat. Filmmaker-turned-politician and

S

former coal minister Dasari Narayana Rao, 65, who completes two terms in April, is most likely to be dropped. He, like Chiranjeevi, is a rallying force of the Kapu community. Traditionally, the Congress has granted its nominees two terms and MP K. Keshava Rao, hopeful of getting a second term, believes there is no reason for the party to break with tradition. "I am the face of the party in Telangana," he reinforces. Equally confident is the Indian National Trade Union Congress President G. Sanjeeva Reddy, 79, who has also completed one term. Lobbying hard on her own strengths, Renuka Choudary, 58, has always held an office or post since her entry into politics as a TDP activist in 1984. She alleges that her Kamma caste is neglected. "Our community leaders' services have always been used at the time of elections but they are never included in decisionmaking," rues Choudary. She points out that only two of the four Kamma MLAs in Andhra Pradesh have key posts--Speaker Nadendla Manohar and Mines and Geology Minister Galla Aruna Kumari. Congress conventions dictate that those who have lost in the general elections should not be made party nominees. by Amarnath K. Menon

48

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

Photographs by A PRABHAKAR RAO /www.indiatodayimages.com

