Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

ASHOEBOXOFASHES
A son remembers his parents who embodied the best of post-Independence India
tribute to his late mother, a lament for a fractured relationship with his father, and redemption for can't tell you how dim the girl is, and she comes him, their only child, it takes us from the purdah from a working-class family. I really don't know parties of colonial Nainital to music soirees at what he saw in her." That's Shakuntala Mumbai's Altamount Road, from diplomatic dinSrivastava talking about Rajiv Gandhi and his ners at the ambassador's home in Rio de Janeiro to "Italian wife" Sonia. The year is 1968 and the oc- durbar intrigues in Indira Gandhi's Emergencycasion she is referring to is Vijayalakshmi Pandit's stricken Delhi. The book is teeming with boldface reception for the newlyweds. Shakuntala, heir to names, as the couple rise in the power hierarchy. Sir Jwala Prasad Srivastava's textile and sugar for- Here's Nehru telling his father at the breakfast tune, third wife of the pro-West, free-market leader table in Allahabad's Anand Bhavan about a young Minoo Masani, one-time loyalist of Indira Gandhi, Parsi nationalist called Feroze Gandhi who was and mother of writer Zareer Masani, was known supposedly infatuated with his wife, Kamala. for such throwaway remarks. Her son Zareer There is Shakuntala introducing young Zareer to Masani's book, And All is Said: Memoir of a Home her exalted circle of friends in London, from author Divided, is full of the mix of personal history and Arthur Koestler to publisher Hamish Hamilton. But as a stray remark in the book points out: political memoir which takes the reader from their heady years as a fashionable couple in post- "What can you do with such lovely people. Cast in Independence India to the bitter divorce and disin- such a grand mould, when all they want to do is dance on the edge of a precipice." As Zareer strugtegration in a new, rougher, ruder nation. It is a social history of independent India's rul- gles with his homosexuality, his parents war with ing elite, which takes us from Masani's days as chef each other. There is overwhelming passion but de cabinet to JRD Tata, to his years as Jawaharlal there is also unforgivable infidelity. There is also poNehru's antagonist. It is a cultural history of the litical betrayal, as Zareer and his mother join Indira emancipation of women, personified by Zareer's Gandhi in the face of Minoo Masani's opposition. Eventually all that pales aunt Mehra, who was a key into insignificance, when all member in the early days of of life fits into a shoebox in a All India Radio, and his handful of ashes, no more mother, one of the original than a kilo. As Zareer hanRenaissance women, who dles his mother's remains, could dance as well as she sifting through her letters, painted, argue politics in shopping receipts and soirees as vehemently as recipes, he is forced to conshe canvassed for political front his own mortality. It is appointments. the worst nightmare It is also a memoir of of every child whose parents loss, bringing to its writing grow old. "Now there is no a tone of unutterable sadone to blame but myself, and ness mined so beautifully in no one left to stand between Joan Didion's classic acme and the fading hope of count of death in The Year middle age, solitude has of Magical Thinking. ceased to be comfortable," Zareer is the son of two he writes. Wisdom of the headstrong, beautiful peoheart is as cruel as it is comple, and his achingly frank pelling. To attain it in time account of his role in the dewhen your parents are alive struction of their marriage is the greatest and the most is part tribute, part lament unattainable gift of all. and part redemption. A  ZAREER WITH HIS PARENTS, 1948
By Kaveree Bamzai

I

AND ALL IS SAID: MEMOIR OFA HOME DIVIDED
byZareer Masani Penguin Price: RS 299 Pages: 236 BETWEEN THE COVERS Zareer Masani's bookis a headymixof personal historyand political memoir,bringing to it a tone of unutterable sadness.It takes the reader from the earlyyears of a fashionable couple in post-Independence India to a bitter divorce and ultimate disintegration in a new,rougher and ruder nation.

68

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

