Nation

KERALA
confident that I will get justice in the Supreme Court," Ghai said after the high court order. Deshmukh was in touch with several film personalities as Maharashtra culture minister between 1985 and 1990 but his association with the industry hit the headlines in January 2003 when Riteish's debut film Tujhe Meri Kasam was released. Officials of the state's publicity department were put in charge to ensure that the film was a hit at the box office. Deshmukh, then chief minister, even extended an invitation to Congress President Sonia Gandhi to attend the premiere. Fifteen days later, Sushilkumar Shinde replaced him as the chief minister.

CORNERED BYCOMRADES
Achuthanandan detractors outnumber loyalists at CPI(M) state conference
earing 90, former Kerala chief minister Velikkakath Sankaran Achuthanandan, the sole surviving founder member of the CPI(M) in Kerala, cuts a lonesome figure. His faction has been destroyed at the party's 20th state conference in Thiruvananthapuram from February 7-10, with arch-rival Pinarayi Vijayan, 68, elected for the fifth time in a row as CPI(M) state secretary. In typical communist style, Achuthanandan was made to propose Vijayan's name as secretary, who was then unanimously elected. The humiliation hasn't deterred the battle-scarred veteran from his resolve to continue a war inside the party against the dominant faction led by Vijayan, who has been secretary since 1998. It was clear that Achuthanandan would be sidelined at the conference, as his faction had won control over only one of the 14 district committees of the party to which elections were held from December 15-January 15;

N

the CPI(M) district committees elect delegates to the state meet. What was unexpected was the way he was sought to be trampled upon by his rivals who far outnumbered his loyalists. Achuthanandan was forced to take recourse to a public rally marking the end of the state conference to hit back at his detractors--a measure unheard of in the iron-fisted party. Pretending to target the ruling United Democratic Front, he said, "We, communists, have faced gallows and guns in our lives. Let no one try to threaten us with capital punishment." His real targets were enemies within the party. For it was one of them who had remarked at the

ACHUTHANANDAN'S FACTION WON ONLY ONE OF THE 14 CPI(M) DISTRICT COMMITTEE POLLS IN JANUARY.
ACHUTHANANDAN (RIGHT) WITH VIJAYAN

delegates' session that Achuthanandan deserved "capital punishment" for his "anti-party activities". A majority of the 565 delegates had demanded Achuthanandan's blood, calling him a betrayer for "allowing his comrades to be vilified by rivals". He was criticised for attempting to book Vijayan in the Lavalin scam case even after the party's central leaders had exonerated him. Even the CPI(M) politburo was rebuked for "running in to rescue" Achuthanandan whenever the state leadership tried to restrain him, such as in the 2006 and 2011 Assembly polls, when the politburo forced a reversal of the decision to deny him candidature. The politburo once again came to Achuthanandan's rescue this time. CPI(M) leaders Sitaram Yechury and Brinda Karat, who are reportedly `soft' on him, took the initiative to `freeze' the chapter against him. However, the district committee election results will bolster the state leadership's plan to block Achuthanandan's re-entry to the politburo at the 19th CPI(M) Party Congress in April at Kozhikode. What is ironic is that while he is increasingly being sidelined in the party, Achuthanandan remains a popular leader. "This reminds us of the tearing down of Lenin's statue in Moscow after the collapse of the Soviet Union," says political observer Appukuttan Vallikkunnu. CPI(M) General Secretary Prakash Karat reminded delegates that the former chief minister was an asset to the party and it was wrong to call him a "class betrayer". Even his detractors admit that Achuthanandan was the single factor that saved the Left Democratic Front from a pathetic debacle in the Assembly elections in 2011. The onslaught against him, and his response, have weakened Prakash Karat's claim that the three-decade-long factionalism in the Kerala CPI(M) has been reined in. by M.G. Radhakrishnan

VILASRAO (RIGHT) WITH SON RITEISH
GETTY IMAGES

THE RECENT RAP BYTHE BOMBAY HIGH COURT ON TRANSFER OF LAND TO SUBHASH GHAI'S MEDIA INSTITUTE HAS LANDED DESHMUKH IN A FRESH CONTROVERSY.
Deshmukh did not learn a lesson even when he returned as chief minister in 2004. On November 29, 2008, he took Riteish and film producer Ram Gopal Varma on a `tour' of Taj Mahal Palace hotel immediately after the 26/11 terror attack. The video was flashed on every news channel. Deshmukh was again asked to step down. The Union minister has been in the dock over the alleged misuse of his position in other cases as well. In 2010, Deshmukh was criticised by the Supreme Court over the Maharashtra government shielding a Congress money laundering legislator from Khamgaon, Dileep Sananda. It had imposed a fine of Rs 10 lakh on Deshmukh for pressurising police not to file a complaint against Sananda. In 2011, he was again in trouble over his alleged role in the Adarsh Housing Society scam. The recent rap by the Bombay High Court on transfer of land has blocked Deshmukh's chances of reentry in state politics. by Kiran Tare

MAHARASHTRA

SCRIPTGOES WRONG
Vilasrao Deshmukh's love for Bollywood's movers and shakers is ruining his political career

W

hen his US-educated architect son Riteish told him he wanted to become an actor in 2002, Union Minister for Science and Technology Vilasrao Deshmukh gave his goahead. But 10 years on, the former chief minister must be regretting it. On February 9, the Bombay High Court indicted Deshmukh for irregularities in the allotment of 20 acres of land to Mukta Arts, producer Subhash Ghai's company, for film training institute Whistling Woods International. Chief Justice Mohit Shah and Justice Girish Godbole ordered Whistling Woods to surrender the open space of 14.5 acres in Goregaon (East), Mumbai, immediately and the remain-

ing 5.5 acres, where a studio and building stand, by July 31, 2014. The high court also asked Mukta Arts to pay a rent of Rs 5.3 crore per annum to the state government from the date of its joint venture with Maharashtra Film, Stage and Cultural Development Corporation on October 24, 2000. Deshmukh's fault: he overlooked then culture minister Ashok Chavan's opposition to the deal, handed over the land at concessional rate and signed papers of the "illegal" agreement as a witness. Ghai announced that his company would file an appeal in the Supreme Court against the high court order. "I am a filmmaker and committed to education of the next generation. I am

52

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

FEBRUARY 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

53

