Nation

THE ISRAELI EMBASSY CAR IN FLAMES AFTER THE EXPLOSION

DELHI BLAST

CAUGHTIN ATRIANGLE
The bombing in Delhi puts India in a tough spot as Israel blames Iran for conducting a secret bombing campaign

PTI

T

he February 13 sticky bomb attack on an Israeli diplomat in New Delhi could complicate India's ties with Iran. Four persons, including the wife of the Israeli defence attaché, were wounded when a motorcycle-borne assailant affixed an improvised explosive device to the vehicle and sped away. Israel reacted angrily. Within hours of the blast, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu accused Iran of complicity. Iran denied the accusation vehemently. Indian investigators who are still piecing together the type of explosive say it is too early to see an Iranian hand. A similar attack was foiled the same day in Tbilisi. On February 14, two Iranians were arrested for carrying out blasts in Bangkok. Itzhak Shoham, Israel's ambassador to Thailand, hinted that the attacks were part of a covert international terror campaign: explosives in the Bangkok blasts were identical to those used in Tbilisi and New Delhi. "We have no evidence of the involvement of any organisation, entity or country," said India's foreign ministry spokesperson Syed Akbaruddin. India gets nearly 10 per cent of its annual oil imports from Iran for roughly $1 billion (Rs 5,000 crore) a

month. Israel is India's third largest supplier of military hardware after Russia and the US. Since 2001, Israel has supplied roughly $5 billion (Rs 25,000 crore) worth of hardware including three Phalcon airborne warning radars and surface-to-air missiles. Iran and Israel are deadly enemies. Israel has accused Iran of waging a proxy war against it through Lebanese insurgent group Hezbollah. This is a small part of the dilemma. India has halved its dependence but can't completely stop importing Iranian crude because two refineries have been set up to exclusively treat it. The US and European Union has imposed sanctions on Iran for pursuing a clandestine nuclear weapons program. This has made it tougher for India to pay for Iranian oil in US Dollars and Euros. In December 2010, the RBI scrapped the Asian Central Bank-run clearing house system between India and Iran. An alternative banking route, via Turkey, was scrapped last year as it was vulnerable to sanctions. The attack was timed a week after an Indian delegation to Teheran achieved a breakthrough by ensuring India can now pay for Iranian oil using Indian ru-

pee. The delegation, which included representatives of Indian banks and officials of the petroleum and finance ministries, negotiated for four days. "The logic being cited behind the attack in New Delhi doesn't make sense," says Chinmaya Gharekhan, the Prime Minister's former special envoy to West Asia. "Why should Iran want to alienate India at this point?" This is a question being echoed in both North and South Blocks that house the external affairs ministry and the commerce ministry. "We are being pragmatic, keeping our energy security in mind when we decided to do business with Iran. We are also ensuring that we stay on the right side of the United Nations Charter," says a bureaucrat who played a key role in the Tehran breakthrough. The UN Security Council is yet to impose sanctions against Iran but the Indian stance has attracted global criticism and could bring renewed pressure on it. "Indian businessmen were waiting for a windfall from the setting up of the new channel, but after these tensions there is a sense of uncertainty. Indians and Iranians, need to watch carefully that no one puts the Iran-India friendship to test," says Pervinder Singh Chandhok, a Tehran-based businessman.
by Sandeep Unnithan

50

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

NEW

