The Big Story NATURALRESOURCES

SOURCE OF CONFUSION
By Dhiraj Nayyar, Shravya Jain and Prachi Bhuchar

The Policy Alternatives
The Government has multiple options, including auctions, to govern the distribution of natural resources

EXISTING POLICY PROPOSED POLICY GLOBALBESTPOLICY
Centre and states apply discretion for their land banks. Discretionary; some designated as no-go areas. Draw up a clear inventory of land holdings available to the public. Invite bids for tree cover of less than 10% for the paper industry. In the US, surplus government land is sold through auctions. In Canada, logging contracts are given on a long-term basis.

n February 2, a Supreme Court bench of Justices G.S. Singhvi and A.K. Ganguly cancelled 122 telecom licences issued by former telecom minister A. Raja on a first come, first served basis in 2008. The court's order, which observed that a first come, first served process to allocate natural resources was unconstitutional because it violated the principle of equal opportunity, triggered a panic in both industry and Government. The cause of the panic was a single sentence in the ruling. The court said, "While transferring or alienating natural resources, the State is duty-bound to adopt the method of auction." For the Government, the order could mean an end to policy discretion, something the UPA is unwilling to accept. Sources in the Government confirm that the law ministry began working on a coherent rebuttal to the order soon after the true ramifications were understood. The Government's response is expected to be made public within days. Sections of Indian industry are equally unhappy. A representative of the Federation of Indian Mineral Industries told INDIA TODAY that he feared investor interest would decline sharply in the mining sector and that the cost of key raw materials would rise substantially. Neutral expert opinion is divided on the ruling. Rajeev Chandrasekhar, entrepreneur and member of Parliament, is among those who agree with the

O

SPECTRUM

court. Says Chandrasekhar, "When the Government gives away public assets for private or commercial use, it must follow three principles--transparency, equal opportunity for all those interested in acquiring that asset and protection of the public interest. Only auctions can ensure all." Others are not so sanguine. "Theoretically speaking, auctions are best. But I don't think discretion can be done away with altogether. There have to be goals other than short-term revenue maximisation, like, say, the long-term development of a particular market," says economist Bibek Debroy. Ashok Chawla, the chairman of the Competition Commission, who chaired a High Powered Government Committee on the Allocation of Natural Resources between February and June 2011, says, "There are many intermediate options within the extremes of first come, first served on the one hand and auctions on the other." (See box for interview)

FORESTS

Supreme Court's 2G ruling says natural resources held in public trust by the Government must be auctioned for commercial use. Government and India Inc disagree.

LAND

Coal ministry notified on February 10 to auction captive mines for most sectors. Auctions conducted via New Exploration Licensing Policy formulated in 1997. Mines and Minerals Act, 1957, follows first come, first served policy. Post 2G scam, 3G spectrum given based on competitive bidding.

Repeal The Coal Nationalisation Act of 1973, which gives monopoly to Coal India Limited. Set up independent upstream regulator; rejig role of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons. Conduct auctions in majority of the cases under the Mines and Minerals Bill 2011. Make bidding mandatory under draft National Telecom Policy, 2011.

The Australian government announced reforms in January to grant land via bidding. In the US, 10year production rights contracts were granted through a competitive bidding process. The Russian government has auctioned many of the iron ore mines in the country. European countries such as France and Germany conduct auctions.

OIL AND GAS
Auctions are already in motion. Independent regulator required.
For the moment, the only natural resource, other than spectrum (post the Raja-engineered scam), for which there is open, competitive bidding, is oil and gas. The New Exploration and Licensing Policy (NELP), which was formulated in 1997-98, is in compliance with the Supreme Court order. The problem in

METALS OILAND GAS

COAL

THE OWNERSHIP OF FORESTS IS A BONE OF CONTENTION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND FOREST DWELLERS

Water allocated by states giving priority to drinking water, irrigation and hydro-power.

Draft National Water Policy, 2012, silent on priorities. Says water be used as economic good with priority to basic livelihood support.

Although rules vary in different US states, most issue permits after taking into consideration rights of downstream users.
33

32

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

SANJAY RAMACHANDRAN

WATER

FEBRUARY 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

The Big Story NATURALRESOURCES
the oil and gas sector is at the post-bidding stage, in the monitoring of the contract between the private explorer and the Government. Even after the resource is allocated, the Government must ensure that it gets an adequate revenue share. "The committee I chaired had recommended an independent regulator for the upstream sector to ensure that this monitoring is done properly, " says Chawla. At present, the regulator for the upstream sector is the Director-General Hydrocarbons (DGH), who reports directly to the petroleum ministry. Questions have been raised by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) over the role played by former DGH, V.K. Sibal, in the monitoring of Reliance Industries' KG-D6 basin. The CBI is investigating Sibal on charges of corruption. tor which has been exempted from the bidding process is the power sector, where selection will take place on the basis of their electricity tariff. The 2G verdict is unlikely to have much of an impact on the mining sector. "The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill 2011, which has been drafted to replace the old MMDR Act, 1957, already addressed the issue of competitive bidding," says PriceWaterCoopers mining expert Kameswara Rao. The new bill, which will set the rules not just for coal but also iron ore and bauxite, has been stuck for three years. The 2G order may give it some urgency. The new bill has many opponents. Says R. K. Sharma of Federation of Indian Minerals Industries, "We feel if deposits like iron ore and bauxite are auctioned, commodities like steel, aluminium and cement will become costlier." A senior official at public sector unit National Aluminium Company believes that auctioning is not the best route since it does not look at other parameters such as value addition. "The problem with auctioning is that it invites speculative bidders, those who are not serious," he says. He suggests a combination of allocation and auction process and short-listing a few companies based on certain parameters and then letting them auction. "Mining cannot just be looked at through the prism of transparency. You have to look at value-addition. The combination will enable transparency, yet we will get revenue," he adds.

LAND AND FORESTS
Draw up an inventory for transparency. Mark areas for commercial use.
For other resources such as land, forests and water, auctions may not be feasible. Rural Development Minister Jairam Ramesh, who is also the minister for land resources, is non-committal on extending the Supreme Court 2G judgment to land. Says Ramesh, "What the Supreme Court has done is give guidelines for the disposal of natural resources. Auctions are not possible in every instance." Agrees Chawla, "In some cases, as in land for schools or a hospital or low-cost housing, auction is not the best alternative and one needs to look at the end use purpose." Pankaj Bajaj, president, Confederation of Real Estate Developers' Associations of India (CREDAI), is of the opinion that auctions are desirable but need to be further examined. He says, "The highest bidder may not have the best credentials to execute the project. Some kind of objective pre-qualifica-

MINING
End public sector monopolies. Auction where deposits are known.
The mining of coal and ferrous metals (such as iron ore and bauxite) is governed by archaic legislation, which does not enable auctions at all. The Coal Nationalisation Act of 1973 gives public sector giant Coal India Limited (CIL) a monopoly over coal mining. An amendment to the Act in 1993 allowed some mines to be given out for captive use by end users like steel and power producers. Coal from these captive mines is not sold in the market. According to an investigation by the CBI and the CAG, the government gave away about 49 billion tonnes of coal reserves to PSUs and private companies for a pittance without auctions between 2006 and 2009. Out of the 143 coal blocks given out for captive mining, production has commenced in just 26. Says B. Akala, former chairman of Coal India's subsidiary, Central Coalfields, and Central Mine Planning and Design Institute, "If the bidder has committed money through bidding, he will be more serious about developing the mine." On February 10, the coal ministry issued a notification that captive coal blocks be allocated through competitive bidding by fixing a minimum floor price on them. The only sec-

Production commenced only in 26 coal blocks out of 143 that were given away between 2006 and 2009 without auctions for a pittance.

MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

34

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

The Big Story NATURALRESOURCES
INTERVIEW I ASHOK CHAWLA

"Auction not the only solution. One size doesn't fit all. "
Chairman of Competition Commission of India, Ashok Chawla, was the chairman of a High Powered Government Committee on the Allocation of Natural Resources between February and June 2011. He speaks to Deputy Editor DHIRAJ NAYYAR about the implications of the Supreme Court judgment on natural resource allocation. Q. Does the Supreme Court judgment mean that all natural resources have to be compulsorily auctioned? A. Public policy has to have a number of instruments. They must cater to different policy objectives, different contexts and different end uses. For some resources, commercial objectives will be more important than social policy objectives. In those cases, policy must be driven more by market forces like auctions. There will be some assets such as water, or Central Government land given for hospitals where the policy objectives and goals will be different. You should not auction in those cases. One size does not fit all. Auction is not the only solution. Q. Does the Government need to retain some discretion? A. Yes, but it cannot be arbitrary and cannot be unfettered. There are two important pillars on which such limited discretion should be based. First, transparency in decision-making, and second, all executive decisions on natural resources must be made within a rule-based architecture. Rules are subordinate legislation where you have to be clear about what you want to do. They are also tabled in Parliament. Q. Where does Government policy stand right now with regard to different natural resources? A. Coal, for example, is a fairly closed chapter. There are some limited auctions, but they account for only 10 per cent of allocations. In mining, we have a chicken-and-egg situation because it is said that there can't be auctions unless it is clear whether any deposits actually exist. We suggested that the Government should therefore increase the area of known mineralisation with the help of expert agencies. In oil, NELP has been reasonably sound and transparent, while in spectrum, auctions are already the prescribed way to go. Forests, land and water are more complicated. For forests and land, the Government needs to first bring out a clear inventory and clearly demarcate which areas can be used and which cannot be used for commercial purposes. Q. How do you respond to the argument that auctions raise costs and therefore end users will have to pay more? A. If you have robust and effective competition, it is very unlikely. Of course, theoretically, if the number of players is small, prices for end users can go up. But then regulatory bodies and the Competition Commission are there to address issues of unfair uncompetitive practices.

tion among bidders is desirable" The ownership of forests is a bone of contention between the Government and forest dwellers. Wildlife and forest expert Valmik Thapar cites the need for an overhaul of the existing legislation and the need to develop a land use policy which demarcates which forest land can be used for commercial purpose and which is out of bounds, something that's absent today. Thapar is not opposed to auctions. "If auctioning of this land takes place through a competitive bidding process, it might help us get the right price, but I think auctions are only favourable in the context of forests if the money is ploughed back to locals for the upkeep of these forests," he says.

WATER
Estimate commercial water use. Auctions not feasible right now.
On water resources, experts see little possibility of auctions. Eighty per cent of India's water resources are deployed for irrigation, 15 per cent for industrial use and 5 per cent for residential use. Says Arunabha Ghosh, CEO of the Council of Energy, Environment and Water, an independent think-tank, "Water auctioning is not viable in India right now. There are far too many other conditions that would have to be in place, such as much more improved monitoring of the water resource, monitoring of use and discharge, effective water regulator, bulk allocations across sectors, including environmental flows, to maintain healthy water systems. None of these conditions are resolved by simply auctioning water use." For a start, adds Ghosh, "We need to collect accurate information of water use in the industrial sector." Says H. Subramanian who heads Everything About Water, a body that is working to bring in global investment in India's water industry, "Water is virtually free in India." It would be a tall order to expect a populist UPA Government to begin charging a market price for water, especially from farmers. Water will likely be the last of the natural resources subject to market-based methods of allocation and pricing.
with Shantanu Guha Ray

