PAKISTAN PRIME MINISTER YOUSUF RAZA GILANI

THE PROBABLES
Two ministers and an ally are frontrunners to replace Gilani
CHAUDHRYAHMED MUKHTAR

The 66-year-old defence minister is a close aide of President Asif Ali Zardari.
CHAUDHRY PERVAIZ ELAHI

The 66-year-old is a leader of PML(Q), the ruling Pakistan Peoples Party's key ally.
SYED KHURSHEED SHAH

The 60-year-old minister for religious affairs is one of the few Zardari trusts.

Nei ghbours

PAKISTAN
AP PHOTO

FINALCOUNTDOWN
Prime Minister Yousuf Gilani's indictment by the Supreme Court may hasten his removal from office

O

n February 12, Yousuf Raza Gilani became Pakistan's first prime minister to be indicted for contempt of the Supreme Court. That was not enough humiliation to induce his resignation. For over two years, Gilani has steadfastly refused to act on orders to reopen graft cases against President Asif Ali Zardari. The court hit back. Justice Nasirul Mulk said Gilani had "wilfully flouted, disregarded and disobeyed" court orders. The verdict plunged Pakistan into a fresh political crisis. "The court's decision saddened me, I was not expecting such treatment," Gilani remarked. Self-pity is not yet a legitimate response under Pakistan law. The Supreme Court will announce the sentencing in the contempt petition after February 28. Contempt is

punishable with a six-month jail term, removal from office and a fiveyear exile from public office. Hours after Gilani's indictment, bigwigs of the ruling Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) huddled with coalition partners at President House in Islamabad, Zardari's official home. The Pakistan Muslim League (Quaide-Azam) (PML-Q) and Muttahida Quami Movement endorsed Gilani's leadership but expressed concern over his survival. Zardari has constitutional powers to pardon the premier in case he is convicted. But Gilani will have to step down after conviction. If convicted, he will also miss the general elections due later this year. Sources privy to the meeting at President House told INDIA TODAY that Defence Minister Chaudhry Ahmed

Mukhtar was the frontrunner to replace Gilani. Other candidates include Minister for Religious Affairs Syed Khursheed Ahmed Shah, PML(Q) leader Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi and even Zardari's sister Faryal Talpur, a member of parliament. Analysts believe the PPP will try and delay the verdict till March 2 when elections to the Upper House will be held. The ruling party believes it can retain control of the Senate post elections too. PPP leaders dismissed speculation over Gilani being replaced. "Such comment is premature," Information Minister Firdous Ashiq Awan said, holding fast to a stance the PPP has maintained since the National Reconciliation Ordinance controversy exploded on its face in January. Former prime minister Nawaz Sharif berated Gilani's stance as political suicide aimed at saving Zardari. "They know elections are coming and would like to cling to power, so they will sacrifice Gilani by not writing a letter (to Swiss authorities asking them to re-open the probe against Zardari)," says Rasul Bakhsh Rais, a political science professor at Lahore University of Management Sciences. The turmoil only helps to serve the army's interests in solidifying control, says political commentator Najam Sethi. "They want the politicians to fight amongst themselves and remain discredited."
by Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad

FEBRUARY 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

