NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA

Tough Love
Two videos created quite a stir in the online world. One showed an almost-naked fouryear-old running in the snow and the other had a teenaged girl's laptop being shot at. Both videos were posted by fathers, but for quite different reasons.The first, a video by a Chinese couple making its child run and do push-ups out in the snow during a vacation in New York in order to toughen him up, outraged viewers.The second has caused more of a debate as Tommy Jordan's method of dealing with his 15-year-old daughter Hannah's disrespectful Facebook status message seemed a little too extreme.Jordan has turned into something of a cyberspace celebrity, with his video receiving more than 22 million hits since February 8. It's not just children creating a stir online anymore.

TWO GEMS FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet Chinese Whispers
In NYTimes.com's Inside China's Greatest Mystery blog,Didi Kirsten Tatlow,an International Herald Tribune columnist,writes about the country's "most renowned crime fighter,Wang Lijun and his whereabouts" .Detailing posts about Lijun on the Chinese blogosphere,she writes, "Apost claimed Mr Wang had been under heavy surveillance in Chongqing and escaped his home dressed as an old woman."
LIJUN

CHINESE CHILD RUNS IN THE SNOW JORDAN

AP

Reason to Love
In this cynical scene,economics graduate Saad Hazri's Let's Love Pakistan: A New Resolution series of articles might be a practice that every country needs to follow.The project,which Hazri started in September 2011,is to list 65 things to love about Pakistan.The second article in the series lists reasons like Pushto cinema and child prodigy Arfa Karim,who passed away earlier this year at the age of 12.
KARIM

Top of the Lot
app alert
Our app round-up is all about work this week. These three will be right at home on any professional's device: Dropbox It gives you access to your documents, photos and videos wherever you are. Google Currents Compiles updates from top publications, blogs and trends. Alarm clock HD This iPad app begins the morning with news and your favourite music.

blog watch

Fashion Chronicles
Some of the world's most successful fashion bloggers believe that fashion trends are what you see on the street and not on the runway. Blogger Manou captures these trends on Indian streets, identifying the extraordinary from the ordinary, and chronicling them on his blog Wearabout. Unlike other similar blogs, Wearabout features everyone from creative college students to rickshaw-pullers. Recent posts also featured a chaiwala on the streets in Jaipur and Union minister Kapil Sibal at the Jaipur Literature Festival. Beauty is in the eye of the beholder indeed.

viral video web wow

Instant Fitness
A video, Shocking Before and After Transformation in 5 Hours - EXPOSED!, has a blogger and eating champion showing you how to go from `fat' to `fit' in just five hours. In the video, which received more than seven million hits,"Furious Pete" explains how certain foods bloat up the body and can turn a perfectly muscular physique into a fat one within a few hours. This sure explains those countless fitness ads.

Cheap Stays
Frequent travellers are constantly looking for cheap places to stay and www.airbnb.com brings them just that.An eBay for places to stay of sorts, the website boasts of spare bedrooms and unused vacation homes in around 200 countries and is seen as a better option than chain hotels.
PETE

74

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

