Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

THE CHOLESTEROLTRAP
Diet or drugs? While the debate rages on how to cut cholesterol, its effects are leading to a loss of productivity in the young workforce.

2
For a country slated to lose productivity worth $237 billion between 2005 and 2015 due to coronary problems in the young workforce, lowering LDL (bad cholesterol) is top priority. An executive check-up on 1,16,731 corporate employees last year by Apollo Hospitals revealed high cholesterol levels in 51 per cent.

1

Despite the confusion, diet remains the best way to attack high cholesterol. A Harvard University study mentions 11 foods that either provide soluble fibre and drag cholesterol out of the body, or polyunsaturated fats that lower LDL or block cholesterol absorption. These are: oats, beans, brinjals, nuts like almonds and walnuts, vegetable oils, apples, grapes and citrus fruits, food fortified with sterols and stanols, soy, fatty fish and fibre supplements.

3

Cholesterol-lowering drugs like statins are top sellers, not just in India but globally, with drugmakers earning billions every year from them. Patients end up spending a fortune, as most such drugs are prescribed for 5-7 years, if not a lifetime. And they typically cost Rs 15 a day.

Weight loss and physical activity are the cornerstones of therapy for many. Exercise itself does not burn cholesterol, but it can significantly reduce triglycerides and stimulate several metabolic enzyme systems in the muscles and liver to convert some of the cholesterol to a more favourable form--such as HDL (good cholesterol).

4

6
Statins, however, are among the most debated of treatments. Many contest the cholesterol-heart attack link. The repeated lowering of recommended LDL and total cholesterol levels by the medical community creates confusion. Many believe cholesterol and statins are hyped by the pharma industry.

5
It's not only important to know what your total cholesterol, LDL and HDL, is, but also what your overall risk is--your family history, smoking, blood pressure and diabetes.Your overall risk determines where your LDL should be and what treatment you might need.


Compiled by Damayanti Datta

