Signature
R O U G H

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

FOREIGN BODIES
ow that we have a on twitter and a minister who writes poetry on N , I believe we are ready to take the next step. Truly
PMO SMS

globalise the Union Cabinet. We've had some high profile visitors of late, and some who've made news by not visiting, so I propose some valuable additions. Minister for Social Justice No one but Oprah Winfrey. She has all the qualifications. She can flit easily from the posh drawing rooms of Mumbai high society to the spirited slums of Dharavi. She loves to give away stuff for free. And she is a great therapist. When celebrities need a makeover, from an Angelina Jolie who's just broken up America's Sweethearts to a Tom Cruise who has just emerged as a votary of the secretive Scientology cult, they know which couch to pick. Minister for Innovation All right, so Jeremy Clarkson carried a toilet seat in a Jaguar, and said it would be most useful for travellers to India who spend an inordinate amount of time nursing upset stomachs. I ask you, what's wrong with that? It's a top gear, sorry top class, idea and it must immediately be put into production. After all, the Jaguar is ours, isn't it? Cyrus Mistry, please put it in your plans for 2013. Minister for Urban Development This I am afraid is a punishment posting. Everyone knows that the only urban development happening in India is in the hands of land sharks. So I propose giving this portfolio to Jay Leno, who will henceforth spend his time identifying possible summer homes for Mitt Romney in India. Hopefully, he will keep his eyes off the Golden Temple. He can, however, send Romney there for a free langar lunch. Minister for Internal Security This can

only be Salman Rushdie. It's a portfolio that will be unique in the annals of world history and will be run entirely by video conference since the Indian state, especially the state of Rajasthan, cannot guarantee his security. Since Rushdie discovered that the intelligence from Maharashtra Police about the threat to his life never really existed, he should be put in charge of all pending terror investigations. I expect instant results. Minister for Spiritual Practices This is a brand new addition in keeping with the secular fabric of our nation and the troubled times we live in. This can only be headed by Richard Gere. The headquarters will be in Dharamshala and in Bodh Gaya. Shilpa Shetty will be kept at a safe distance from Mr Gere's lucky lips. It's for his own good. The Dalai Lama will be chief mentor. We will have to give Mr Gere time off to make movies, but given the artistic ambitions of the existing Cabinet (Salman Khurshid's playwriting and Milind Deora's guitar soirees) it should not be difficult. Minister for Sports Who else but Imran Khan? He has all the qualifications. His cricket record is impeccable. He looks good on TV, especially Indian TV, on which he spends vast amount of time. He can coach the Indian cricket team in his spare time. Plus, democratically elected politicians do not last too long in Pakistan. We can hold the portfolio till the next coup and offer asylum. Imran, please choose your villa. We make them better than Dubai. Minister for Twitter Can we have the wonderfully indiscreet Shashi Tharoor back please? Anything to stave off the boredom of PMO's tweets. The PM met children who won bravery awards? Click on the link for pictures and text? Seriously? 

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

CAN WE HAVE THE WONDERFULLY INDISCREET SHASHI THAROOR BACK PLEASE? ANYTHING TO STAVE OFF THE BOREDOM OF PMO'S TWEETS.

S I G N P O STS
BANKRUPT Eastman Kodak Co., the photography pioneering corporation that helped capture the 20th century. The 130-yearold American company has not recorded

annual profits since 2007. WON Tax case by telecom giant Vodafone, worth Rs 11,000 crore against Income Tax Department on January 20. The Supreme Court ruled that tax officials have no jurisdiction over the firm's offshore purchase of mobile assets in India.

EXPANDED The number of nations whose citizens are eligible for visas on arrival in India. Countries that could be offered the facility include Malaysia, Thailand, Brunei, Spain, France, Germany, Sweden, Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Brazil and South Africa.

APPOINTED Indian-origin journalist Davan Maharaj, as editor and execu- MAHARAJ tive vice-president of the Los Angeles Times, to succeed Russ Stanton, who led the paper to three Pulitzer Prizes.

16

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

