Nation JUDICIARY

ADAYOFJUDGMENT
Supreme Court Justice Ashok Ganguly retires on February 2. His last day of work arouses dread at the highest levels.
n February 2, Home Minister P. Chidambaram may have to resign. With Justice Ashok Kumar Ganguly, one of two judges hearing the 2G spectrum allocation case, set to retire on that day, a verdict on Chidambaram's alleged role in fixing 2G spectrum prices is imperative. The hearings in the case are over, although the Supreme Court reserved a decision on October 2011. Now, Justice Ganguly's forthcoming retirement has fast-tracked judicial proceedings. If found guilty, it will be impossible for the home minister to continue in office. This is not the only case with the potential to knock UPA 2 off course. At least four cases involving top functionaries of the Government and industry await judgment on February 2.

O

The telecom industry is closelywatching the case involving the cancellation of all 121 telecom licences issued in 2008 by former telecom minister A. Raja, accused of giving away scarce spectrum cheap and causing a huge revenue loss to the Government. Another case, targeting the law ministry and the Prime Minister's Office, is expected to set guidelines for granting sanction for prosecution of government functionaries. The outcome of a case on the formation of a Special Investigation Team for the day-to-day monitoring of the 2G cases is also awaited. Justice Ganguly, along with Justice G.S. Singhvi, is one of the judges responsible for turning Chief Justice of India (CJI) S.H. Kapadia's court into a verbal firing squad. For

JUSTICE GANGULY'S RETIREMENT HAS FAST-TRACKED PROCEEDINGS IN THE 2G CASE. IF CHIDAMBARAM IS FOUND GUILTY ON FEBRUARY 2, HE WILL HAVE TO GO.

JUSTICE ASHOK KUMAR GANGULY

15 long months since October 2010, as part of the Supreme Court bench hearing the 2G spectrum allocation scam, the two have taken on the nation's high and mighty, come down heavily on investigating agencies and exposed embarrassing anomalies in governance. And they have chimed perfectly with the public mood--the national aversion for dishonesty, corruption, depravity and greed in public life--despite the buzz about an "out of control judiciary" or "judicial over-reach". With that track record, court insiders are certain that Justice Ganguly will deliver before demitting office. Moreover, the CJI enforces strict rules and sets the pace himself. "These days the CJI sends out the list of pending cases to about-to-retire judges months in advance," they say adding "Justice Ganguly anyway has a reputation for not keeping cases pending." Supreme Court judges, they point out, often deliver the bulk of judgments on their last day. "And even if some of those are given by other judges with whom he shared the bench, say Justice Singhvi in the 2G case, he can always sign those in his chamber." Justice Ganguly is a rare judge endowed with the gift of eloquence. He has given the nation pithy one-liners against corruption, from his comment on the magnitude of the 2G scam last May--"Never seen so many zeroes except in school mathematics" to asking how long the CBI will take to investigate--"Another ten years?" in October 2010. In November he inquired about the Prime Minister's "inaction and silence" and in August, he declared the Prevention of Corruption Act to be a "Preservation of Corruption Act". In September 2011, he famously remarked in court, "Had Sita not crossed the Lakshman Rekha in Ramayana, Ravana would not have been killed. Lakshman Rekha is not sacrosanct but for a limited purpose." On February 2, the day he crosses the Lakshman Rekha of the Supreme Court, it remains to be seen how many Ravanas lie dead around him.
by Damayanti Datta

MAHARASHTRA

CHAVAN TURNS MESSIAH OFPOOR
The Maharashtra Chief Minister woos Mumbai's impoverished at the cost of its middle-class

CHAVAN'S NEW ORDER
Free housing for slum dwellers
Cabinet decides to provide free houses to 40 lakh slum dwellers settled in Mumbai before 1995.

Slum development
Redevelopment project for Dharavi kickstarted after a gap of seven years.

Food distribution scheme
State government to deliver grain at the doorstep of poor.

Hike in property prices
Ready reckoner rate increased by 10-30 per cent across the state.

has been increased. Sunil Mantri, 50, chairman of the real estate committee of Indian Merchants' Chamber, wants Chavan's intervention while consumer forums plan to approach the court. "We will approach the government but if the outcome is not positive, then we will file a writ petition," says Vinod Sampat, 52, president of Stamp Duty and Registration Payers' Association. Chavan has also amended the Development Control Rules (DCR) in Mumbai and imposed new restrictions on builders. New rules say the balcony and terrace will also be counted in the Floor Space Index (FSI), the ratio between the built-up area allowed and the plot area available. Architect Arif Noorani, 38, says, "Builders will pass on the cost to customers." Chavan says

Amendments in rules
Changes in Development Control Rules in Mumbai. Buyers to compulsorily spare 1.5 metres open space around plots measuring less than 600 sq m. New restrictions imposed on builders.
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

CHAVAN

CHIEF MINISTER CHAVAN HAS HIKED THE FSI AND READY RECKONER RATES. THE MOVES WILL RESULT IN AN INCREASE IN REAL ESTATE PRICES IN MUMBAI.
the changes will bring transparency. "The amendments are a step in curbing corruption," he assures. BJP has attacked his moves. "The decisions were taken under the pressure of builders, who support the Congress," says Vinod Tawde of BJP. But Chavan says, "We have changed the rules after consulting builders."A top BJP official says the party wants to hurt Chavan's image, the cleanest Maharashtra Congress Chief Minister in years. Will Chavan's gambit to woo the urban poor at the cost of its middle-class supporters pay off? Municipal poll results, to be declared on February 17, will tell. by Kiran Tare

aharashtra's technocrat Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan has carefully positioned himself as a messiah of the poor. On January 4, the state Cabinet decided to provide free houses to 40 lakh slum dwellers, settled in Mumbai before 1995. The same day, the 65-year-old Chief Minister also announced a food distribution scheme under which the state will deliver foodgrain at the doorstep of the poor. The next day, he finalised a redevelopment plan for Asia's second largest slum, Dharavi, under which a 300 sq ft house will be allotted to each of the 60,000 families living there. With 55 per cent of Mumbai's population living

M

in slums, Chavan apparently sees a vote bank. His decision on January 5 came three hours before the state Election Commission announced polls to 27 zilla parishads and 10 municipal corporations, including Mumbai. But the urban middle class, which has been a supporter of the Congress, hasn't got a similar deal. The Maharashtra government's decision to increase the ready reckoner rate by 10-30 per cent will hike house prices in Mumbai, where real estate rates are already going through the roof. The rate, which is based on stamp duty and registration fees charged at the time of purchasing a house,

HK RAJASHEKHAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

36

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

37

