NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA

Angry Aunty
Pakistan saw its very own version of India's saffron brigade on January 17 when host of a morning TV show, Maya Khan, decided to take cameras to Karachi parks and badger couples into explaining what they were doing there.Twitter, Facebook and the blogosphere were on fire with criticism of Khan's actions. Eventually the channel and the TV host apologised. But not before Aunty Maya became Monster Maya.

buzz feed

Shoot on Sight
YouTube has launched an online short film festival, where 10 winners will be sent to the Venice Film Festival and compete for a $500,000 prize. The jury will choose 50 semi-finalists, at which point users of the site will be invited to vote for 10 winners. The website will be accepting submissions from February 2 till March 31. Get your cameras out, kids. It's time to make a movie.

Disapproval Galore
Columnist Tammy Haq tweeted: Maya Khan is evil. Blogger Mehreen Kasana wrote: Young people fall in love all the time. But they don't need a team of middle-aged women hounding them down public places. Blogger Beena Sarwar wrote: This could result in putting couples in life-threatening situations in a country where forced marriages and honour killings continue to be the norm.

MAYA KHAN

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's three best apps include something old, something new and all very useful. Here are ones that need to find place on your iPhone: List the ingredients you have at home and Epicurious tells you what you can make. A virtual moneymanager, Mint tracks your income and expenditure using your financial data. iBooks 2 lets you create and edit free interactive eBooks.

web wow

viral video

Pipe Down, Listen Up
You've said all you can. Now it's time to let pictures do the talking. A new social networking website, Pinterest, lets users create collections of stuff they like by uploading "pins" (images) from around the web. Like Twitter, there are followers. Like Facebook, users can "like"images or re-pin someone else's item on their own board. However, Pinterest is more about curating content, than creating. Some of the most popular categories on the site are food, weddings, travel and fashion.Are you pinning, yet?

Sing Along
A video of US President Barack Obama singing Let's Stay Together has gone viral and received 1,319,680 hits within two days.At a fundraiser held at Apollo Theater in New York City, Obama mentioned that soul legend Reverend Al Green was at the event and sang "I'm so in love with you,"a line from his classic hit. Is the singing president trying to get history to repeat itself? During the 2008 election, he sang the Aretha Franklin hit Chain of Fools to a crowd that included the Queen of Soul.

blog watch

Food for Thought
Food blogger and cook, Pamela Nelson has been creating a buzz with her blog Eat and Dust since it launched in March 2009. Nelson moved to India four years ago and started discovering the joys of local food. Instead of just sharing recipes on the blog, she also discusses how she discovered them.Also, aplenty are beautiful photographs of her excursions around Old Delhi.And every blogger's dream came true for Nelson as she recently got a contract to write a cookbook."From Kinari Bazaar we turned into Paranthe Wali Gali, not for paranthe but for sweets at Kanwarji," writes Nelson, whose familiarity with the area will put many Dilliwallas to shame.

WHAT GOT PEOPLE TALKING THIS WEEK Tables turned British teen Elly Nowell has become something of a celebrity after sending a mocking rejection letter to Oxford University, where she appeared for an admission interview. In her guardian.co.uk OXFORD UNIVERSITY essay Why I Sent Oxford a Rejection Letter, Nowell, 19, explains,"I am reluctant to be part of a system so heavily dominated by such a narrow group of self-selecting elites."

smart sheet

Finding fault
With the US doing all it can to bring outsourced jobs back home,a New York Times article titled How the US Lost Out on iPhone Work created much stir online.In a critique, Slate magazine's business and economics correspondent Matthew Yglesias writes,"At the same time that a lot of companies seem to want to move certain kinds of production to foreign countries to take advantage of their labour forces,an awful lot of people seem to want to move to the United States."
STEVE JOBS

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

