The Big Story JAIPUR LITERATURE FESTIVAL

SHAME AND ENCHA NTMENT IN JAIPUR
SATANIC TEMPTATIONS OF POLITICS GATECRASH THE CARNIVAL THAT CONTINUES TO OFFER THE MOST INTIMATE CONVERSATIONS IN LITERATURE
By S. Prasannarajan 3 4

et us spot the assassin. In the sprawl of Diggi Palace, the site of Asia's biggest literary carnival, it's a mission as futile as separating the flannelled Booker winner from the autograph-hunting flaneur. Here, in a wintry day warmed by words, the man with a conspicuous beard and a glint in his gaze could be someone called Teju Cole, author of Open City, a first novel everyone wants to recommend. Or it could be the Canadian with Sri Lankan ancestry, Michael Ondaatje, whose silvery mane is as poetic as any of his novels, be it the bestseller The English Patient or the forensic thriller Anil's Ghost. Or it could be the dapper Ben Okri, whose address in the English-speaking world still reads The Famished Road, though his exploration of the African magic has gone much beyond his first novel. Here in literary tourism's most swarmed destination, almost every monumental author, and every sightseer, is accessorised by a bag swelling with explosives-- hardbound stories and arguments that shatter the dead certainties of the day. The phantom assassin and the missing blasphemer make the fifth DSC Jaipur Literature Festival an arena of shame and sorrow, of Satanic temptations of politics and the enchantment of dissent. 1 Salman Rushdie, whose imagined India is one of fiction's most enduring landscapes, is denied access (not even a video conversation) to the festival because the ruling regimes in Jaipur and Delhi have put the vote above the book, leaving the fate of the disposable writer to the street fighters of religion. Still, it is not the paid assassins prowling on the front lawns of Diggi Palace and the gardens of the majestic Rambagh Palace--a scenario manufactured by the Rajasthan government--that keeps a gagged Rushdie away. It is another festival, in Uttar Pradesh and elsewhere, starring the same political class that banned The Satanic Verses even before Ayatollah Khomeini's Iran put a price to the novelist's head, that dictates the mind of a government that refuses to stand up for the author. Rushdie tells INDIA TODAY: "To be attacked by people who don't know who you are, but have decided they do, is a surreal fate. To find Official India refusing to stand up against such bigots is even more surreal (see box on the right)." The surrealism of realpolitik makes Rushdie the unseen, unheard protagonist of Jaipur where every bibliophile aspires to be a story in the long days and nights of storytellers. "I feel personally dis-

L

1. Salman Rushdie; 2. Oprah Winfrey; 3.Ashi Dorji Wangmo Wangchuck, the Queen Mother of Bhutan, with Gulzar; 4. Michael Ondaatje; 5. Ben Okri; 6. David Remnick

5

"
SALMAN RUSHDIE TO INDIA TODAY
AP PHOTO

God is my daddy. I believe that. Which is why I have always acted like I could achieve things in my life.
Oprah Winfrey, Chat show host

LIFT THE BAN

"
6

"

I have been writing about India, on and off, my whole

life, and I deeply resent being reduced to a one-dimensional cartoon of an `insulter'by people who haven't, don't want to, or can't read the book they hate so much, or anything else I've written.To be attacked by people who don't know who you are, but have decided they do, is a surreal fate.To find Official India refusing to stand up against such bigots is even more surreal. It's time to demand that the ban on The Satanic Verses (which is only a Customs Act ban on importing the book, unenforceable in the Internet age) be revoked. If Egyptians,Turks and even Libyans can read this novel without dire consequences, are Indians really so backward that we can't? I don't believe that for a minute.Lift the ban!

2

"
Photographs by: PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR, RAMESH SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

44

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

The Big Story

JAIPUR LITERATURE FESTIVAL

7

10

graced by this, that after three weeks of struggle we had to give in to those who wish to suppress free speech," laments William Dalrymple, one of the festival directors. Even as the disgrace of Rushdie Outcast looms over the pink canopies of the festival palace, words swirling in the overcrowded tents exude dissent and solidarity. On a Monday evening, Richard Dawkins, author of such provocative bestsellers as The Selfish Gene and The God Delusion, turns a bravura reading session into a trial of God and a celebration of the poetics of science. Remember, here is a writer who has written, among other subversive gems, a sentence like this, and is still alive: "The God of the Old Testament is arguably the most unpleasant character in all fiction: jealous and proud of it; a petty, unjust, unforgiving control-freak; a vindictive, bloodthirsty ethnic cleanser; a misogynistic, homophobic, racist, infanticidal, genocidal, filicidal, pestilential, megalomaniacal, sadomasochistic, capriciously malevolent bully." This evening he is distributing aphorisms on the poetic possibilities of science and the profanities of faith to an audience in thrall. Samples: Reality is the real source of magic and wonder; breaking through the anaesthetic of familiarity is the essence of poetry; the future belongs to science and those who make friends with science; there was no first person; religious faith is a state of mind; brain taken over by faith is dangerous; religious faith deserves a chapter in war technology... He concludes the session with a statement of solidarity with Rushdie, which he had written originally for The New Statesman in the aftermath of the original fatwa. "I'm looking forward to the day without religions." We too, so roars the applause. Dissent is the romance of the storyteller who doesn't give in. And there is no storyteller who is more perseverant than Shahrazad of One Thousand and One Nights. Hanan alShaykh has just re-imagined the eternal classic. "Reading Alf layla wa layla this time was personal: I felt as if I had opened the door of a carriage which took me back into the heart of my Arab heritage, and to the classical Arab language, after a great absence," she writes in the foreword. She is one friend Rushdie has been looking forward to meet up with in Jaipur. One afternoon on the palace terrace, she tells you why she too misses him here. She too finds herself as a citizen in the "Republic of the Uprooted". Born in Beirut,

11 8 9
7.Teju Cole and Ghanaian novelist Taiye Selasi; 8. Kalli Purie; 9. M.J.Akbar and former New York Times editor Joseph Lelyveld (right); 10. (From left) Richard Flanagan, Tom Stoppard, Girish Karnad, Lionel Shriver and Vishal Bhardwaj; 11. Simon Sebag Montefiore (right) with William Dalrymple; 12. Steven Pinker; 13.Tom Stoppard; 14. Pola Oloixarac

she left her homeland on November 9, 1975--she remembers the exact date. "I return to Beirut every year, but I don't feel at home. The Beirut I knew no longer exists," the author of the poignant The Locust and the Bird, the story of her mother, tells you. As history plays out the liberation script in the Arab world, she is happy that "Arabs got rid of those dictators". She regrets she is not there in the theatre of freedom, "but I am there emotionally." Women, she tells you, have always been in the vanguard of the freedom struggle: "Women liberated Liberia." Tahrir Square

13

"

I get turned on by abstract ideas. I do not think of them as critical, analytical or political before I begin writing.
Tom Stoppard, Playwright

"

12

has an ancestry. The beautiful Morocco-born Houda Echouafni, who will be playing Shahrazad in the three-hourlong stage adaptation of her friend's latest work, agrees. "See me on stage in London," she can't resist the excitement. Off-stage conversations with writers are the rewards of being in Jaipur. So Okri tells you why he doesn't want to get upset by reading the latest Naipaul, The Masque of Africa. "He sees the obvious things, not the hidden things, the spiritual things." It saddens him more because it is written by a writer known for his unsentimental gaze, by the same writer who wrote the brilliant African book, A Bend in the River. But Naipaul's book is about the magic of Africa, and he is still unsentimental, you tell him in disagreement. "In Africa, history is not the problem, it is the myths." Okri, as a stylist, is moving from the magical (as in The Famished Road) to "a simpler, purer" form, as in Time for New Dreams. And his first book of poems is on its way: Wild. "It's about the civilisational wild," he says. Then you meet two of non-fiction's finest minds at work today: David Remnick and Simon Sebag Montefiore. Remnick, editor of The New Yorker and author of the Pulitzerwinning Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, has written the definitive book on Barack Obama, The Bridge: The Life and Rise of Barack Obama. "He is the best president of my generation," he says, and is rather modest about being the best chronicler of an exceptional life in politics. The overwhelming reality of President Obama has already erased from American memory the romance of Candidate Obama circa 2008. Today, it's not the biography of the candidate that dominates the campaign, as in 2008; it's the economics. There may be an emotional detachment about the presidential personality, and then each presidency was marked by a distinctive personal trait. "Obama is a bit remote. Then Nixon was morose and vindictive, Carter was known for the smallness of his vision." Ask him how he manages to be the editor of one of journalism's loftiest brands and a prolific writer of bestselling literary non-fiction and he doesn't think for a minute 14 to reply: "I don't mix the two."

46

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

The Big Story

JAIPUR LITERATURE FESTIVAL

15 17

15.Artists perform at the inauguration of the festival; 16. Richard Dawkins (left) and actor Lalla Ward; 17. Hanan al-Shaykh (right) with Houda Echouafni

16

Montefiore, the other biographer you meet, has just published Jerusalem: A Biography. It is a city where, he tells you, "dreams, myths and faith" meet; or, as he writes, it is "the illuminated stage for the cameras of the world in the age of twenty-four-hour news". It is the art of the novelist that powers his dramatisation of 3,000 years of Jewish history and his earlier portrait of the red terror, the chilling Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar. "History is storytelling" for him, as it is for Simon Schama, whose book on the French revolution, Liberation, is a masterpiece in the genre. "We are all influenced by him," Montefiore admits. The other popular historian you meet for a casual conversation is an old India hand, the bidi-smoking John Keay, whose romance with India has not stopped since he came to Kashmir in 1965 for trout fishing. Though a bit puzzled by India's "electrocracy", he is more dazzled by the change in India than by the progress of China. "I enjoy India, and I still see too much India in Pakistan and Bangladesh, and it is an anomaly that the shared history of South Asia has not resulted in any unity," he says. Jaipur is the most casual, and intimate, conversation literature can offer outside the pages. In multiple sessions spanning four venues of the palace, you have an embarrassment of riches to choose from. Listen to the formidable Steven Pinker, author of The Better Angels of Our Nature, arguing, with clinical clarity, how humankind has become less violent over the centuries. Listen to Tom Stoppard, the cult playwright, wondering why he seems to have a life more

as an adapter than as a playwright these days. Listen to author and editor M.J. Akbar, in his characteristic lucidity, explaining how Gandhi freed Indians from fear. Listen to Montefiore, in a spellbinding, extempore speech that lasts for almost an hour, going deep into the recesses of Stalin's mind. Listen to Kalli Purie, author of Confessions of a Serial Dieter, telling an inspired audience how she has become a worshipper in the temple of her own body, which has now attained what she calls the happy weight, and why a fit, lean body is the best costume you can ever have. Listen to Teju Cole describing a world which has a pessimism deficit, and why his aim is the total destruction of African as an adjective. Listen to the glamorous Argentinean novelist Pola Oloixarac talking about how Roberto Bolano, author of 2666 and The Savage Detectives, handles violence in fiction. Listen to Girish Karnad, the best moderator at Jaipur, reflecting on stagecraft and cinema with equal ease. Listen to The New Yorker writer Katherine Boo, author of the forthcoming Behind the Beautiful Forevers: Lie, Death and Hope in a Mumbai Undercity, narrating her experience in chronicling the life in a slum. Listen to the chat show goddess Oprah Winfrey enthralling an admiring multitude with the one-liner, "I'm because we are." Or listen to the writer whose absence becomes the overwhelming presence at the concluding writers' ball in Kinari Bagh, overlooking Amer Fort on the outskirts of Jaipur. The night carries the whispers of Salman Rushdie. 

48

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

