Nation

PMO

By Priya Sahgal

T

he one man in Government whose responsibility was news had no news of his own departure. The decision to remove Harish Khare as the Prime Minister's media adviser was taken over six months ago. His inability to get the Government's views across to the public had irked the Congress leadership. But even after Pankaj Pachauri was appointed as the communications adviser on January 19, Khare did not get the message. Perhaps he thought that since he held a secretary-level rank and Pachauri was brought in as an additional secretary, the latter would report to him. It was only after he was told that Pachauri would be reporting directly to Principal Secretary Pulok Chatterji that Khare finally resigned. The new chain of command had no place for him. According to a Cabinet minister, Khare appealed to Ahmed Patel, political secretary to Sonia Gandhi, for help. While it is not clear what Patel told him, he did get a message from 10 Janpath. He was told if he went quietly there might be compensation. Just as A.B. Vajpayee's former media adviser H.K. Dua was compensated as ambassador to Denmark after he was eased out of the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) in 2001, two years after he took office. Khare's contempt for the media is an open secret. His snub to Arnab Goswami, editor-in-chief of Times Now television channel was broadcast live on national media. On Febuary 16, 2011, Khare had organised an interaction between the Prime Minister and TV editors. When Goswami asked

PRESS PMO FOR REVOLVING DOOR
The departure of a second press adviser from the Prime Minister's Office looks like carelessness. Why did Manmohan Singh get fed up of Harish Khare?
a follow-up query, Khare shut him up saying, "this is not an interrogation of the Prime Minister". Suddenly Manmohan Singh, who had been taking all questions head on, looked as if he had something to hide. Print journalists were used to more colourful reprimands. While criticism of the Prime Minister was sometimes overlooked, criticism of the media adviser was punished with ostracism. It is significant that Pachauri will be reporting to Chatterji and not to the Prime Minister as is the norm. Chatterji is known for his closeness to Sonia and Rahul Gandhi and his presence in the PMO is being seen as an increase of 10 Janpath's hold over South Block. During UPA 1, when Manmohan handpicked his friend's son Sanjaya Baru as his media adviser, he had a one-line brief to offer. "I asked the Prime Minister what he expected of me. He said I want you to be my eyes and ears and tell me what you think I should know without fear or favour,"

says Baru. Now Pachauri will be doing the same, but for Chatterji not the Prime Minister. A television editor, Pachauri is expected to handle the minute-tominute needs of the electronic media much better than Khare. Says Baru, "The role of a media adviser changes from time to time. H.Y. Sharda Prasada (Indira Gandhi's press adviser) once told me, he used to deal with five editors. I dealt with 300 TV channels and newspapers." The idea is to create a buzz around the Prime Minister. Under Khare's watch, the PMO had retreated behind a wall of silence that gave an impression that Manmohan was doing very little. One of the first things Pachauri did was to log the PMO onto Twitter where details of the Prime Minister's activities are uploaded. Law Minister Salman Khurshid admits that the Government has not used social media effectively. Pachauri's first tweet was about a meeting of the National

PACHAURI (LEFT) AND KHARE

THE DECISION TO REMOVE KHARE WAS TAKEN SIX MONTHS AGO. HE WAS OUSTED AS HE WAS UNABLE TO GET THE PM'S VIEWS INTO THE PUBLIC SPACE.
Skill Development Council with PMO officials.Another revealed Pachauri's wide-eyed wonder at his new job. "Looking forward to meeting some of the bravest children in India. Always used to watch them atop elephants at Republic Day parades." Pachauri lacks the seniority of his predecessors. According to Ashok Tandon, a former journalist who was Atal Bihari Vajpayee's press adviser, "This could see the growing importance of the Press Information Bureau." For this, Pachauri will need to work in tandem with Information and Broadcasting Minister Ambika Soni. Khare had even manHEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

PACHAURI WILL REPORT TO CHATTERJI AND NOT TO THE PM AS IS THE NORM. CHATTERJI IS KNOWN FOR HIS CLOSENESS TO SONIA.
YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

aged to antagonise the genial Soni by first inviting her and then revoking the invitation to a press conference with television editors. According to a Congress general secretary, Soni was told that there was "not enough space" in the room to accommodate her. The politically astute Soni found her own space. A few months later, in May 2011, she persuaded the Prime Minister to set up a Group of Ministers to handle the media. Marketing the Prime Minister to the media is a key component of the the press adviser's job. "Access is crucial. We encouraged editors to accompany us on foreign trips. On board, each got a half-hour interaction with the PM, to discuss whatever they wanted. Or, in some cases to lobby for a Rajya Sabha seat," says Tandon, with a smile. He was luckier than some as Vajpayee was a media delight. Tandon organised a succesful Women's Day tea between Vajpayee and women journalists. Baru kept this on the PMO agenda. Dua has also been media adviser to H.D. Deve Gowda. He laughs ruefully when he recalls the then prime minister's trip to Harare where he took 15 relatives for a G-15 meet. The press dubbed the entourage `Gowda's G-15'. "How do you sell the image of a man caught dozing on camera at Vigyan Bhavan?" he asks. Manmohan's advisers have to balance between two power centres--10 Janpath and 7 Race Course Road. There is a buzz that a recent theft of Khare's laptop was ostensibly to hack into his mail to read his views about the Congress leadership. If this is so, the thief needn't have bothered. Khare has never hidden his contempt for Sonia. In The Hindu on September 6, 2000, he had scoffed at "Manmohan Singh leading the panegyric pack to 10 Janpath to congratulate Sonia Gandhi on becoming a grandmother." In September 2010, speaking at a book release, he said, "Congress is a status-quoist party. It does not believe in any conviction." After Khare's track record, even a simple tweet by Pachauri seems like a great feat of media outreach. 

32

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

