GLOSSARY

TO PUPPIES,WITH LOVE
It's not often that our celebrities engage in PDA. But when it comes to their pets, love knows no bounds.
Ratan Tata The Tata chairman tweeted about missing his two Alsatians when he was away. Tata's Mumbai house is home to many stray dogs, but Tito and Tango are his favourites. When in town, he insists on taking them for a walk. Raveena Tandon The 90s diva played hero to a puppy and brought him home. Naturally, she had to tweet about it, saying how the puppy joined her family of five-- her husband and two daughters and two Labradors.The Mast Mast girl's daughters named him Cuddles Thadani.That's an awww moment right there.
RATAN TATA
AFP

Shah Rukh Khan Some like to keep their private lives to themselves. Not Khan. Recently, he took a break from sharing tidbits about his children and tweeted a picture of his dogs, Dash, a Pekingese, and Hulk, a black Labrador. Khan says he talks to his dogs when he's lonely. He also tweeted that his little dog tries to bite everything, including water and smoke. Arjun Rampal Following in close friend Shah Rukh Khan's footsteps, Rampal brought home a Chinese pug.The yummy daddy's kids named the puppy Muscles. Now acting will not be the only thing Rampal and Khan share notes on.
SHAH RUKH KHAN
GETTYIMAGES FOTOCORP GETTYIMAGES

TO RAJIV,WITH AWE
Director and former journalist Bhavna Talwar began research on a biopic of Rajiv Gandhi a year ago. She laughs away talk of a Rs 120 crore budget. It will be a big budget film produced by husband Sheetal Talwar, she says, but is tight-lipped about who will play Rajiv Gandhi. "What's inspiring to me is that he had a vision. We are able to have this telephone conversation today because of him," she says. We think the Gandhis would approve.
FOTOCORP

RAVEENA TANDON AND ARJUN RAMPAL

THE PERFECT CUT
If not in films, Sonam Kapoor, 26, is scoring on the sartorial front. This time it's a personal invitation from fashion's wild child, French designer Jean Paul Gaultier, for his Paris show on January 25. There is yet another invite, for Lebanese designer Elie Saab's show that extends to an exclusive dinner at his home. Wish her movie sense was as well-honed as her fashion sensibility.

Q& A B H AY D E O L A "I want to dance where it makes sense"
ACTOR

Abhay Deol, 35, is gearing up for three films this year, more than he has done in a long time--Dibakar Banerjee's Shanghai, Ronald Joffe's Singularity and Navdeep Singh's Rock the Shaadi. And while he doesn't talk much about his films that are `works in progress', he is more forthcoming on his stint as brand ambassador of the upcoming Signature Premier Indian Derby 2012 in Mumbai. Q. How keen are you on racing? A. The last season was my first time at a derby. I am excited about seeing the horses run but it's not something I'd jump to do. Q. As brand ambassador, what do you bring to the derby? A. A lot of hot air. Q. Will you ever do television? A. I am quite happy doing films.

I live in the moment and have nothing planned as yet. Q. How do you pick your movies? A. It's the script. I can't explain why I like or dislike a script but it has to be something I can relate to. I like realism and lose interest if it is larger than life. Q. How did you prepare to play a Tamil Brahmin IAS officer in Shanghai? A. The challenge was not to sound hardcore and stereotypical because an IAS officer stationed in the north would know Hindi. I got someone to read my dialogues and would repeat them the way he spoke them. I also learnt the Tamil alphabet. Q. What is Rock The Shaadi about? Are you doing an item number? A. It is about zombies at a Punjabi wedding. It is a work in progress and if we go ahead and complete a song then I can talk about it. Q. But you have previously said you are not comfortable with dance. A. I wanted to strike a balance and dance where it makes sense. I take a longer time to prepare for it, not that I am uncomfortable dancing.
by Nishat Bari
GETTYIMAGES

WORD
OF THE

MITTENS
WHATMANYAMERICANS THOUGHTWAS THE REAL NAME OFMITTROMNEY,WHO'S BEEN TRYING TO BE THE REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE FOR FIVE YEARS.

WEEK

OSCAR SURPRISES
In typical Academy Awards fashion, the nominations brought surprises and snubs. While they ignored many popular choices, the announcement gave Anil Ambani reason to cheer as Reliance DreamWorks movies scored 11 spots on the list. Here are three unexpected Oscar hopefuls for February 26.
REUTERS GETTYIMAGES AP

GETTYIMAGES

Demian Bichir The Mexican actor might be this year's dark horse. His nomination for Chris Weitz's A Better Life saw pretty boy Ryan Gosling and rising star Michael Fassbender being shut out.We protest.

Melissa McCarthy The year's surprise success Bridesmaids didn't make the best picture list. But the first-time nominee's role as rauchy Megan was too outrageous to ignore.

Terrence Malick Hollywood loves recluses. So the always visible David Fincher with The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo was out of the race and The Tree of Life's maverick master got a look-in.

Nishat Bari and Avantika Sharma

62

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

