Mail

Hatya Shastra
JANUARY 23, 2012

Murder has a terrible new face, new motive and a new address. Across urban India, seemingly normal people kill their closest relatives in the name of love, sex or jealousy.

In the so-called modern, high-profile Indian society, while affluence and intelligence have increased, character has deteriorated.
P AW A N K U M A R F A N G A R I A ,
Noida

Morality Deficit
It is horrendous and rather retrograde for our growing nation to see crimes of passion rise to such alarming levels ("Hatya Shastra", January 23). What is more appalling is that premeditated murders are giving way to impulse killing, which is even more difficult to track and curb. The growing influence of films and TV serials, replete with scenes glorifying blood-curdling violence, also seems to have an adverse effect on urban society. Apart from speedy trials and convictions to punish the guilty, inculcating moral values among the young will go a long way in countering this terrible malady afflicting our society.
NALINI VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Thiruvananthapuram

Living with China
Despite fundamental differences, there is common ground on which India and China could build upon ("China Plays Rough", January 23). There is no denying that Indian businessmen should improve their business ethics and practices. Intimidation could happen in any political or economic setting, not necessarily only under communism. The challenge lies in overcoming hurdles and becoming an indispensable partner.
MAHESH KUMAR, Mumbai

To drop an IAF officer from a delegation following China's refusal to issue a visa is nothing less than capitulation by India. This clearly shows the country in poor light.
MOTUPALLI S. PRASAD, Chennai

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

``
PTI

``

Discretion and discrimination are often thrown to the wind when so-called close relatives resort to mindless murder to prove their point of view, in a fit of rage. Lack of trust, ego clashes and intervention by elders in minor disputes often contribute to domestic murders, carried out in the heat of the moment.
K.V. RAGHURAM, Kerala

Landed Asset
The Railways should take note of your story as it made a sound point ("Lease Land to Get Back On Track", January 23). To ask for a Rs 10,000-crore bailout is a shame. The fact that the Railways owns land worth Rs 22 lakh crore makes the bailout demand look ridiculous.
ANOOP SRINIVAS BHAT, Bangalore

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

Mail
"Facts Distorted"
The story ("Benefit of Clout", January 23) is a deliberate distortion of facts and a malicious attempt to insinuate wrongdoing. I understand that the allegations regarding acquisition of Sesa Goa by Vedanta Resources are false in material particulars, but since I do not know the facts I shall refrain from commenting on the same. My concern is about the allegations on the tax proposals. A little research would have revealed that every tax proposal of the Ministry of Finance is examined on a file which contains the reasons in support thereof. Every modification of a tax proposal is also examined on a file which contains the reasons in support thereof. Every tax proposal and every modification goes through several stages of scrutiny and is done with the approval of the finance minister and the Prime Minister. Every finance minister receives postBudget representations. He responds to them while the Finance Bill is taken up for consideration and announces some changes or modifications or relief. It is outrageous to suggest that these are done to benefit any person. Export duty on iron ore was imposed for the first time in the Budget for 2007-08. Following post-Budget my first Budget, I reduced customs duty on copper, lead, zinc and other base metals by 5 per cent. By parity of reasoning, you should have said that I disfavoured Vedanta Resources, which is one of the leading manufacturers of copper, lead and zinc, and complimented me for the same.
P. CHIDAMBARAM Union Home Minister

35
YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
F E B R U A RY 1 6 - 2 8 , 1 9 7 7

Back in Business
Perhaps no less dramatic than Indira Gandhi's surprise decision to hold general elections a few days earlier, was Congress stalwart Jagjivan Ram's sudden exit from the ranks of the ruling party in the early hours of February 2. Ram, who along with Bahuguna, Ganesh and Satpathy and several other supporters formed a new party--Congress for Democracy--sent in his resignation to the Prime Minister by a special messenger at 10.30 a.m. Later at a hurriedly convened Press Conference at his New Delhi residence, Ram, former Union Agriculture Minister, called for an immediate withdrawal of the Emergency and repeal of MISA. Ram's resignation, compared by one observer to "a general changing sides just before the battle lines are drawn" , is one of the most significant political developments since the Congress party split in 1969.This has added a new, unexpected dimension to the hopes of the Opposition in the approaching elections. Ever since the first Lok Sabha, the Opposition has largely been a faceless and unknown entity, making its presence felt, sporadically; more as a matter of course than conviction.

CHIDAMBARAM

representations, after extensive consultations with all stakeholders, the export duty on iron ore `fines' with iron content of 62 per cent or less was modified on May 3, 2007. Thereafter, the duty on iron ore `fines' underwent several changes. The duty was increased to 15 per cent of FoB value on June 13, 2008. It was reduced to 8 per cent of FoB value on November 7, 2008. Each change was prompted by the market conditions. After I demitted office as finance minister, on December 7, 2008, the Prime Minister who was also holding charge of Finance, reduced the export duty to `nil' and this continued for a year. On December 24, 2009, the Finance Minister (Pranab Mukherjee) imposed a duty of 5 per cent of FoB value. I wonder if you would attribute motives to every change that was made in the duty rate by successive finance ministers? Besides, did the author/editors know that after I became finance minister in May 2004, in

Not Separate
The article ("Son Rising", January 14) referred to a conference in Guwahati which was attended by Joseph Stiglitz and Lord Meghnad Desai and mentioned a comment by ULFA military head Paresh Baruah describing my initiative as an attempt "to distinguish Assam's economy from that of India". This description is completely inaccurate. There is no question of separating Assam's economic development from India's economic prosperity. Over the past 11 years, the state has witnessed a major period of development thanks to regional and nationallevel efforts.
GAURAV GOGOI, Guwahati

Correction
In the obituary to Homai Vyarawalla (January 30), her year of birth has been wrongly mentioned as 1949. The correct year of her birth is 1913. The error is regretted.

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

BAHUGUNA, RAM, SATPATHY: THE ONES THAT GOT AWAY

10

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

NEW

