Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

AGLIMMER IN THE GARBAGE
Katherine Boo's captivating biography of a Mumbai slum is the most elegant counter-argument to the power and possibilities of modern India
By S. Prasannarajan

I

BEHIND THE BEAUTIFUL FOREVERS: LIFE, DEATH AND HOPE IN A MUMBAI UNDERCITY
byKatherine Boo Hamish Hamilton Price: RS 499 Pages: 254

BETWEEN THE COVERS The author,an American journalist,documented the experiences of the slum dwellers with written notes,video recordings,audiotapes,and photographs.All the names are real.She used more than 3,000 public records,manyof them accessed through the Right to Information Act. She completed her recording in March 2011.

n the mythology of the unequal country, the Mumbai slum is the site where the damned and the wretched multiply. They feed the angst of the sentimental sociologist who seeks the fault lines of development. They continue to be turned into monochromatic images of dispossession on the other side of the megalopolis. They are the brand ambassadors of an India that has undergone an Oriental overhaul: the photogenic snake charmer has been displaced by the Oscar-worthy slumdog. The shanty towns that mar the dreams and delusions of India's iconic city--also the most imagined and reported one--tell everything you need to know about those who have been denied access to one of Asia's most coveted marketplaces. So, before you turn the first page of Katherine Boo's debut, Behind the Beautiful Forevers, you dread the possibility of being transported into a dramatised cliché. You dread the inevitability of being dazzled by the beauty of squalor. Turn the first page and it takes only a few sentences to be dazzled--yes, but by a different kind of beauty that you rarely find in literary non-fiction from India. Boo, a Pulitzer Prize-winning writer with The New Yorker, turns a jaded, no matter however unpleasant, fact into a literary experience as rewarding as the finest in fiction. The fact here is called Annawadi, a slum in "the biggest city of a country that holds one-third of the planet's poor. A country dizzy now with development and circulating money." Founded in the early Nineties by Tamil migrants, the slum sits next to the city's international airport, and "Annawadians were among roughly one hundred million Indians freed from poverty since 1991, when, around the same moment as the small slum's founding, the central government embraced economic liberalisation. The Annawa-

KATHERINE BOO; (ABOVE) A SNAPSHOT FROM ANNAWADI

dians were thus part of one of the most stirring success narratives in the modern history of global market capitalism, a narrative still unfolding." Still, only six of the slum's more than 3,000 residents have permanent jobs; a few of them have only rats and frogs and scrub grass for dinner; and Boo zeroes in on an enterprising Muslim teenager, a garbage trader, though "some people called him garbage and left it at that." Abdul Hakim Husain, the only earner in his big family, "simply recognised Annawadi as a place booby-trapped with contentions, new and ancient, over which he was determined not to trip. For Annawadi was also magnificently positioned for a trafficker in rich people's garbage." But he trips at a moment when his family's "affluence" makes their dream of resettling in a more favourable place a possibility. His world shatters when the Husains' neighbour, the less fortunate one-legged Fatima, sets herself on fire as an act of revenge on her "tormentors". The cripple's suicide sets the stage for the trial of the Husain family, and the implicated include Abdul, his sister

and his father. Still, when Fatima is buried, Abdul's sister covers the bier with the Husains' best quilt. That day Zehrunisa, Abdul's mother and a woman of immense forbearance, cries. "She didn't cry for the fate of her husband, son, and daughter, or for the great web of corruption she was now forced to navigate, or for a system in which the most wretched tried to punish the slightly less wretched by turning to a justice system so malign it sank them all. She cried for the manageable thing--the loss of that beautiful quilt, a parting gift to a woman who had used her own body as a weapon against her neighbours." In the Dickensian bleak land that Boo portrays with the perfection of a first-rate reporter and the sensitivity of a novelist, even grief has to be measured by a scale that will remain incomprehensible to the world beyond that concrete wall covered with the ads for Italianate floor tiles: BEAUTIFUL FOREVER. Abdul still struggles to keep the beauty of being dignified in the squalor of his existence. He knows that water and ice are made of the same thing; he also knows that most people are made of

the same thing. "But here was the interesting thing. Ice was distinct from--and in his view, better than--what it was made of. He wanted to be better than what he was made of. In Mumbai's dirty water, he wanted to be ice." Around him, though, not everyone survives the dirty water. Asha, the most ambitious woman in Annawadi, tries hard. "As group identities based on caste, ethnicity, and religion gradually attenuated, anger and hope were being privatised, like so much else in Mumbai. This development increased the demand for canny mediators--human shock absorbers for the colliding, narrowly construed interests of one of the world's largest cities." She wants to be a shock absorber that won't lose its spring, at any cost. And her daughter, Manju, who compensates for her mother's cruelties, is all set to become Annawadi's first female graduate. Children of a lesser mother are sinking in the "dirty water". Kalu, the thief, ends up as "a shirtless corpse with a grown-out Salman Khan haircut, crumpled behind a flowering hedge" outside of Air India's red-and-white gates. Scared, his friend Sanjay kills himself by drinking rat poison. And Manju's best friend, Meena, kills herself after a family dispute over making an omelette. Life and death behind the "Beautiful Forever" cannot afford the luxury of sentimentalism. Set in the span of three years, 2008 to 2011, a period otherwise known for terror attacks on Mumbai, mega scams, and the General Elections, this book is a rare triumph in storytelling. Every page is a life story that provides a counter-argument to the national narrative of an India lost in the giddying rhapsodies of its achievements as a modernising twenty-first century power. I

86

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

MARCH 12, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

87

