BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

EARTH ON EARTH
S
cepticism is a dilemma of the naïve. The scriptures tell pretty cool as well. The rules are different; and you can us that there is heaven in the next life, and we remain make up new ones when the old turn decrepit. Try this exdicey about its prospects. More immediate evidence periment. Order a car, or a safety pin, pay for it, and turn tells me that there is heaven on earth. It is otherwise known up at the shop. You will get what you paid for. Buy a fully as owning an airline in India. This is the one business where paid airline ticket, and all you have purchased is a promyou cannot fail, since if you know how to fail properly, the ise within a zone of uncertainty. It is understandable if weather, for instance, is the reason for delay or cancellarewards will continue to accumulate. When you launch an airline, to the usual fanfare of trum- tion. But airlines no longer feel compelled to offer the truth pets, a queue of suits from high finance waits in the ante as an explanation. They hide behind a catch-all excuse: room of the Big Boss, eager to flood his coffers with cash in "technical reasons". One of these days I shall be very dethe name of economic growth. When, in a thousand days or lighted to be introduced to non-technical reasons. Which two, you have piloted your airline into visible bankruptcy, glamour puss would be so considerate as to announce that an even larger number of banks flock around to parcel out a flight has actually been cancelled because Big Boss foreven more money, this time in the name of patriotism. Their got to pay for the fuel for passengers although he does seem only requirement is that Big Boss makes silent deals with to have enough for his own private Boeing? Those who bluff politicians and garrulous ones with journalists. This public and hide away live to fly another day. The real trick is to fail on a spectacular scale; that is, in relations smokescreen does not need logic, nor does it have to make sense: those obligations are for a less exalted breed front of millions of spectators. This, naturally, must be acof businessman. But it has to be loud. The louder the de- companied by dramatic outbreaks of attitude. Everyone mand for a bailout on jugglery terms, the more ecstatic the gets intimidated into submission. I know of one airline owner, however, who is modest, response from bankers eager to hand out the public's hardearned money for an endless bonfire in the skies. No one and frameworks his business philosophy in the same culquestions this clamour as long as it is conducted in correct ture. He sticks to the possible, and then personally ensures that his company achieves it, English. It is a hallmark of economic SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com before venturing into the probareform nationalism to chase bad ble. He keeps to himself, and money with fresh capital. The true has coffee incognito in a coffee motto of such a glamorous business shop when he wants to chat is: Heads, I win; tails, you lose. with a friend. There are no Who is "you"? Well, you and parties for Page 3 photographers me. All of us mugs who put money or interviews to jaded sections of in a bank in the belief that it is in a newspaper. He is supremely safe custody, and in any case there unconcerned about whether anyis nowhere else to put it. Big Bosses one recognises him or not, and I and Bankers are not so stupid as to won't annoy him by publishing his employ personal wealth in their name. His company lives within five-star game. Cats do not get fat the prudent confines of black ink, by slurping from their children's indespite the fact that he has to pay heritance. They dine sumptuously the same price for fuel as anyone on borrowed food. Bankers justify else. He has an ego, since it is their "lending" on the ephemeral part of human chemistry, but he strength of an accountant's imagidoesn't hang it out like boutique nation. The accountant, of course, laundry in an upwardly mobile is smart enough to collect his 3 per home. He has created one of the cent fee long before the board acknowledges publicly what it knew Which glamour puss would be so great brands of modern aviation. He is not a star on Twitter. But he all along, that it was all a fantasy to considerate as to announce that a is a star in office. He belongs to a indulge a few lifestyles. Then the flight has actually been cancelled genre where an industrialist board assumes a doleful countenance in order to ask for more. because Big Boss forgot to pay for understood that his first commitment was to industry, not caprice. Such is the merry go round of postthe fuel for passengers although Such a role model is not, modern capitalism. he does seem to have enough for alas, heaven on earth. It is earth Running an airline, as far as on earth. one can make out from airports, is I his own private Boeing?

MARCH 12, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

70

