Mail

The Dark Side of Sunny Porn
F E B R U A R Y 2 7, 2 0 1 2

Easy access to pornography on the Internet hits society, threatening to swamp conventional notions of morality, raise tensions in bedrooms and lure children into a world they do not understand

SUZANNA,

SHIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

Out in the Open
Your cover story about pornography and its effects gives a true picture of the society today. It is no longer a topic of discussion behind closed doors ("The Dark Side of Sunny Porn", February 27). People are discussing, sharing and even watching sexually explicit content openly. There is greater acceptability of porn in daily life. Easy access to Internet and smartphones has made it even easier for children to watch pornographic material. However, not everyone is mature enough to handle porn. The rise of teen porn, campus porn and incest porn is of prime concern. These may shake the very foundation of our culture and family values.
GIRISH SHARMA, Kanpur

At Loggerheads
With a Rs 16,000 crore deficit in Railways' coffers, it is criminal for Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee to instruct the railway minister against a fare hike ("His Master's Choice?", February 27). Incidentally, starting with Lalu Prasad and up to Banerjee as railway minister, fare hikes were always resisted, obviously to gain political popularity. As a result, there is fund crunch for safety and modernisation of Railways.
RANJIT SINHA, Kolkata

Kudos to your cover story on pornography and its spread in India and abroad. There is nothing wrong in viewing sexually explicit content. Sex is natural. The only regulation required is that it should not be viewed by children till they are 12. Without proper guidance and education about sex, children would get the wrong meaning about pornography. In my opinion, India should legalise porn.
JOSEPH JUNNIRICKAL, Kochi

Today, a stage has come when there is no assurance of safe journey by the Indian Railways. Additionally, ministers introduce new trains in their constituencies without taking even track capacity into account. There is no alternative but to increase fares. Mamata Banerjee should be rational and avoid being whimsical.
K.R. SRINIVASAN, Secunderabad

The entry of Sunny Leone in Bigg Boss 5 marked her entry into Indian society as well. It is important for us to realise that a porn star is not a prostitute and that, like most of us, they, too, are doing their job. One should have the sensibility and maturity to understand that pornog-

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

``
Goa

``

If a child is watching adult content, it's his parents' responsibility. After all, it is parents who put laptops and smartphones in their children's hands.

Mail
raphy is acceptable till the time it does not become an addiction and starts hampering a person's relations with his spouse, family and even friends.
GUNJAN VERMA, Delhi

35
the ruler of a country. The Maldivians considered him a hero who consistently fought against the dictatorial regime of his predecessor, Maumoon Abdul Gayoom. Nasheed has shown maturity in resigning as president without much resistance. His admirable conduct under grave circumstances may help him come back to power whenever fresh elections are held.
J. AKSHAY, www.intoday.com

Act in Time
It is in India's interest that it becomes more assertive in its own backyard ("How India Lost Maldives", February 27). We do not need a reminder, but the recent turmoils in Nepal, Pakistan, Bangladesh and now in Maldives are ample evidence that ours is not a stable neighbourhood. Most of the countries with which we share our borders have shown political instability. Under these circumstances, India needs to show that it can take care of political upheavals and, if need be, intervene with an objective to restore peace and democracy. We should not hesitate to act unilaterally if push comes to shove. The countries around us should look to India for leadership. For this, India needs to project its power in a positive way and handle difficult political situations with maturity.
SUNIL MULAY, Pune

that has crossed the boundaries of Israel and reached Asian countries. There are also suspicions that Iran and Hezbollah had a hand in the attack. However, unless proper probe is carried out and wrongdoers are nabbed, it would be naive to blame Iran for the attack.
JANGA BAHADUR SUNUWAR, Jalpaiguri

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
A P R I L 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Contemptible Coverage
What do they think we are, morons?" "Yaar, shut off that radio and ring up a newspaper office." "Doordarshan is still doing Congress darshan.And how door (far) they are from the janata (people)." It was the evening of Sunday the 20th March, 1977.The election results had already started coming in on the tickers. But it was obvious that the loyalists of the Information and Broadcasting Ministry were going to put up a last-ditch stand.As the listener and the viewer switched on their sets for the promised first election results at 5 p.m., they realised that the two media were merely playing for time and waiting for the first Congress victories.The erosion of AIR and Doordarshan's credibility since the proclamation of the Emergency had been steady as well as pathetic.And this was easily their worst hour. There is only one fate worse than death that can overtake a professional news organisation: total lack of credibility. And if AIR and Doordarshan plunged to their most sorry depths in coverage of the elections, it was because the orders obviously came from Shastri Bhavan the moment elections were announced.
by Amita Malik

Resource Debate
Just as in the developed countries, natural resources must be auctioned for commercial use ("Source of Confusion", February 27). But it should be done on the basis of transparency while affording equal opportunity to all interested parties and keeping rapid development of the country in mind. The whole system must be de-bureaucratised and streamlined in the interest of the public. At the same time, steps must be taken to allay fears of investors.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Terror's Tentacles
The terror attack on an Israel embassy car in Delhi has raised serious concern about the spread of terrorism ("Caught in a Triangle", February 27). The series of bombings in Delhi, Tbilisi and Bangkok have demonstrated the magnitude of global terrorism

Iran is on the verge of acquiring nuclear power and as an aspiring nation, it has every right to do so, despite protests and sanctions imposed by the US. It doesn't appear fit to connect Iran with global terrorism, considering its past record. If Iran fails to acquire nuclear weapons, then it will surely be dominated by the US on the pretext of waging a futile war in the Gulf countries in the backdrop of the Arab uprising and Jasmine Revolution. India has come to a point where it is headed for a diplomatic tightrope, caught between Israel and Iran. India needs to play safe and the situation requires for it to act like a sheet anchor between the two nations.
PRATIBHA CHATURVEDI, Delhi

Nasheed suffered an ignominious exit from the Maldivian presidency partly owing to the rising clout of fundamentalists and partly because of his failure to grow from a pro-democracy activist to

Correction
In the February 27 issue, the story `Sheer Comfort' carried an image that was incorrectly credited to Ritu Kumar. The swimsuit sari is a creation of designers Shivan & Narresh.

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

BROADCASTING HOUSE: NO NEWS, JUST HYMNS OF PRAISE

MARCH 12, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

