Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N BOOKS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Getting There
Southern siren Akshara Gowda was in the news for the wrong reasons. Her love-making scenes from the film Chitkabrey:The Shades of Grey were accidentally leaked and she was rumoured to be dating cricketer Yuvraj Singh.But she is past all that and has been roped in to play the second lead in A.R.Murugadoss's Tamil film Thuppaki which also stars actors Vijay and Kajal Aggarwal.

BRAZILIAN BOOTY
It's raining item girls and yet another one is on her way. BrazilianIndian model Nathalia Kaur, 21, will be shaking her booty to the song Dan Dan in Ram Gopal Varma's Department. Formerly known as Nathalia Pinheiro, from Rio de Janeiro, she changed her last name to flaunt her Punjabi roots. She was crowned the Kingfisher Calendar Girl 2012 in December and is also a trained opera singer. All she needs now is the ability to dance.

Envy League
After a forgettable role in Saas Bahu aur Sensex (2008), Chak De! India girl Seema Azmi will now be seen in Sunny Deol-starrer Mohalla Assi.Her character is called Ramdey and she will share screen space with TV actor Sakshi Tanwar in the film,which is set around Varanasi's historic Assi Ghat."I want to be known in the league of actors like Shabana Azmi and Smita Patil," says Azmi.Setting the aim too high,are we?

FRESH BLOOD
Yet another popular face from down south will be making her Bollywood debut. Yami Gautam, 25, known for her role as Leher in the TV series Yeh Pyar Na Hoga Kam on Colors, will be seen in John Abraham's debut productionVicky Donor. She plays a Bengali girl in the romantic comedy which deals with the subject of sperm donation. "Acting happened to me by chance and I'm just going with the flow," she says. Her series was pulled off the air due to poor ratings. Let's hope her Bollywood debut has better luck.

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND WHAT MATTERS
MUST SPORT GOOD IDEA

Stiched-to-perfection tuxedos like those flaunted by George Clooney and Jean Dujardin at the Oscars.
MUST HIDE

Football fan actor Ranbir Kapoor wants to work in a football film. Now who wouldn't want to watch that?
BAD IDEA

Plunging necklines post 40, like the clearly single and ready to mingle Jennifer Lopez.
I

Malaika Arora Khan in itty-bitty outfits for a new item number in Housefull 2.

Compiled by Prachi Rege

80

Volume XXXVII Number 11; For the week March 6-12, 2012, released on March 5

and Avantika Sharma

