Na tion

KERALA
soft-pedalling on the matter to Congress President Sonia Gandhi's Italian roots. The killings have become a major campaign issue, witnessing even a walkout by LDF from the Assembly in protest against what it says is the government's "inefficiency" in dealing with the issue. The result, to be out on March 21, is critical for the ruling UDF which has only a four-seat majority, including the Speaker, in the 140-member Assembly. Piravom fell vacant after former food supplies minister T.M. Jacob of Kerala Congress (J) died in November. His death brought down UDF's strength to 71, just one above the halfway mark, as against 68 seats in LDF's kitty. Union ministers A.K. Antony and Vayalar Ravi, along with Chief Minister Oommen Chandy and Kerala Congress unit chief Ramesh Chennithala, have led the highoctane campaign. UDF has fielded Jacob's son Anoop, a debutant, as its candidate against the CPI(M)'s M.J. Jacob. by Radhakrishnan M.G. fetch him," Chouhan reportedly told a senior party leader. Jha and Vijayvargiya have of late been trying to shift the focus of the murder probe to CBI, probably taking a cue from Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha Sushma Swaraj. "The CBI is involved in character assassination at the instance of the Congress party," says Vijayvargiya. "It is for the court to decide if anyone is guilty or not," Swaraj had told newspersons during a visit to her parliamentary constituency Vidisha on March 3. CBI says it has not given a clean chit to Singh. "His role is under suspicion," says a senior CBI officer. Agency sources say Singh's involvement in the case could be serious. According to the agency, Singh, who had been Masood's friend for several years, did not respond to a distress call made by her father Sultan on the day the RTI activist was murdered. Masood was shot dead on August 16, 2011, outside her house in Kohee-Fiza locality of Bhopal.
by Anup Dutta

IN CHOPPYWATERS
MR NANDAKUMAR

In poll-bound Piravom, UDF may pay a high political price for the killing of two fishermen by Italian marines
arely has a by-election to an Assembly constituency in Kerala attracted so much international attention before. The bypoll to Piravom in Ernakulam district on March 17 is being discussed even by diplomats and top ministers of Italy, coming as it does in the aftermath of the killing of two Indian fishermen aboard an Italian ship off the Kerala coast on February 15. An Italian website has quoted Guilio Tezie, Italy's foreign minister, as having said that the United Democratic Front (UDF) government in Kerala is being tough on the marines as it fears being punished by voters otherwise. UDF also fears that the opposition Left Democratic Front (LDF) will attribute any

R

UDF CANDIDATE ANOOP JACOB CAMPAIGNS IN PIRAVOM

MADHYAPRADESH

Dubious Liaisons
Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister snubs MLA allegedly involved in the murder of RTI activist Shehla Masood
JP MLA Dhruv Narayan Singh's alleged complicity in the murder of 38-year-old RTI activist Shehla Masood has became a cause of worry for Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan. During his birthday celebrations on March 5, Chouhan reportedly looked the other way after he spotted Singh walking towards him. Chouhan, who turned 53, refused to accept a bouquet from the 62-yearold MLA from Bhopal Central. Reports say Chouhan later communicated his displeasure to state BJP chief Prabhat Jha and Industry Minister Kailash Vijayvargiya for specifically going to Singh's home to bringing him along to the celebrations. "There was no need for two senior leaders to

B

SINGH

PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

60

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

