So ciety DUBAI

BIKINIS,BHAIS &THE TOWERS OFBOOM
Humbled by the financial crash, Dubai is now focusing on its core competency: The sale of illusions.Yet despite the bad press about migrant workers and ethnic segregation, people still come here to get rich, says Man Booker Prize-winning author Aravind Adiga.
"Bhai!" I have just got down from a metro stop in the centre of Dubai. The man is short and mustachioed, wearing a grey suit, and running in my direction as if he had been waiting just for me. "Franshaal Centre kidhar hain?" Like most of the South Asians I have met so far--for some reason I am sure this man is Pakistani--he looks bewildered by this big, shiny, terrifyingly clean city. I sympathise with him. Nothing I have seen until now--not Manhattan, not Hong Kong--has prepared me for the shock of Dubai. "Naya hain?" he asks in disappointment. "Tu bhi?" Now it occurs to me the mustachioed man is talking about the International Financial Centre, which is to our left. And he is going in the opposite direction. I call to him and point in the right direction. Just two hours in Dubai, and I'm giving directions like a local. It is that kind of place. 888
BURJ ALARAB LUXURY HOTEL IN JUMEIRAH BEACH, DUBAI

How long would it take V.S. Naipaul

to demolish the Burj Khalifa, the world's tallest building? This crescendo of steel--twice the height of the Empire State Building, the locals say--built as a symbol of Dubai's chutzpah, now doubles up as an emblem of its hubris. The Burj Khalifa was begun during Dubai's boom in the early 2000s, when this city, which gained its independence from the British only in 1971, dreamed of becoming the new New York. By the time the tower was opened in 2010, Dubai's boom was over, and the city had to ask for a $10billion bailout from neighbour Abu Dhabi to pay its debts. It has been mostly bad news for Dubai ever since. An eerie silence envelops many of its plazas and financial centres: The economy has still not recovered. The reek of speculation, financial and ecological, is everywhere. Here, in the middle of the desert, gallons of fresh water are being wasted in the giant fountains and artificial lakes. It is ridiculously easy to walk about this place jotting down Naipaulian notes: "sultanistic fantasies... while the

desert creeps, closer and closer..." 888 The second day, I stop making such notes, because Dubai is proving much harder to dislike than I expected. The worst parts of the city that I have seen--the slums of Al Karama, fragrant with masala powder and littered with posters saying "Housing for Indian Bachelors Only"--could pass for middle-class neighbourhoods in Mumbai. There is a matter of factness to the way people go about their work here, even the Filipina prostitutes on the Al Rigga avenue striking quick deals with their (mostly South Asian) clients. The metro is reliable and inexpensive, and the roads are broad. Dubai is what Mumbai stopped being a long time ago: A city whose business really is business. 888 Humbled by the financial crash, Dubai is now focusing on its core competency: the sale of illusions. A director named Lal Jose is shooting a Malayalam film on the Marina. The

AP PHOTO

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

61

NEW NEW

So ciety DUBAI
city's malls, which look like film sets, are packed: Tourists from around the world come here looking for bargains, even though a local says that luxury goods are probably cheaper in London. And--despite all the bad publicity about migrant workers being exploited--people still come to Dubai to get rich. On my way to the Jumeirah Beach Hotel, my taxi driver is Vinod, who is from Kasargod in north Kerala. Vinod has been in the UAE for seven years. Thirteen years in Saudi Arabia before that. Has he ever been cheated of his wages? Of course, he says. It happens a lot, he claims, especially in Saudi Arabia. He doesn't seem too perturbed by it, as if it were just a fact of life for someone like him. I remember what an IAS officer from Calicut told me: Watch the immigration queue at any airport carefully, and you will see many returning Malayalee workers slipping 100-rupee notes into their passports as they hand them over at the immigration counter. These workers--many of them poorly educated-- have been exploited so relentlessly in the process of going to, working in, and returning from places like Dubai that they assume they must pay someone a bribe even to be let back into

GETTY IMAGES

Indians in dubai talk about cricketers, filmstars, and members of Parliament as if they alone knew the truth about them.
their homeland. We are almost at the Jumeirah hotel when I make the mistake of asking Vinod what he thinks of a famous politician from his home state. It takes me a long time to get out of that taxi. Indians here talk about cricketers, filmstars, and members of Parliament as if they alone knew the truth about them: Pity the suckers back home who don't see what happens in the hotels along the creek. But Dubai's privacy is just another of its illusions. So much of the city is under electronic surveillance, and there are so many desi eyes around, that it might be safer getting up to your hanky-panky right in the heart of New Delhi. 888 All the people on the beach by the Jumeirah hotel are white. A few Arab men are watching them, and a Filipino guard is watching the Arab men. Dubai is so segregated along ethnic lines--except in evenings, when the expatriates come together on the metro--that one Indian tourist told me that it felt like a "plastic city". Everything is shiny and fake, and all the migrants will one day leave, letting the city be covered by sand. Yet here, on this posh beach, expecting to find the apex of Dubai's "plasticness", I feel a sense of this dream city's durability. There is no hedonism on display here, just families with their children taking a dip in the ocean. This must be one of the few places in the Middle East where women can sunbathe in freedom. Just as Dubai is one of the few places in this part of the world where a Hindu temple can exist, and where the merchants in the old Souk can sit with impunity beneath their portraits of Durga Ma.

(ABOVE) A FAMILY POSES FOR PICTURES IN FRONT OF THE MOORISH HORSE FOUNTAIN AT THE JUMEIRAH MADINA BEACH RESORT IN DUBAI; MIGRANT WORKERS CROWD INTO BUNK BEDS IN DUBAI.

GETTY IMAGES

62

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

NEW NEW

All the people on the beach by jumeirah hotel are white. This must be one of the few places in the Middle East where women can sunbathe in freedom.
All around me are people working hard in a relatively liberal city. There is no bubble to prick, no one to mock. Even stranger: I am starting to hope that the pessimists, who expect matters to get much worse for Dubai, lose. I can imagine V.S. Naipaul, hovering above the beach, rolling his eyes: D-Minus, old boy. 888 I have found a target. I am having dinner with a very rich Bombaywallah who is in Dubai, he admits, simply to avoid paying taxes in India. This man, in his small way, is part of the movement of capital from India-- some of it legal and some of it surreptitious--that is said to have raised quite a few of Dubai's towers. When I ask the Bombaywallah if he has met any mafia men here--the Mumbai dons used to call Dubai their gaon-- he says he had a driver who once worked for the mobster Iqbal Mirchi. Indeed, he has plenty of stories to tell me about the mafia, but they are all set in Mumbai, which he is intensely nostalgic for. His family, who migrated from Peshawar, were on good terms with the Pathan gang of Dongri. One of his childhood memories is that of Karim Lala, dressed in one of his 100 suits, coming to his home in south Bombay. The American woman whom he has brought along--there are apparently four or five expatriate women for every man in Dubai--has become curious, and the two of us have to field her questions for the rest of the dinner: Where is Peshawar? Who is Karim Lala? What, exactly, is a gaon? 888 If there is no one else to do a Naipaul on, there are the Emiratis, surely.

AN EMIRATI MAN RIDES A CAMEL PAST FOREIGNERS SUNBATHING ON A BEACH IN DUBAI

"They despise all the migrant workers," says one well-connected Indian, a long-term Dubai resident. "Eventually they want to get rid of the Indians, and bring in Egyptians or Filipinos to do our jobs. This is starting already." He thinks about what he has said. "But they are incredibly warm and hospitable people--if you ever get close enough to them." And Emirati women? Educated and independent, but faced with a crushing shortage of eligible men. He tells me of one Harvard graduate who recently agreed to become the third wife of a Sheikh because she could find no one else of her pedigree to marry. Can you imagine how humiliating this must be for a woman like that? 888 Four days in Dubai, and still no one to dislike. I must be growing old. I

64

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

NEW NEW

AFP PHOTO

