AnimPACTFeature

·

India's growing roster of high net worth individuals (HNIs) and demand from corporates are accelerating sales of business jets in the country. Sensing demand for flexible transportation, players like Boeing, Dassault, Ernbraer, Gulfstream, and Bombardier are for a pie of the country's burgeoning business aviation market. The jet, set, go bunch is crowding the private airplane circuit for their trips across the globe. There's a growing of leisure iappers, who prefer to chart their own course and fly high.

FLYING H

Dassault Falcon at INDIA AVIATION 2012
assault Falcon is presenting its Falcon fleet of large cabin, long range business jets at the third India Aviation air show, which opens on March 14 at Hyderabad Begumpet Airport. Since the fifties, Dassault built its reputation for advanced high-performance fighter jets in the region. Today, this reputation for design excellence is also driven by advanced business aviation aircraft like the Falcon 7X, the Falcon 900LX and the Falcon 2000 series which offer unparalleled performance, comfort and fuel economy. Dassault Falcon commands a large share of the Indian market for executive jets and continues to consolidate its position as the benefits of business aviation become recognized by an increasing number of Indian companies and private owners. Private investment in the country's aviation infrastructure and growing support by the Indian authorities are making this dynamic market even more attractive. Dassault is the Indian market leader for large cabin long range aircraft. Some 20 Falcons are currently operating from airports in Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore and Hyderabad. The performance of the Falcon fleet is especially valued in the Indian subcontinent, where short airfields, elevated runways and high temperatures are common. Falcon aircraft are also more economical to operate and more environmentally friendly than any other large cabin aircraft. Their efficient design and advanced technology means less weight, 20-40% better fuel burn and lower emissions than other airplanes in their class. In addition, Dassault aircraft are very well suited to the long-range requirements of Indian customers. The Falcon 7X can connect Mumbai to Cape Town, for example, or Bangalore to the challenging London City Airport, in the heart of London. The 7X is the only jet in its category to meet the demanding performance requirements of London City, with its steep approach and noise restrictions.

D

FROM INSPIRATION TO INNOVATION
I oeing is the world's largest aerospace company and leading I manufacturer of commercial jetliners and defense, space and "security systems. Atop U.S. exporter, the company supports airlines and U.S. and allied government customers in 150 countries. Boeing products and tailored services include commercial and military aircraft, satellites, weapons, electronic and defense systems, launch systems, advanced information and communication systems, and performance-based logistics and training. Boeing has a long tradition of aerospace leadership and innovation. The company continues to expand its product line and services to meet emerging customer needs. Its broad range of capabilities includes creating new, more efficient members of its commercial airplane family; integrating military platforms, defense systems and the warfighter through network-enabled solutions; creating advanced technology solutions; and arranging innovative customer-financing options. Boeing Business Jets is dedicated to bringing the best of commercial aviation into the realm of private air travel. They offer customers a wide range of Boeing products which can be customized for the private, business, or governmental sectors. The robust characteristics of these commercially inspired airplanes are an excellent value proposition when outfitted for the private market. They offer space, reliability, and world wide support.

Jetsetting Indian is, wary of rubbing shoulders with oth, s, and is opening up to the chance of acquiring their very own flying machine. Am he future is sure to touch the skies...

