Na tion

MATCH-FIXING
October 2011, the public prosecutor informed the court that betting on cricket in Asia was worth $40 billion (Rs 2,000 crore). In Mumbai, a major centre for betting, around 10 bookies run the business, with most of them operating from outside India. Ulhasnagar, a small town near Mumbai, has emerged as a major betting centre over the past few years. Sources say an Ulhasnagar resident known only as Jaggi is a prominent name in the betting syndicate. A person of Pakistani origin, Jaggi became an Indian citizen nine years ago. Pawan Chikki from Ghodbunder Road and Praful Katchchi from Dombivali operate in Thane. Some bookies are active in the temple town Shirdi. Deputy Commissioner of Police Amar Jadhav, who had busted a betting racket in 2010, says bookies in Mumbai also exploit Indian students
AFP

CRICKETERS BETBIG ON SEX
Bookies use Bollywood starlets to tempt Indian cricketers to throw matches
By Kiran Tare

MAHARASHTRA

NOTME,THEM
CM Chavan shakes off the Congress debacle in civic polls, blames it on his own party's tainted leaders

ondon-based The Sunday Times's claim on March 12 that small-time actor Nupur Mehta was used to offer cricketers money to throw matches has once again raised the spectre of match-fixing. Mehta denies the allegations that she was used to fix the big-ticket IndiaPakistan semi-final match at Mohali during the 2011 World Cup. "I don't know any cricketer personally and I was at my home on the day the match was played," she says. But other Bollywood starlets aren't cagey about

L

"I was shooting in Thailand in May last year for an advertisement when Razzak started calling. He wanted me to arrange a meeting with the cricketer. He offered me Rs 50 lakh but I refused," Malik says. "When I was rude with him he threatened me," she adds. Malik filed a complaint with Oshiwara Police Station in Mumbai in May 2011. Her complaint was never taken up. INDIA TODAY spoke with prominent bookies in and around Mumbai to assess the seriousness of the allegations. Bookies say cricketers from Pakistan, Sri Lanka and West Indies opt for

hand spinner, a left-hand batsman, a left-hand medium pacer and an allrounder were "mostly interested in physical contact with models during IPL-4." Another bookie disagrees and says that Indian players' involvement in fixing is less than players of other countries as they earn huge money through endorsements. Also, not everyone sells out. "No bookie can dare approach top players like Sachin Tendulkar, M.S. Dhoni, Rahul Dravid and Virender Sehwag due to their integrity. Some newcomers are also honest," he says. Another reveals relations between an
MEHTA

PRITHVIRAJ

KALMADI

GIDWANI

SINGH

FOTOCORP

NUPUR MEHTA WAS ALLEGEDLY USED TO OFFER CRICKETERS MONEYTO FIX THE INDIA-PAKISTAN WORLD CUP MATCH AT MOHALI IN 2011, CLAIMS A LONDON-BASED NEWSPAPER.
having been approached to reach out to Team India and cricketers of other countries. Liza Malik, 25, says a UKbased bookie offered her Rs 50 lakh to put him in touch with a leading Indian cricketer during IPL-4 in May 2011. The cricketer was her partner on a TV reality show that she participated in. Malik was also a regular at IPL afterparties. The bookie, who introduced himself as Razzak, thought she could be a conduit to the cricketer. match-fixing because they are not paid much by their respective boards. Pakistani cricketers can be fixed for merely Rs 50 lakh whereas the amount goes up to Rs 10 crore per match when it comes to Indian cricketers. Indian cricketers often demand sex with beautiful women instead of money. A top bookie from Thane, Mumbai, says almost 80 per cent matches in the second and fourth season of IPL were fixed. He says a right-

SMALL-TIME ACTOR LIZA MALIK SAYS A UK-BASED BOOKIE OFFERED HER RS 50 LAKH TO PUT HIM IN TOUCH WITH A LEADING INDIAN CRICKETER DURING IPL-4 IN MAY 2011.

MALIK

Ulhasnagar-based bookie Deepak Narayani alias Deepu Balaji's and a "heavyweight" cricketer from Mumbai. "Balaji and the cricketer were allegedly involved in fixing three one-day international matches three years ago." Narayani, who was arrested in 2002 and 2008 by Ulhasnagar police on betting charges, says the cases are false. During the trial of Pakistani cricketer Mohammad Asif in London in

in the UK. "Betting in sport is legal in the UK but one has to have a local bank account to operate it. Hence, bookies access the bank accounts of Indian students studying in the UK. They pay them Rs 50,000 per month and use their bank account to route hawala transactions," he says. Whether there is any truth to the Mehta story or not, the gentleman's game has suffered yet another body blow to its reputation. I

ormer Maharashtra chief minister Ashok Chavan's 23-month tenure was marred by 3K, a controversial rule under the Slum Rehabilitation Authority which gave the chief minister discretionary powers to appoint any builder to redevelop land that measures more than 46 hectares. His opponents allege the loophole led to rampant corruption, epitomised by the Adarsh Housing Society scam. If his successor, current Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan, is to be believed, `3K' is to be blamed for all ills affecting his government too. Only, the 3K in question is no land rule but the trio of (Suresh) Kalmadi, Kripashankar (Singh) and Kanhaiyalal (Gidwani). Prithviraj reportedly told Congress President Sonia Gandhi on March 10 that the party had to suffer a humiliating defeat in state-wide local body polls held in February due to the presence of these tainted leaders. Congress's seats have reduced to 50 from 79 in the 227-member Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation. Kalmadi, a Congress MP from Pune, is an accused in the Commonwealth Games scam, while Singh is facing charges of amassing disproportionate property worth Rs 300 crore. Gidwani is in CBI custody since March

F

6 for bribing a lawyer to dilute the case against him in the Adarsh case. Singh, who resigned as the party's Mumbai chief after the Bombay High Court ordered an FIR to be filed against him on February 22, is also accused of "selling" tickets in BMC polls. Kalmadi's grand welcome in Pune on February 5 after his release on bail also raised eyebrows. With 110 tickets handed out to his supporters in the Pune Municipal Corporation election, Congress ended up winning only 14 seats in the 152-member House. The party's failure to promote loyalists has also irked a section. Senior Congress leader Pushpasen Sawant joined the Nationalist Congress Party in January, while state Congress spokesperson Anant Gadgil is sulking because he was `sidelined'. "Had my surname not been Gadgil, I would have left the party by this time," the son of late Congress leader Vitthal N. Gadgil says. Maharashtra Congress President Manikrao Thakre, however, claims that the party has taken stern action against the tainted. He denies there is any rift. "Kalmadi and Gidwani have already been suspended. We will not protect Kripashankar Singh. There is no dissent in the party," he adds.
by Kiran Tare

44

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

45

