GLOSSARY
SHARMA

BOLLYWOOD HEAT, COSMO COOL
The Cosmopolitan Fun, Fearless Awards was a glittering affair. With the theme Cosmo Women Love to Love Men, it was hosted by funnyman Cyrus Broacha.
Shah Rukh Khan The main attraction at the event proved again why he is such a charmer. He got the Fearless Male of All Time award from Kalli Purie, chief creative officer, India Today Group, and Mala Sekhri, publisher, Cosmopolitan."I may look gentle but I'm a tough guy. I'm not afraid of anything," he said. The award, clearly, is in the right hands.

WORDLY WISE ACADEMY
Oscars are about performances. Here are the key contenders rated according to their prospective speeches.
DUJARDIN

YOGEN SHAH

BUSINESS AS USUAL
It's back to work for new mommy Konkona Sen Sharma, 32, who all but disappeared after the birth of her son Haroon. "First day of film shoot after a year-and-a-half and a baby," she tweeted from the sets of Gaur Hari Dastan, a biopic on Gaur Hari Das, a living freedom fighter waiting to be recognised by the government. She plays wife to Vinay Pathak. Last seen in Iti Mrinalini, Sen will soon be back on the big screen as director Ananth Mahadevan plans to finish principal photography by mid-April and do the rounds of film festivals soon after.
OF THE

YOGEN SHAH

SHAH RUKH KHAN WITH KALLI PURIE (LEFT) AND MALA SEKHRI

Malaika Arora She won the Cosmopolitan Fun Fearless Female Stylish Hair award but chose to flaunt her legs in a tiny gold-sequined number.The Sunsilk brand ambassador became the showstopper at a fashion show held during the event. Deepika Padukone She was a pretty sight in her Ferragamo gown.Things got more interesting when she wound up sitting at the same table as Sidhartha Mallya. She was also Cosmopolitan Fun Fearless Female Most Stylish. Sonam Kapoor The deep pink Dolce and Gabbana gown made her the red carpet favourite. Her consistently high style quotient earned her the Cosmopolitan Fun Fearless Female Best Dressed award, and rightly so.The diva's next stop, after the award ceremony, was the front row at the Burberry show at London Fashion Week.
YOGEN SHAH

Best Actress She has already called Harvey Weinstein God (from the Old Testament, no less) at the Golden Globes.And yes, we do love Meryl Streep, but could we have Viola Davis for The Help instead? Oscar loves black women and we love a good cry.Think Halle Berry. Best Actor He will no doubt Miss The brave Tilda speak about Darfur, but Swinton, who lived with perhaps George Clooney the teenager from hell need not prepare. Expect a in We Need To Talk. a French-accented speech from Jean Dujardin forThe Best Supporting Actor Artist. Of course, he will Can you argue with a never be heard of again, man who played Von like Life is Beautiful's Trapp in The Sound Roberto Benigni. of Music (1965)? No. Miss Michael Fassbender So ladies and gentlewould have been our men, please allow Mr choice.At least there Christopher Plummer to would have been some give a long speech when penis jokes. accepting his award. He is,
AP

after all, 82. Miss No one can work a fork as well as Albert Brooks, especially over human flesh. Sadly, he was not nominated for Drive.

Best Supporting Actress Who could not love Melissa McCarthy in Bridesmaids? But Hollywood has to choose between two overweight women and no

doubt the Oscar will go to Octavia Spencer for The Help.Tears, drama and more black power speeches. Miss Shailene Woodley for The Descendants. For holding her own against Clooney.And she doesn't look too bad in a bikini.
UGGIE

AP

PLUMMER
AP

SPENCER
AP

Best Pet Uggie, who else? the marvellous Jack Russell terrier from The Artist. Amazingly versatile. Plus he can't make a boring speech. Too bad he wasn't invited.

FINE COMEBACK
Raveena Tandon, 37, is barely visible but she is hoping to correct that soon. She will be having heart-to-heart chats with celebrities about their journey to stardom on her first television talk show Issi Ka Naam Zindagi."I discovered how good a dancer Irrfan Khan is when he broke into a Rajasthani thumka after his friends egged him on," she says of one of her 13 episodes.There is also a glamorous role in Shobana Seven Nights directed by Sudipto Chattopadhyaya. In Rishi Deshpande's Gin Liya Aasman, she is the mother of a five-year-old boy and is coping with the death of her husband.

CLUB OF CREATIVITY
Sotheby's forthcoming Inspired by India sale has handpicked the best of Indian art

WEEK
YOGEN SHAH

YOGEN SHAH

Actor Steve Martin: "Practicing (sic) a very humble speech for Oscar night since I am not nominated."
78

Pieces from award-winning potter Rahul Kumar's Tranquil Flame series will feature in the auction. "What I am really happy about is that people are now identifying and accepting pottery as contemporary art," says Kumar, 37. The series features miniature pots in bright red colour.

Indian designer Sabyasachi Mukherjee's name on the list was no surprise. With collections inspired by deserts, prostitutes and his hometown, Kolkata, the 38-yearold's designs sport traditional Indian embroidery and craftsmanship. The featured pieces will include shawls, bangles and headbands.

by Nishat Bari and Avantika Sharma
AFP

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012
MANDHAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

79

