Nation KARNATAKA

BUFFALO MINISTERS
f real ministers watch porn in the Legislative Assembly, who do the people turn to for their troubles? Buffaloes! At Chamarajanagar town in Karnataka, the people held a cabinet meeting of buffaloes and solemnly presented their demands to them. "In today's scenario, buffaloes are probably much better ministers," former legislator and the event organiser Vatal Nagaraj told INDIA TODAY. The protest also underlines a longstanding grouse of the people of the town--one of the most backward in

Residents of Chamarajanagar town organise a `Cabinet' meeting of buffaloes to protest against successive chief ministers giving them the cold shoulder

I

and lost power within seven months. Rao's successor Ramakrishna Hedge, the first non-Congress chief minister of Karnataka and a popular leader, ruled for nearly five years. He, however, visited Chamarajanagar to inaugurate a park in 1988 and lost power the same year after a phone-tapping scandal. Hegde's successor S.R. Bommai was dismissed by the Centre just after he paid Chamarajanagar a visit in 1989. Bommai's successor, Veerendra Patil, a powerful leader and Hegde's one-time friend, took over

rate the district headquarters. The only chief minister who chose to ignore the trend was H.D. Kumaraswamy, who went to Chamarajanagar in May 2007. "Everyone knew his days were numbered, so we were not blamed for his exit," says Vatal. Vatal, along with other progressive organisations from the area, has been fighting against the `jinx'. He raised the issue in the Assembly during Krishna's tenure and demanded that Chamarajanagar be declared a separate state if the chief minister

INIMITABLE VATAL
The colourful politician loves to play to the gallery but all for a cause
nown for his maverick ways, Vatal Nagaraj celebrates his birthday as the day when he was kicked in the head by a policeman 49 years ago in 1962, for demanding the screening of a Kannada film. "What I believe is that my age is irrelevant. I was born the day I was hit," he says. Vatal, as he is popularly called, has always been a pro-Kannada activist, but also fights for rationalist and progressive causes. Each of his over 100 protests has been unique and innovative.

K

Karnataka--that no chief minister visits them. There is a belief that no chief minister can continue in office if he visits the town."This appears to be the only way any chief minister will come here," says Nagaraj, who is a former MLA from Chamarajanagar. Political historians trace the `jinx' to former chief minister D. Devaraj Urs, who lost power within six months of visiting the town in 1980. His successor R. Gundu Rao addressed party activists in Chamarajanagar in 1982

the reins of the state and met the same fate in 1990. Losing five predecessors was enough for Bangarappa, who made sure he never went anywhere near the town. Neither did five of his successors, highly educated M.Veerappa Moily, superstitious H.D. Deve Gowda, rationalist J.H. Patel, urbane S.M. Krishna or the calm Dharam Singh. Though Patel carved out Chamarajanagar district from Mysore in 1997, he did not visit the town even to inaugu-

THE BUFFALO CABINET MEET AT CHAMARAJANAGAR IN KARNATAKA

doesn't visit it. In 2010, some BJP ministers invited astrologers to dispel the `jinx' by performing puja. "We are now going to file a PIL in the Karnataka High Court," Vatal told INDIA TODAY. What Chamarajanagar is really in need of is not rituals and pujas to purge it of its jinxed status but a political class that has shed its baggage of superstitious beliefs.
by Sowmya Aji

52

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

