Bus iness&Economy KINGFISHER AIRLINES
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com RACHIT GOSWAMI/www.indiatodayimages.com

VIJAY MALLYA (FAR LEFT); PRATIP CHAUDHURI

BAILOUT BREATHER
he latest bailout of Rs 1,650 crore given by the State Bank of India (SBI) to cash-strapped Kingfisher Airlines on February 21 was backed by the Ministry of Finance. The SBI released the new loan after the finance ministry assured the bank that Kingfisher would raise cash in the next few months by offloading a substantial stake to a European airliner and would not, therefore, default on repayments. Kingfisher Airlines is in advanced stages of negotiations with the foreign airline and will announce the stake sale once the Cabinet clears FDI in aviation--perhaps in three months--that will allow foreign airlines to pick up 49 per cent stake in domestic carriers, Ministry of Civil Aviation insiders told INDIA TODAY. Meanwhile, Kingfisher will

SBI'S Rs 1,650 crore

package will help Kingfisher Airlines stay afloat, even as it readies for a sale of its stake

T

get SBI's first tranche of Rs 700 crore, which it will use as short-term working capital to pay salaries, tax dues, provident fund contributions, as well as clearing outstanding arrears of vendors and oil marketing companies. The bailout will also help Kingfisher convince income tax authorities to de-freeze its accounts. SBI Chairman Pratip Chaudhuri, when contacted, declined to comment on the issue: "Why should I comment, am I the PRO of Kingfisher Airlines? Would your bankers tell me what is the status of your accounts? Why can't the media value the confidentiality a bank shares with its client?" The dilemma before the banks, including SBI, is that they are both lenders and equity holders in King-

fisher and cannot let it close down. They had converted part of their loans in Kingfisher Airlines into equity at Rs 64 per share in March 2011. The price of a Kingfisher share today is Rs 25.15. SBI has an existing Rs 1,400 crore loan exposure in Kingfisher that has turned into a non-performing asset (NPA). The airline's losses have gone up to over Rs 6,700 crore. The 19 banks, including ICICI Bank and SBI, which bought a 23.21 per cent stake in the airline in April, met on February 17 to revive the cash-strapped carrier but failed to make any headway. Union Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh told reporters that the airline will have to raise funds. "We are not advocating that banks should bail out all ailing companies," he said. Singh, it is learnt, has told Kingfisher promoter Vijay Mallya that this is his last chance to save the airline. The day before the bailout, Kingfisher CEO Sanjay Aggarwal and Executive Vice-President Hitesh Patel had failed to placate an angry Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) chief E.K Bharat Bhushan, who had taken serious cognisance of the airline's sudden cancellations of flights and exodus of pilots. Once SBI cleared the bailout package, the airline informed DGCA and the Ministry of Civil Aviation that it would not indulge in predatory pricing (offering extremely low fares to gain market share), pay salary dues and properly run its (truncated) fleet of 28 airworthy aircraft (out of a fleet of 64) for its daily 175 flights, down from 418 flights, in accordance with a new timetable. The airline was told to pay upfront cash to other airlines for carrying Kingfisher passengers stranded due to cancellations. "Hopefully we've heard the last of complaints about Kingfisher," Bhushan told INDIA TODAY. Mallya also welcomed the DGCA decision to monitor the carrier's flight safety. "I am glad that the DGCA wants to do special daily audits on us. We truly welcome the opportunity to prove that our aircraft are entirely safe," Mallya tweeted. by Shantanu Guha Ray

56

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

