GLASS HOUSE TEMPLE RITUAL

by KAVEREE BAMZAI
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

YEDDYURAPPA

BIRTHDAY WISH
ince protests haven't worked, TRS President Kalvakuntla Chandrasekhara Rao is trying puja. On February 17, his 59th birthday, he called 24 priests from Telangana, led by Vavila Damodar Sharma, to perform the Chandi yagam for two days at the party headquarters. Telangana Bhavan, in Hyderabad. Rao had organised a three-day yagna in April 2011, marking the 10th anniversary of his party as well as the agitation for statehood by enlisting 64 priests. Rao hopes to organise a shashti purti (completion of 60 years) in 2014 in the new state.

FAMILY ALBUM

F

ormer Karnataka chief minister B.S. Yeddyurappa, tainted by corruption scams, rushed off to Kashi with his confidante Shobha Karandlaje for Shivratri, to plead before Lord Vishwanath for help. Not for his party, but for himself. His successor D. V. Sadananda Gowda is sticking to the chief minister's seat like glue, and only divine help can get the ex-chief minister back to power. He and Karandlaje have already conducted several yagnas but nothing

seems to be working. Yeddyurappa has been saying he will give "good news" on this issue soon. His Kashi visit, however, prompted another former chief minister, H. D. Kumaraswamy of the Janata Dal (Secular), to quote Kannada poet Kuvempu: "This is like the crow from the south of Vindhyas that flew to Kashi and took a dip in the Ganga in the hope of turning into a nightingale. He can't wash away his sins like this."
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

S

T

CHANDRASEKHARA RAO

SHADOW WIFE

R

REDDY FOR TROUBLE

MUKHERJEE

SHARP MEMORY
fficials in the finance ministry got a taste of Pranab Mukherjee's sharp memory during a recent discussion on the timing of the Union Budget. Mukherjee was the only one present in the meeting who was able to recall that the Budget was once presented as late as March 15 in 1976. That provided a ready precedent for scheduling the Budget on March 16 this year. Mukherjee even recalled the precise rate of inflation, down to the decimal point, of when the Janata Party government took power in 1977 and when it left office in 1980.

amil Nadu Chief Minister J. Jayalalithaa is not one to show her soft side but perhaps the split from her surrogate family has made her sentimental. Presiding over a mass marriage in Chennai, organised by the Puratchi Thalavi Peravai as part of her 64th birthday celebrations on February 19, she lamented the rise of old age homes. "People's priorities have shifted to making money, leaving behind family bonds. Of course, money is necessary. But you must understand that money is not everything," she advised the newlyweds. Ah. She understands the meaning of loneliness.

"I have grown in the RSS, but I am a street fighter. We have made some strategic changes and are waiting for the results."
NITIN GADKARI, BJP President

"The Left has suffered for a lifetime now, from an ailment they cannot diagnose, the symptom that troubles them the most is that they just cannot see beyond their nose."
KAPIL SIBAL, Human Resource Development Minister

ashmi Thackeray, 46, prefers a low profile compared to sister-in-law Smita but the Shiv Sena-BJP's 107-seat victory in the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation polls on February 17 was enough to draw her out. She shared the dais with husband Uddhav for the first time at his press conference at Shiv Sena Bhavan. "The celebrations have come with a feeling of responsibility. In the next five years, we have to focus on improved roads and water supply in the city," she said. Uddhav said he was a zero and the real credit for victory should go to father Balasaheb. We believe him.
PTI

C
REDDY

ongress leaders may be waffling on about a separate state but Union Minister S. Jaipal Reddy has no such qualms. On February 19, he said it was unlikely that the Centre would introduce a bill on Telangana in the current session of Parliament. It is likely to work against Congress's prospects in the by-elections. The ruling party in Andhra Pradesh is preparing for byelections in six constituencies in March, including three in Reddy's home district of Mahaboobnagar, in Telangana region.
JOSHI

O

"Maybe his time has come. Every player has his time. Sachin should have announced his retirement after the World Cup."
KAPIL DEV, Former cricketer
JAYALALITHAA

PORN AGAIN

VIA MEDIA
Where C.P. Joshi goes, Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot will not follow. Both were invited to speak at Lokmat Group's newly instituted Ashok Gehlot Lokmat Mitra Puraskar in Jaipur on February 16. Joshi put in an appearance, making snide comments about how Gehlot ensures media silence on his controversies by giving journalists plum official positions. Gehlot did not turn up, citing ill health. He also skipped Rajasthan Cricket Association's dinner in honour of Rajasthan's Ranji champion cricket team, hosted by the association president Joshi. Clearly, things between them can't get worse.

O F T H E W E E K

"Don't judge me by the cancellation of my flights. You see my calendars are always on time." Vijay Mallya

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

RASHMI

PLAN INDIA
hile the Indian Prime Minister's Twitter account has so far only been used for publicising the events he attended, @PMOIndia got more active on February 21 and asked its 51,213 followers to send in ideas for Manmohan Singh's meeting with the Planning Commission to devise the 12th Plan. Some unsolicited sugges-

W

GEHLOT

tions on Twitter  12th Plan Win a Test series in Australia.  12th Plan Get Facebook banned, submitted by Kapil Sibal.  12th Plan Accelerate growth rate of Swiss Bank deposits by 200 per cent.  12th Plan Reduce people below poverty line to 10% by starving them to death.

14

QAMAR SIBTAIN/www.indiatodayimages.com

F

ormer Karnataka chief minister B.S. Yeddyurappa says journalists spend their time at home watching porn films. In a rather strange way of defending his three supporters, the ministers who were watching porn in the Legislative Assembly, Yeddyurappa told reporters in Shimoga on February 19: "Don't you all watch blue films at home? Why are you making such a big deal?" Now of course we want to know exactly what Yeddyurappa does at home.

JOKE

with AMARNATH K. MENON, SOWMYA AJI, DHIRAJ NAYYAR, ROHIT PARIHAR, KIRAN TARE, LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

15

NEW

NEW

