Na tion

REGIONALPARTIES

RISE OFTHE EASTERN FRONT
The growing opposition to NCTC gives birth to a new political force that makes the shaky UPA more nervous on the eve of the Uttar Pradesh verdict
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora and Amitabh Srivastava

BONE OFCONTENTION
Controversial parts of the NCTC notification, 2012 Clause 3.2 The officers of the
operational division of the NCTC shall have the powers to arrest and the power to search under Section 43A of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act of 1967.

ome Minister P. Chidambaram's National CounterTerrorism Centre (NCTC) has provided the perfect occasion for three angry federalists to launch a pre-emptive strike on the UPA. The eastern regional council--comprising Bihar, West Bengal and Orissa--is all set to become a power bloc. The concerted attack, on the eve of the Uttar Pradesh verdict on March 6, makes it all the more ominous for the UPA. A week before writing to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to oppose NCTC for its potential to become a tool of Central transgression into states' domain, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar had supported the formation of an eastern council. "This is an excellent idea. I wish such a body comes up. But, it is yet to take a formal shape. It will be a meaningful step, if it happens,'' he said on February 13. The same day, Orissa Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik sent a letter to Manmohan Singh, stating his objections to the NCTC. He said that the states would not tolerate Centre's "authoritarianism" on the powers and functioning of NCTC. On February 14, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee also wrote to the Prime Minister, seeking "review and withdrawal'' of the NCTC, an overarching body set up to collect and collate intelligence on terror groups. She said, "Its rules violate the federal structure of government. Its officers have sweeping powers to arrest and search, without consulting state governments.'' Delhi could not have missed the political message from the three regional satraps. Together they command 53 seats in the Lok Sabha, with Janata Dal

H

(United) (JD-U) having 20 MPs, Trinamool Congress 19 and Biju Janata Dal 14. In fact, a group of NDA leaders believe that a political understanding already exists among the three chief ministers. On his part, Nitish has admitted that he often discusses various issues with his West Bengal counterpart. "But we are not talking about any political alignment,'' he says. While speaking to the media, Nitish was insistent that he did not think Banerjee would quit the UPA and return to the NDA fold. Meanwhile, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister J. Jayalalithaa, with nine Lok

Sabha seats, is looking to extend the eastern council down south. After Banerjee's letter to the Prime Minister, Jayalalithaa quickly followed suit, highlighting NCTC's imposing powers. She announced on February 19 that she wants her partymen to start working towards winning all 40 seats in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls. Amma's aspirations seem clear--she wants to take a plunge into national politics. "I want the AIADMK to come to a position where we can select the prime minister,'' she said. Jayalalithaa is being endlessly wooed by the BJP. Her constant criticism

of the Congress can rule out any alliance with them at the moment. The already shaky UPA is dreading the emergence of this new attacking front. Though both Banerjee and Patnaik have dumped BJP in the past, JD-U leaders in Patna believe that it is possible to form a distinct bloc within the NDA. In an increasingly bipolar world of national alliance politics, Patnaik and Banerjee may not mind working with the NDA on terms similar to what Nitish practises with BJP in Bihar. Political commentator Cho Ramaswamy feels that the emerging political front can be effective only if it allies with either the Congress or the BJP. "All I can say is that a third front only comes third in an election. A government cannot be formed without al-

Clause 3.5 The NCTC shall for the purposes of discharge of its functions under the order have the power to seek information including documents, reports, transcripts and cyber information of every kind in whatever form. Any agency furnishing such information or obliged to furnish the information may do so under such conditions or confidentiality as may be reasonable in the circumstances of the case.

NITISH KUMAR
JANATA DAL (UNITED) "NCTC is highly flawed and surprisingly, created within the IB, which is a secret intelligence organisation without any accountability to Parliament." No. of seats in Lok Sabha 20

MAMATA BANERJEE
TRINAMOOL CONGRESS "Its rules violate the federal structure of government. They can interfere in anyone's business without consent of the state governments." No. of seats in Lok Sabha 19
KM KISHAN SHEKHAR YADAV

NAVEEN PATNAIK
BIJU JANATA DAL "The Prime Minister has stated that the home minister will be in touch with us. Let us wait for the Centre's next step and the home minister's response." No. of seats in Lok Sabha 14
RAVI S SAHANI/ www.indiatodayimages.com AFP

J. JAYALALITHAA
AIADMK "Setting up of inter-state intelligence teams by NCTC is tantamount to usurping the legitimate rights of state governments." No. of seats in Lok Sabha 9

lying with the BJP or Congress,'' he says. The BJP, too, is opposing the NCTC. Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha Arun Jaitley says the Government's decision to form the NCTC through an executive order is a breach of the federal structure and demanded that the decision be kept in abeyance till a consensus is evolved with the states. "This is one of the many instances which show that statecraft and statesmanship have become alien to this Government. We are not a Union of states. If the Government questions this, the states have a right to protest,'' he said on February 21. "You cannot sacrifice federalism while combating terrorism,'' he said. Another UPA ally, National Conference, has expressed reservations about NCTC. BJP-run states Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh have also upped the ante against the body. Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home, chaired by BJP leader M. Venkaiah Naidu, also recommended on February 20 that the proposal be kept on hold. The Prime Minister has stepped in to assure the states that consultations will take place on NCTC and that their powers will not be diluted. He has asked the home minister to engage the states on the issue. Banerjee, who met Manmohan on February 22, remained unconvinced by his assurances. Aimed at strengthening various counter-terrorism measures following the November 2008 Mumbai attacks, Chidambaram had originally envisioned NCTC as a super body with all intelligence and investigating agencies under it. It ran into trouble with the PMO, finance and defence ministries opposing it. All three have powerful intelligence agencies under them and they did not want to give up their turf. The Cabinet Committee on Security cleared a much-diluted version on January 12, placing NCTC under the Intelligence Bureau, to be headed by an officer of additional director rank. Chidambaram refused to be discouraged then, saying it was not a comedown but a beginning. It could be the end of the beginning for NCTC.
with Sandeep Unnithan and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

48

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

