Cover Story AKHILESH YADAV

Projecting himself as a moderniser, the urbane, techno-savvy son of Mulayam Singh steals the show in Uttar Pradesh and revives hope of a resurgent Samajwadi Party
By Priya Sahgal

BICYCLE CHIEF

A
18

fter six months of hard work, it looks like Delhi has suddenly discovered me." Akhilesh Yadav laughs at the compliment that he has suddenly become the new darling of the media--the other crown prince of Avadh. Midway through the Uttar Pradesh polls, with the signs of a Samajwadi Party (SP) resurgence, there is a feverish interest in the brand new young netaji. As late as November 2011, opinion polls had begun to suggest that anti-incumbency would take a toll on the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) but no one was certain who would occupy the space vacated. The Congress was making a determined bid to construct a major political triumph for Rahul Gandhi and his Mission Uttar Pradesh. Its surprising performance in
of musclemen, were given tickets. The symbols of Goonda Raj were removed. The politically incorrect muscleman D.P. Yadav was denied a ticket even though his case was sponsored by party stalwarts like SP chief Mulayam Singh Yadav's brother Shiv Pal Yadav. These were Akhilesh's baby steps in leadership. Then suddenly, by the beginning of the actual campaign, he began to evoke a positive reaction. To the surprise, if not shock, of observers, he became the modern face of Uttar Pradesh, a place that Rahul had hitherto occupied all by himself. After the first two rounds of polling, Akhilesh managed to pose a real threat to the Congress recovery. Three things happened as a result. First, Rahul said he would not support SP. Second, the Congress began to attack Akhilesh directly as it saw the Muslim vote slipping away. Third, Congress leader
T. NARAYAN/ www.indiatodayimages.com

the 2009 Lok Sabha when the Congress won 21 MPs from the state had fuelled the party's hopes. Rahul had topped it up with carefully programmed visits laden with special packages from the Centre. SP, in contrast, looked lumbered with an ageing leadership, the legacy of having taken several antimodern positions like rejecting computers, an antediluvian commitment to eradicating English and a Luddite aversion to machines, problems which seemed almost certain to sabotage any form of recovery. But equally, Akhilesh had been working on a change of image for SP, down to even riding the latest model of bicycles. Free laptops to students were promised in the manifesto and computers introduced at the party office despite old-timers scoffing in disgust, "Ab kya party computers se chalegi? (Will the party be run by computers now?)" Professionals, instead

AKHILESH YADAV

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

Cover Story AKHILESH YADAV
Interview

"Rahul's anger is fake"
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

AKHILESH AT A RALLY IN BARABANKI

Seven a.m. is the best time to catch a man on a cycle. Especially when he is the star campaigner for a party on a comeback ride. Thirtyeight-year-old Akhilesh Yadav is also working hard to shed the Samajwadi Party (SP) of its Luddite image. Midway through the Uttar Pradesh polls, the Yadav scion speaks to Senior Editor PRIYA SAHGAL and reveals a wry sense of campaign humour. Q. What is your reaction to the Congress saying that it will not support SP in case of a hung Assembly. A. (Laughs) You know this has harmed the Congress more than us. UP ki janta (the people of Uttar Pradesh) do not want a hung Assembly or Governor's Rule. So after the Congress comment, they will definitely ensure we get a majority. Q. Is SP going to rethink its support to UPA at the Centre after this? A. Netaji (Mulayam Singh Yadav) has already said that we support the Congress at the Centre but we have no understanding in Uttar Pradesh. It is issue-based support to stop BJP. Netaji is a puraana style ka neta (old-school leader). He does not give dhamki (threats). Neither does he pursue vindictive politics. It is the Congress which will have to rethink. They know their difficulties. If they want to continue the Government at the Centre, they'll have to decide who are their friends and who are not. As for us, Uttar Pradesh will give us a clear mandate. We won't need them. Q. What do you think of Rahul's `angry young man' campaign? A. He says he is angry and people think it's because the party is not doing well (laughs). What is the use of getting angry and doing nothing? When we got angry with BSP, we

Digvijaya Singh said the party would prefer President's Rule if the Congress could not form the government. As a reaction, Akhilesh became more vocal in his responses to Rahul. The SP scion's recovery was all the more remarkable given that his wife, Dimple, had suffered a rather humiliating defeat in the 2009 Firozabad Lok Sabha by-election at the hands of old loyalist-turnedRahul protege Raj Babbar. The defeat was a reality check for the young leader. In early 2011, Akhilesh commissioned a series of surveys about the party's image. "There was a feeling of anger against BSP but at the same time there was a real fear about goondaism (hooliganism) if SP came back," says a party MLA. That was when Akhilesh realised he was fighting not just a battle at the grassroots but also a war of perception. For the first time in SP history, interested candidates were asked to use application forms. "The selection process began early last year. I got 4,000-5,000 forms," says Akhilesh. The contestants were then interviewed by Akhilesh, his uncle Ram Gopal Yadav and other party seniors. "We asked them what kind of issues they would raise and how they expected to win. After that a list was sent to Netaji who made the final decision," he says. Akhilesh kicked off the party campaign in September 2011 with a 250

km cycle yatra to propagate the party symbol and motivate the youth. He also repackaged the staid cycle symbol as an "umeed ki cycle (cycle of hope)". "We wanted ours to be a campaign that spells out hope, not negative ideas," he says. According to a colleague, he studied past campaigns and was especially critical of NDA's 2004 slogan `Bhay Ho' (Be Afraid), a parody of UPA's `Jai Ho'. There is an uncanny resemblance between his style and that of Rahul. Both work with a mix of professionals and party workers, both are tech geeks and mouth the same rhetoric of development. When the Congress sought SP'S support on the nuclear deal in 2008, Akhilesh met Rahul at a PWD guest house in Deoria. They shared a cordial relationship. Both are foreign educated, Rahul studied development economics at University of Cambridge, London, while Akhilesh studied environmental engineering at Sydney though he is yet to complete his MTech; first a love marriage to a Thakur girl, Dimple, and then politics came in the way. That is where the similarities end. "When Rahul talks about the problems of farmers, it looks as if he is reciting something he has been taught. When Akhilesh speaks, it seems as if he knows the problems. Akhilesh samanya bhasha bolta hai, Rahul mein abhi bachpana hai (Akhilesh speaks in a mature manner, Rahul is still a bit

protested against their government and got lathi-charged. The Congress is in power at the Centre. Their governor's anger could have removed the BSP sarkar (government). If their CBI got angry, then the Chief Minister (Mayawati) would have had to go. There is so much corruption in this Government. Their gussa (anger) is nakli, not asli (fake, not real). Where is the need to tear others' manifestos (referring to Rahul tearing up a piece of paper at an election rally on February 15 to drive home the point that "mere lists" of assurances were of no use)? In every democracy, each party has the right to make promises of what they will do when they are elected. Tear the manifesto if we don't deliver on our promises. But not before. Q. The Congress says it steers clear of caste politics... A. It is only recently that I learnt that Sam Pitroda is a Vishwakarma. Rahul says he has been eating food cooked by Dalits. I've been doing that for ages. My cook in Delhi is a Dalit. Q. Halfway through the polls, which party do you think is your biggest challenger? A. BSP, as it has a cadre. The Congress has nothing. Even most of their candidates are outsiders. And their local MPs are of little help. Take the Bahraich-Gonda belt. This area is prone to floods. The water resources minister (Pawan Bansal) visited the area by chopper along with Jitin Prasada. They did a survey to decide on the precautions to be taken once floods came. But when the floods came, no one came. The Congress was comfortable thinking that this (Bahraich) is an area where the MP (Kamal Kishor) won within 14 days (his nomination was cleared by the Congress at the last minute). And this is how they returned their support. The first phase of polls

went in our favour, and since then, the momentum has picked up. Q. There is a perception that the educated voter will never vote for SP. A. For the first time we are winning seats in urban areas. Our party got a good chunk of the vote in Lucknow and other cities. We have fielded young professionals, so the message has gone that the educated people are not against SP. Tell me, has the Congress given an IIM professor a ticket? We have--to Abhishek Mishra from Lucknow North Assembly constituency. Q. The Congress says it has given as many as 36 poll tickets to young candidates. A. They are defining young by their own age. For them, 42 is young (a dig at Rahul's age). If you take their criteria, then SP has given tickets to 120 young people. Q. Has there been some opposition to your elevation in the party from older party leaders like Shiv Pal Yadav and Azam Khan? A. Those who don't know my party say this. There are no issues between us. Q. Not even the denial of a ticket to D.P. Yadav? A. No one wanted D.P. Yadav to contest. I checked with Netaji before taking the decision. Otherwise our state would have been that of the BJP with Babu Lal Kushwaha. For the last five years we have tried to ensure that no one raises a finger against us on the issue of goondagardi (hooliganism). We have tried to keep all those out who give the party a bad name. Q. Yet, haven't a few tainted candidates slip-

ped into the field? A. Maybe two or three. But either their cases are still pending before the courts or they have had false cases registered against them. Don't forget that BSP ne jaan bujh kar hamaare logon ko jail bheja tha (BSP wilfully sent our leaders to jail). Q. There is a fear that return of SP means a return to goondagardi. A. Nahin (No). See our record for the last five years. There has been no such accusation against SP. When we come back to power, there will be a committee set up under chacha Ram Gopalji (his uncle) to make sure there is no gadbad (trouble). If someone misbehaves, he will face the law. Q. Who will be Uttar Pradesh's chief minister if SP wins ? A. Netaji. Everyone wants him.

20

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

T.NARAYAN/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Cover Story AKHILESH YADAV
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

AT ATTHE THE PARTY PARTYOFFICE OFFICE IN IN LUCKNOW LUCKNOWWITH WITH FATHER FATHER MULAYAM MULAYAM (RIGHT) (RIGHT)

The Other Yadavs
The party of Samajwadis has become a party of dynasts

> > Dharmendra Yadav 33, Lok Sabha MP
RELATIONSHIP Cousin He is an articulate face of the Gen-Next brigade in Parliament. He is a grassroots worker and one of Akhilesh's chief aides.

> > Ram Gopal Yadav 66, Rajya Sabha MP

Princes at War
> RAHUL GANDHI >
tearing up the paper he held in his hands at a rally on February 15 If all they want are false promises, they are welcome to go away and attend the meetings held by SP, BSP and BJP.

> AKHILESH YADAV >
February 17 After the first phase, Rahul vented his anger by pulling up the sleeves of his kurta and after the second, he tore the paper containing the list of his own candidates. After the third phase, who knows, Rahul might as well jump off the stage to show his anger.

> RAHUL GANDHI >
on Mulayam Singh Yadav's stand against English and computers, December 11, 2011 But for his own son, he ensured that he learnt English as well as computers. Today when his son meets me, he talks in English and works on the computer.

> AKHILESH YADAV >
January 5 Congress claims SP is against computers and English. We have no problem using the language to communicate. But we encourage Hindi or Urdu as the language of work.

childish)," says Bhupendre Sharma, a tea stall owner in Pratapgarh. Unlike Rahul whose campaign is a mix of national issues along with regional, Akhilesh restricts himself to local issues. "Rahulji is a national leader while Akhilesh is a regional one. Akhilesh is a pocket book edition of our leader," says Lucknow-based Congress leader Surendra Rajput, and quips, "pocket books always sell more". What makes it easier for the SP leader is that unlike the Congress, his party has a cadre to support him. He is a natural with crowds. Even while sitting in his bus (he undertook a 9,000 km kranti rath yatra from September to January covering 215 constituencies), he is always communicating--whether waving to the crowds outside or furiously typing SMSes on his BlackBerry. Caught in a traffic jam at Barabanki, Akhilesh waved to an astonished truck driver parked next to him, saying, "Hello truck driver bhaiya" and asked him which village he belonged to, murmuring an aside, "I bet he is from Kannauj (Akhilesh's constituency)." Together, the father and son pack a formidable electoral punch with Mulayam taking on Mayawati while Akhilesh counters Rahul's youth appeal. But Akhilesh knows that the only reason party seniors accept his diktat is because he has his father's backing. Although this Samajwadi GenNext speaks fluent English, having com-

RELATIONSHIP Uncle Akhilesh's favourite.The two are said to have teamed up against Shiv Pal.Akhilesh has made him SP spokesperson.

> > Shiv Pal Yadav 56, Party MLA
RELATIONSHIP Uncle Before Akhilesh's elevation, he was the second-in-command. Now he can't even ensure tickets for all his men.

pleted his graduation from University of Mysore, he is careful about using Hindi as his preferred language. English news channel anchors ask their questions in English, but are always given a reply in Hindi. Everyone wants to claim credit for a good idea. Says former SP leader Amar Singh, "To change the antiEnglish, anti-computer image of the party, it was I who had suggested that Akhilesh be made state president." And adds, "He is a good boy but lacks focus." A few years ago, Mulayam may have agreed with his former friend. An ardent soccer fan, Akhilesh seemed more at ease talking about Manchester United than figuring out caste equations. A lot has changed since then. Mulayam's son is not riding pillion anymore. Instead, he is busy reinventing the (cycle) wheel. 

22

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

