NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA
The brainchild of Anantha Subramanian, 31, and Mayur Narasimhan, 28, Meterpodu.in was launched on February 15.The website's ambitions are simple: It tells you how much an autorickshaw ride between two destinations should cost."We don't want to create villains out of the average autorickshaw driver. But we think the way to bring some order to this chaotic situation is to crowdsource the fare and let every commuter know what the approximate auto fares should be to go from point A to point B," says Narasimhan, who works at a management consulting company in the US.The site has an average of 1,000 users per day at present and Narasimhan hopes to hit 50,000 visitors a month.The website is limited to Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Coimbatore and Mysore, but the developers plan to expand it to more cities. "SMS will be the final frontier, for then, someone standing on the road can question the system and know exactly how much to pay before getting into an auto," he says. TWO GEMS FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

Fair Fares
AUTORICKSHAWS IN CHENNAI

smart sheet Log On To Cash
As Internet entrepreneurs sprout across the world with Facebook, Twitter,Zynga and now Pinterest, Indian-born American venture capitalist Vinod Khosla writes The "Unhyped" New Areas in Internet and Mobile on Techcrunch.com."The Web has been expanding what we have access to.It is time for tools to start reducing the amount of information coming at us," suggests Khosla.
KHOSLA

The Alternative View
On Aljazeera.com,Oxford University political researcher Sharmila Bose explores data showing that many people--from Libya to South Asia--are wary of democratic systems in What if the `people' don't want democracy? "Libyans would be interested to know that across the five South Asian countries,two-thirds of respondents expressed a yearning for the rule of a `strong leader who does not have to bother about elections'," she writes.
LIBYANS AND TUNISIANS MARCH IN TRIPOLI, LIBYA, IN 2011
AP PHOTO

HK RAJASEKHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

viral video

buzz feed

Swing High
US-based photography director Devin Graham has created what he calls the world's longest rope swing and a video of his stunts has gone viral. Titled World's Largest Rope Swing, the video was shot at the Corona Arch rock formation in Moab desert in Utah over two days and offers spectacular views of Graham and his friends swinging around a 130 ft fall. This could very well feature on adrenaline junkies' list of `things to do before you die'.
GRAHAM ON THE ROPE SWING

New Tube
Video sharing website YouTube is shelling out $100 million (Rs 500 crore) to rope in the best names in TV to produce original content for the site.The online giant wants to create 25 hours of programming per day for the generation that loves smartphones more than TV remotes.

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's apps are for the sports fan, the world traveller and the bored. Make room for these on your iPhone and iPad: ESPN ScoreCenter Customise it to feature your favourite teams and get score updates. Doodle Jump This topgrossing app will have you addicted to "The Doodler" in no time. Word Lens Take a picture of foreign text and see the app translate it to English.

web wow

Don't Google It
Remember Google when it was just a search engine and not a tech giant that wanted all your personal information? Duckduckgo.com brings that back to you. It is a simple search engine with a no-nonsense privacy policy--it does not store any information that could tie you to your searches. The best part? The search results are fairly accurate and devoid of spam. Hmm. But life without Google? Nah.

