Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

MORALITY FOREIGN TO POLICY

S

o it is not Bashar al-Assad, still unfazed and unrepentant in spite of the genocidal blood in the Syrian city of Homs, who threatens the shaky international order. It is not the Great Successor in the Hermit Kingdom of North Korea, Kim Jong Un, either, though the new supreme leader in Pyongyang, presiding over an impoverished but comic strip dictatorship, has apparently amassed enough quantity of enriched uranium to feed the fears of imperial powers beyond the Korean peninsula. And certainly not the last apostles of un-freedom in the Arab world or Africa. The new Evil is spelt Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, and it is not just in places like Washington and Jerusalem that the "civilian" leader of Iran evokes apocalyptic nuclear dread. In a world bereft of such iconic villains as Saddam and Osama, Ahmadinejad, always tieless and in a jacket, is an unlikely Doomsday Man, but the "sticky bomber" has already scared the streets, from Georgia to Delhi to Washington. The question is not about the degree of Tehran's nuclearisation; it is about the mind of a reckless outcast. For the God-fearing Ahmadinejad, like the leader of Godless North Korea, who also happens to be the youngest dictator in the world, enriched uranium is enriched nationalism, a weapon of mass delusion. Dictators in desperation badly need a foothold in the mind of a beleaguered people. Their ingenuity in such moments knows no bounds. Remember how the secular Saddam Hussein, the original Ba'athist along with Assad père, discovered the uses of Islam when American missiles began to fall on Baghdad. So it is quite natural that, when isolated and hit by the US and European sanctions, Tehran can count on the solidarity of fellow rogue nationalists like China

and Russia. It is also equally natural that New Delhi too is a friend Tehran needs at this moment of real pain and shallow pride. Left-liberals who continue to relive the glories of Third Worldism may argue that we don't have to be the mindless--or even heartless--followers of imperial Washington or paranoid Tel Aviv, sticker bomb or no sticker bomb. Those who time-travel on a magic carpet to the perfumed past of Persia will of course tell you that as civilisational allies, New Delhi and Tehran are bound to be together. Pragmatists of South Block will say what matters is opportunity--and national interest. The truth is, instinctively, we ally with the so-called underdogs in the power pyramid, no matter these underdogs are invariably cannibalistic regimes. Once, the "underdogs", all warscarred freedom fighters in power, were usually found in postcolonial Africa, or in Arabia, or in such romantic Latin American locations as Havana. Today we find them in places like Burma and Tehran. That is why New Delhi was not foolish enough to condemn the brutality of Tehran when the streets erupted against a rigged election; and we were not the sentimental types to offer moral support to the monks who dared the Burmese junta. So why should we join Israelis in the war cry against the mad men of Persia, or why should we go along with President Obama, who cannot be seen as soft on Tehran in an election year? India has long ago retreated from the moral constituency of international politics. It requires more than the rusty pragmatism of the NAM vintage to realise the anxiety of Tel Aviv or the innate inhumanity of a leader who believes that the Holocaust is a fiction.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

FOR THE GOD-FEARING AHMADINEJAD, LIKE THE LEADER OF GODLESS NORTH KOREA, ENRICHED URANIUM IS ENRICHED NATIONALISM, A WEAPON OF MASS DELUSION. DICTATORS IN DESPERATION BADLY NEED A FOOTHOLD IN THE MIND OF A BELEAGUERED PEOPLE. THEIR INGENUITY IN SUCH MOMENTS KNOWS NO BOUNDS.

S I G N P O STS
DROPPED Australian batsman and former captain Ricky Ponting, PONTING from the 13-man squad for the OneDay Internationals, while all-rounder Shane Watson makes a return from injury for the

remainder of the triseries involving India and Sri Lanka. STOPPED Oil shipments by Iran to Britain and France, in a retaliatory measure against the European Union after the bloc imposed sanctions on Iran's crucial

fuel exports. DEMANDED Rs 413 crore by the Income Tax Department, as tax from the Board of Control for Cricket in India as per its income assessment for the year 2009-10, of which only Rs 41 crore has been paid.

SELECTED Culture Secretary Jawhar Sircar, a 1975batch officer, as the CEO of public broad- SIRCAR caster Prasar Bharati, by a panel headed by VicePresident Hamid Ansari.

NEW

