Mail

Politics is in the Heir
FEBRUARY 20, 2012

Robert Vadra's sudden bid for a place in the power structure has created discomfort for the Congress family.

Sonia Gandhi became a politician by marrying Rajiv Gandhi, so why can't Priyanka's husband, Robert Vadra, become a politician?

MAHESH KUMAR,

Next Prince?
Robert Vadra sounds a bit presumptuous in proclaiming that he will join politics when people want or when he can make a difference for the people ("Politics is in the Heir", February 20). Neither his background nor his bikedriven persona suggest that people will want him or that he can make a difference. He certainly does not come out as a Feroze Gandhi. A lot more has to happen before he can have credibility; being the son-in-law of the Congress's first family is not enough credentials.
BISHAN SAHAI, Ranchi

Caught in the Act
Karnataka's Porngate couldn't have come at a worse time for the BJP when the party is battling to regain lost ground in Uttar Pradesh ("BJP'S Porn-Again Moment", February 20). Legislators like these put the already embattled BJP to shame. This incident must be used as an opportunity to expose the hypocrisy of the BJP and Sangh Parivar who regard themselves as the custodians of Indian morality.
MOTUPALLI S. PRASAD, Chennai

I read the cover story with a lot of amusement and a certain amount of distaste. Robert Vadra and his penchant for high living personifies the type of young

While watching pornography privately is not illegal, the three ministers in Karnataka seem to have landed themselves in hot water after the nation played the voyeur by watching them watch a porn clip inside the Assembly. Their misdemeanour isn't really about them watching a porn clip, but the fact that they were doing all this while proceedings were on.
J. AKSHOBHYA, Mysore

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

``
Mumbai

``

man who marries into a powerful and wealthy family and then after a few years of playing bored second fiddle, decides to flex his puny political muscle to garner larger share of the power pie. If Vadra decides to step into active politics in the near future, his many get-rich and shrouded-in-secrecy deals will attract a lot of scrutiny. With the Congress balancing itself on a sticky wicket just now, Vadra's entry into active politics could spell more trouble for the Gandhis.
SUNITA BHARGAVA, Delhi

Till now we have only witnessed sons of politicians entering politics, but now even their in-laws have entered the fray. It's high time the Congress high command gives a chance to deserving `out-

Mail
siders' rather than pitching its own players who act like mere puppets. Also, without knowing Vadra's true value as a politician, one wonders if people would ever accept him as their leader.
DIPTIMAN MITRA, Hyderabad

35
started using social networking sites to connect with the public, then why even consider a ban?
RUPA SINGH, Haldwani

point is that these people killed someone. They deserve to be punished. They should not be allowed to walk free.
VINAYAK SHARMA , Jaipur

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
MARCH 16-31, 197 7

Clash of Interest
Right from the days of the British Raj, bureaucrats in India have been placed in a commanding position in the government ("Officers Take on Ministers", February 20). Although the helm of the administration is supposed to be held by the politicians occupying ministerial berths, behind the curtain, strings are managed by bureaucrats. The bureaucrats have more say in government decisionmaking than some politicians. However, at times, this relationship gets strained due to a clash of interest, and this is exactly what happened in Andhra Pradesh. The bureaucrats are now paying the price for what may be the mistake of a minister or politician.
RANJIT SINHA, Kolkata

Rough Weather
Rather than begging the Government for a bailout every now and then, it does make sense for Air India to sell some of its assets or rent them out so that they can generate decent amount of cash ("Air India's Reality Cheque", February 20). The airline can save itself a few blushes by renting out or selling assets which are not giving any return at the moment. The airline could pay off a large amount of its loans and pay its employees regularly by making use of their surplus or nonperforming assets.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

Being a threat to society is not the only reason for these people to have been jailed. They committed crimes that robbed other people of their lives. Jeevan Ram killed his neighbour in a land dispute and is now lamenting that old age is the time to spend with grandchildren. His neighbour never had the chance either.
SUDHA YALAMANCHI, US

A Moving Picture Show
A sleek blue bus, with colourful paintings staring out of huge windows, has generated a sudden interest in Delhi school circles.The bus is a mobile art van launched by the National Gallery of Modern Art. Exposure to art by this ingenious method is what the gallery hopes to achieve. Started three years ago, the art van has slowly acquired a growing clientele. There is hardly a school in Delhi which has not witnessed this unique exhibition. Sent to do rounds about once a year, the van carries different exhibits each time.The last was a display of the works of British paintings of Constable and Turner. Earlier exhibitions contained works of Indian artists and some of the better known works in modern art. The van goes to any school that applies for it.This way, authorities are out to cultivate an appreciation of art among children.The van is equipped with detachable panels on which hang prints of some of the world's masterpieces. Along each print is a caption that states the size of the original work, the medium used and the artist's name.As children file into the van, simplified literature about the exhibits is handed out and then a guide-lecturer explains finer aspects of the works.
by Suchitra Behal

Big Brother
Plans of restricting cyberspace by censoring contents that are obscene and defamatory by Government standards is debatable ("Weed Out the Tweet", February 20). Social networking sites are being used by people to exchange views and opinions. The importance of Internet in a democratic set-up cannot be undermined. The Government itself has

Age No Bar
The article is defending people who have taken innocent lives and have made other families go through hell ("Jailhouse Shock", February 20). Women like Anop Singh Rajput and Sharbati Meena, who killed their daughters-in-law, are guilty of domestic violence. Point is not what harm they can do now,

It is futile to keep elderly and ailing prisoners whom even their nearest relatives do not care to visit. These people may have committed some grievous offences, yet the country should have some sort of judicial provision so that these aged and ailing convicts can be released. Better training of the correctional officers is also an aspect that must receive attention so that some of these problems can be taken care of.
MANISHA RAO, Shimla

Keeping old, frail people in jails defies the very purpose of the imprisonment. Prisons ought to be made like reformation houses rather than punishment dens. It would be fair to set free all inmates above 70.
SIMI, www.intoday.com

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

THE MOBILE ART VAN--CULTIVATING ART CONSCIOUSNESS

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

