Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

FROM RUSSIA WITH LOOKS
Bollywood's love for foreign models is aided by the fact that many get washed ashore on Goa's beaches. Russian model Era Tsariova, 23, was discovered there by producer Rana Bhatia and cast in Cigarette Ki Tarah for a cameo. "She was not convinced when I first approached her and laughed at the film offer," says Bhatia. Tsariova had modelled for Esbeda and Vero Moda back home. In the Goabased romantic thriller about a Facebook fraud, she plays a researcher studying Indian culture who gets murdered after the obligatory item number.
TSARIOVA

Moment of Glory

PATEL

He survived the 26/11 terror attacks that rocked Mumbai in 2008. Four years later, UK-based Harnish Patel, 32, will be a flag-bearer in the teamwelcome and victory ceremonies at the London 2012 Olympics. Patel is a reservist with HMS King Alfred, Portsmouth, a naval reserve unit of the British Royal Navy. Now, that's a well-deserved honour.
VEERA

FURSTENBERG

It's a Wrap
Philanthropy brought BelgianAmerican fashion designer Diane von Furstenberg, 65, to India. But she may be back soon to set up shop here.The creator of the iconic wrap dress, that sold over a million pieces in its first two years, inaugurated the Jiyo Initiative in Delhi.An endeavour of Rajeev Sethi's Asian Heritage Foundation, it seeks to improve the livelihood of rural artisans of India. While we are glad about her initiative, we will be waiting to hear more about plans for a flagship DVF store in India, which she happened to mention.

Cinema Scope
Ajita Suchitra Veera, 34, came to the national stage when her short film, Notes On Her, became India's official entry to the 2003 Student Academy Awards in Los Angeles, in the honorary foreign film category. The Hyderabad filmmaker has now wrapped up her first feature film Ballad of Rustom, which she wrote, directed and produced. It revolves around a small, remote town in India.


GETTY IMAGES

Compiled by Nishat Bari and

96

Volume XXXVII Number 16; For the week April 10-16, 2012, released on April 9

Prachi Rege

