GLOSSARY CLUB NARCISSUS
We know that Victoria Beckham likes to track down celebrities wearing her clothes and then compliment them. She did it with Sonam Kapoor,
FOTOCORP

VIRAL BIYANI

GLITZ, GLAM, GLARE OFTHE IPL
The Indian Premier League 5 opening ceremony in Chennai was meant to enthrall, but some of its most prized stars failed to dazzle us
SPORTZPICS

Q& A

A I S H WA R YA R A I B AC H C H A N
ACTOR

GANGSTER'S MUSE
SINHA

KAPOOR

PERRY

"I don't want to become a mannequin"
On her first trip abroad to Dubai with Beti B, as Aradhya is lovingly called, Longines Ambassadress of Elegance, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, 38, seemed at ease with her status as new mother, as well as her new dimensions. Associated with the 180-yearold watch brand, Longines, for the past 12 years, the actor spoke exclusively to INDIA TODAY about her work and life at Dubai's Meydan Hotel. Q. What brings you to Dubai? A. Longines. Its motto is `elegance with an attitude'. Despite being in showbiz, I have a very real approach to my life. It plays off with my social life.

BECKHAM

CHOPRA

calling her "beautiful actress" , after spotting her in one of her creations. Now she has turned her attention to Priyanka Chopra. After Chopra posted a picture of her in a Victoria Beckham white summer dress on Twitter, the designer promptly commented, "Lovely in white." To that, Piggy Chops replied, "Thank you. Love ur stuff." We don't at all mean to play spoilsport in this show of fashion goodwill, but what exactly was Beckham commenting on? After all, she could also be noting that the dress looks good in white.

KHAN

Kareena Kapoor reminded us of Batman when she came on stage in that costume, and then left us aghast as she began flapping her wings, or whatever those things were. She went on to perform Chammak Challo and Dil Mera Muft Ka, but it was her dress that stole the show, and not in a good way. Katy Perry came to light up the ceremony. Light up she did, although we are still wondering why she turned up dressed as a peacock in a set of shiny pink pampers that competed for attention with the fireworks. We like bling, but this is overdoing things. Salman Khan made a flashy entry, dressed in a black shirt and red pants. Standing on a truck with a lifesize cut-out of him, he grooved to a medley of songs like Dhinka Chika and Bodyguard. It's good to try out new things, but stick to taking off that shirt please.

SPORTZPICS

Q. So would you say comfort comes first now? A. Comfort, time, scheduling. I have many more aspects to my life now. You have just that much time to get yourself together. You don't have that much time to straighten every strand, curl every lash and get everything bang on. But everybody else around you is like that. I like to be human and not lose myself in becoming a mannequin, which people in showbiz are accused of. Q. How do you decide the way you will look? A. I have been in this business for a long time and I kind of know what to do for every event. Because this was Dubai, there was a bit of fluidity (She wore a coral red Sabyasachi Mukherjee tubular kalidaar dress). Sometimes I feel if you are judging someone, have a line-up of everybody who was dressed for the occasion, otherwise it isn't a fair analysis. For instance, you can't compare an Indian award function to Cannes. Q. What is your life like now? A. What's blessed about my life is that I have been able to connect with the global audience on a regular basis. I am thankful for everybody's love and I reciprocate that, but I also have to deliver on every occasion. It need not always entail personal choice. You may be submitting to the requirements of a brand, what a group wants or even what an occasion demands. That's why I don't take it as seriously as the world does, because for me, it's like art. I am playing with art every waking day of my life, so I cannot make that the reason for my existence. That's why I approach these things the way I do. I don't think everybody else gets that.
As told to Deepshikha Punj

Sonakshi Sinha, 24, was last seen as a village belle in Dabangg. She has now bagged the moll's role opposite Akshay Kumar in Once Upon A Time in Mumbai 2. Kumar's character, Shoaib Khan, is based on Dawood Ibrahim and Sinha will play Yasmin, based on the don's real-life muse and former actress Mandakini. Kangna Ranaut, 25, began her career as the don's girl in Mahesh Bhatt's Gangster. She was then seen opposite Ajay Devgn in Once Upon A Time in Mumbai, based on the life of don Haji Mastan. In the crime drama Shootout at Wadala Ranaut plays Vidya Joshi, gangster Manya Surve's girlfriend, opposite John Abraham. Clearly, an offer neither could refuse.
RANAUT

Gawker Central NEWS, VIEWS AND EVERYTHING IN BETWEEN
MUST SEE MUST AVOID MUST LAUD MUST IGNORE

WORD
OF THE

James Cameron's Oscar-winning saga Titanic in 3D, made by 300 graphic artists who worked for over a year, outlining every object, character and emotion.
94
INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

Malaika Arora Khan's Telugu item number in the action film Gabbar Singh. Starring southern star Pawan Kalyan, the film is a regional remake of Dabangg.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav, who cut his motorcade from 40 cars to eight. He also shut down the hospital attached to his new official home.

Rumour that Dhanush and Shruti Haasan are coming close off screen, that has wife Aishwarya Rajinikanth on the edge. Trouble in paradise or overactive imagination?

WEEK
EX EXS RANBIR
KAPOOR AND DEEPIKA PADUKONE REUNITE FOR YEH JAWAANI HAI DEEWANI AND SHAHID KAPOOR AND PRIYANKA CHOPRA FOR TERI MERI KAHAANI.

by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

95

