Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

THE FEAR THAT HAS NO NAME
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder is no longer a rare disorder. Now it's one of the top 10 debilitating diseases, according to the who.

What is OCD?
Do you spend an entire day washing your hands for fear of some contamination that you can't name? Do you shrink from the sight of a kitchen knife, worried that you'll snatch it and hurt yourself or a family member? Do you find it impossible to throw out old newspapers? Do you make lewd comments to women even when you don't want to? Do you re-read, rewrite, re-calculate, redo things over and over again?

WHAT TRIGGERS OCD IN YOUR BRAIN?
Increased activity of circuits in the frontal cortex of the brain that regulate the brain's response to external stimuli.

HOW OBSESSIONS AND COMPULSIONS PLAY OUT
OBSESSION: Fear of germs and contamination. Compulsion: Repeated handwashing despite no visible dirt. OBSESSION: Pathologic doubt about routine everyday activities. Compulsion: Re-checking. Example: Reading the same passage in a book. OBSESSION: Unwanted thoughts or sexual thoughts that are taboo. Compulsion: Repeatedly doing things that confirm or deny those. OBSESSION: With religion and doing the morally correct thing. Compulsion: Repeatedly invoking God to lessen anxiety.

Amygdala, the brain's risk-centre, gets overactive and alerts the brain about possible perils even when the problem has been addressed.

Lower levels of neurotransmitters or chemicals that help nerve cells communicate: Serotonin, dopamine and glutamate.

THE SILENT SUFFERING
No other mental disorder hides as stealthily for years, masquerades as something else, delays diagnosis, or causes as much silent, embarrassed suffering as the neurochemical storm that is Obsessive Compulsive Disorder or OCD. Over 12 million Indians are thought to have OCD. New research reveals that OCD has a powerful genetic component. One in four children with the disorder has a first-degree relative with a similar condition.

RETHINKING REMEDIES

New treatment has been initiated with a class of anti-depressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIS). Behaviour therapy, where suffer-

ers don't try to avoid a source of anxiety but actually seek it out until emotional nerve endings grow de-

sensitised, proving effective in 50-60% patients. 40% patients recover while 30% improve.



Compiled by Damayanti Datta

90

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

