Nation CONGRESS

WHERE HAVE YOU BEEN, RAHUL?
By Priya Sahgal

Badly scarred by the Assembly poll debacle, Rahul Gandhi vanished for foreign holidays to escape the political heat of Delhi
When in Parliament, Rahul remained confined to the back benches, leaving Sonia Gandhi and Mukherjee to supervise floor management. In the Lok Sabha, Sonia was seen issuing directions to Pawan Bansal, the parliamentary affairs minister, during the Reply to the President's Address, after which Bansal spoke to Samajwadi Party MPs who later voted in favour of the Government. Whether inside Parliament or outside, it is Sonia who is leading, despite her illness. The Uttarakhand crisis was handled by 10 Janpath managers. After her illness, Sonia had been hoping that Rahul would take charge, allowing her to step back. But it seems she will have to postpone her retirement plans. "You know how Rahul works, in a silo. We had no clue about his travel plans and, frankly, it makes little difference to us whether he is in the country or not. He doesn't involve the rest of the party," says a party secretary. Rahul had postponed a meeting to review the Uttar Pradesh poll results from end-March to April 6 and 7 and went off abroad. Disappointed Congressmen say that there seems to be little remorse in Team Rahul. "Kanishka (Singh, a key aide) and Company don't think the party has suffered a defeat. They talk about how the vote increased three times in Saharanpur from the last Assembly polls and how in as many as 150 seats, the party got more than 20,000 votes," says a Congress MP. The laptop-toting Kanishka Singh, Rahul's Man Friday, controls access to him. According to a source, each loser will be given a questionnaire to explain his loss. "Rahul hasn't learnt. These laptop solutions are not the answer," moans the Congressman, adding, "I know why I lost. There was no credible local leader." Currently there is no mass leader from Uttar Pradesh. Rahul will have to groom a new face. But for that, he needs to be in Lucknow. Not Thailand. 

s soon as Parliament took its customary break during the Budget session end-March, Rahul Gandhi packed his bags and caught a flight out of India. A wall of secrecy that belies his stated commitment to Right to Information always surrounds his travel plans. While no one was willing to come on record, it seems that the party scion took off for a holiday to a destination in Southeast Asia or somewhere in Europe. "It could either be Thailand or Singapore," says a source not willing to be identified even by his designation. This was not his only March break. As soon as the results of the five Assembly elections were declared on March 6, Rahul left for yet another undisclosed holiday. Sheepish Congressmen admit that they had no clue of his whereabouts. "We look at Subramanian Swamy's tweets for his travel plans," joked a party MP. Swamy's tweets had spotted Rahul first in Nice and later on in Thailand. After a week-long break, Rahul returned to India on March 15, three days after Parliament reconvened for the Budget session. He was not present in the House during the President's Address to Parliament on March 12, the Prime Minister's dinner for UPA allies on March 13 and the Railway Budget on March 14. But he made it in time for Pranab Mukherjee's Budget speech after which he told reporters that it was a "good Budget" but refused to elaborate. After that he did make the mandatory appearance whenever the Congress issued a whip, such as on Mukherjee's Reply on the Budget, the vote on the Rail Budget and the Reply to the President's Address. Those who had hoped to see some sort of a course correction after the Uttar Pradesh polls were disappointed.

A

PTI

JAGIR KAUR BEING TAKEN INTO CUSTODY IN PATIALA

PUNJAB

DEATH AND THE MAIDEN
Minister Bibi Jagir Kaur gets five years jail for the death of her daughter but is cleared of murder
arpreet Kaur `Rosy', 19, died a lonely death on April 20, 2000, the day she had been promised her dream wedding with the love of her life Kamaljit Singh, then 22 years old. Twelve years on, a CBI special court in Patiala convicted and sentenced Rosy's mother to five years of rigorous imprisonment on March 30. Bibi Jagir Kaur, one of Punjab's most powerful woman-politicians who was inducted as a Cabinet minister in the re-elected Parkash Singh Badal government on March 14, was found guilty of abducting, illegally confining and forcing her teenage daughter to undergo an abortion, events that resulted in Rosy's death. Curiously, no one was convicted for the murder. Three others--Sub-inspector Nishan Singh, Paramjit Raipur and Dalwinder Kaur Dhesi--who

H

RAHUL GANDHI

KAMALJIT, ROSY'S LOVER, HAS VOWED TO CHALLENGE THE TRIAL COURT VERDICT.

AP PHOTO

helped Jagir got identical jail terms. Jagir won the Assembly election from Bholath and became Punjab's tourism minister in 1997. She was later anointed the first ever woman president of Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee. "She wanted much better things for her daughters," Kamaljit told INDIA TODAY. He, the son of a small farmer, and Rosy were still at school in Begowal when they first met in 1996. Defying her mother, Rosy, who was pregnant by then, got engaged secretly at a Chandigarh hotel on September 6, 1999. Some months later, Jagir lured them to return. "But she was furious when Rosy told her about the baby," Kamaljit recalls. April 20, 2000, was fixed as the wedding date. It became the day of Rosy's hurried cremation in Begowal. Kamaljit doggedly pursued the case till he finally got justice for his beloved. He is convinced that Jagir and others were directly responsible for Rosy's death. "They killed her," he says, making it clear he will challenge the court's judgment.
by Asit Jolly

70

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

