Nei ghbours PAKISTAN

KAYANI'S NEW SOLDIER-SPY
Pakistan Army chief Kayani comes out trumps once again. His pick, General Zaheer, will now head the country's intelligence establishment.
AP

akistan Army chief General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani has re-asserted his control over the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI). He hand-picked Lt-General Zaheer-ul Islam, 56, to take over as the new ISI chief on March 20. The Pakistan Army is already abuzz with reports of a new batch of `soldier-spies' being groomed by the army chief to run ISI and the army. Kayani was the first director general-ISI to become army chief, when General Parvez Musharraf appointed him in 2008. The Pakistan Army has traditionally maintained a distance between its spies and the army. Spy chiefs have not risen to command army formations or the army. This has changed under Kayani. General Zaheer had earlier served as DG-Counter-terrorism from October 2004 to October 2007 during Kayani's tenure as DG-ISI. Zaheer was responsible for law and order, coordination with law enforcement agencies, supporting counter-terrorism operations and halting the penetration of extremist elements in the armed forces. He was also responsible for handling internal security situations like the violent nationalist movement in Balochistan province and the ethnosectarian strife in Karachi. While the ISI headquarters are located in Islamabad, the Pakistan Army is headquartered in Rawalpindi. Officials believe that the intelligence agency has deliberately been kept away from the army due to the presence of a large number of civilians in ISI. Government officials say Zaheer is the best choice to hold the top position in ISI due to ongoing military operations inside the country. "His infantry background is really going to matter as most of the operations and engagements in Fata, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan continue to be infantry-dominated," a two-star

P

ZAHEER-UL ISLAM

MAN WITH A MISSION
I He is seen as a moderate but is relatively insulated from the West. He did a course in the US Army War College a decade ago. I Zaheer has had a three-year tenure in ISI, handling its counter-terrorism campaign. I His biggest challenge will be to restore ISI's intelligence cooperation with US that stopped after the May 2011 Abbottabad raid.

general told INDIA TODAY. Kayani seems to have clearly prevailed upon the government in getting his trusted aide appointed to lead ISI and if the past is any indication, Zaheer could be one of the serious contenders for becoming the next army chief. Zaheer is due to retire in October 2014,

a year after Kayani retires in late 2013. His appointment comes at a time when Pakistan's political and strategic challenges within its borders and beyond have multiplied. The chair of DG-ISI has become a hot seat. In recent years, Western governments have stepped up accusations of links between ISI and militant groups operating in India and Afghanistan. A near-insurgency situation in the country's Balochistan province, the Afghan endgame, relations with neighbour India and the potentially explosive Kashmir dispute mark the seemingly endless challenges for the new chief. Defence analyst Ahmed Qureshi says the most important challenge facing Zaheer is to repair the fast-eroding military relations between the US and Pakistan. He says an improvement is possible only if ISI agrees to revive its suspended intelligence-sharing with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). ISI stopped intelligence-sharing with CIA after an operation in which US marines killed Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad on May 2, 2011. Zaheer hails from a well-known military family of the Punjab province. His father retired as a colonel, three of his brothers and a brother-in-law retired as army officers. Unlike his predecessors Lt-General Nadeem Taj and Lt-General Muhammad Aziz, Zaheer is widely regarded as open-minded and moderate. His appointment also marks an apparent shift in the thinking of the military and civilian leadership in opting for an inward-looking chief over a popular and internationallyconnected officer. Former ISI chiefs like Lt-General Shuja Pasha were well connected, especially in the US security establishment. Zaheer has few such global connections and attended only one military course in the US as a brigadier in 2002-2003.
by Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad

64

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

