Soc iety RELIGION

THEMONKS WHO ABAND ONED FERRARIS
An aerospace engineer.A doctor.A dozen NRIs. For these new-age monks, renunciation means service before self.
By Uday Mahurkar
THEN NOW

A

n hour after his son Dhrumil, 21, a pharmacy student at Sydney University, left for New Zealand to attend a South Pacific conference of the Gujarat-based Swaminarayan order in June 2011, Darshanbhai Upadhaya, 46, spotted an envelope in front of the portrait of Lord Swaminarayan in their three-bedroom Sydney house. It was addressed to him and his wife Parulben, 43: "Pappa and Mummy, I feel connected to true spirituality, inspired by the lives of Swaminarayan monks. I want to become one and serve society. I know it's a tough decision since I am your only son but being old Swaminarayan followers, I believe you will allow me." When Dhrumil returned after three days, his parents agreed. Dhrumil, now renamed Bharadwaj Bhagat, is part of a strictly celibate and vegetarian order of monks devoted to spiritual uplift and social service. It's a far cry from his school days, when he would idolise actor Hrithik Roshan and was passionate about football and breakdance. A chance to closely observe Pramukh Swami Maharaj, the 91-year-old pontiff of the Swaminarayan order, in Mumbai in 2005 and then again in

Ahmedabad in 2007 led Dhrumil on a spiritual journey that culminated in him enlisting as a volunteer of the worldwide sect in Sydney. "What more could we have asked from the Almighty when he was himself taking our son into his fold," says Parulben. Dhrumil's life-changing story is also the story of 43 other youths who entered the monk order of the Bachasanvasi Shri Akshar Purushottam Swaminarayan Sanstha (BAPS) at the Salangpur temple of the order near Bhavnagar in Saurashtra on March 14. BAPS is one of the four chief sects of the Swaminarayan order now led by Pramukh Swami. The 44 youths include 17 engineers, three doctors and a dozen NRIs, all achievers. Jayesh Choksi, 24, now named Shamik Bhagat, was a USbased aerospace engineer and architect from whose extended family as many as three youths have turned monks. Dharmesh Patel, 31, now Sandipani Bhagat, one of three sons of Gujarat government employee Savjibhai Patel, was drawing a Rs 70-lakh per annum salary as a software engineer in Houston, Texas, until a month ago when he decided to become a monk. As he puts it: "I had this inclination for long but my financial background was poor. I waited so that I could support my family. The dra-

VYAS BHAGAT 23
Earlier known as MANISH PATEL Early etchings An avid cricket player,
Bhagat used to put up Tendulkar posters on the walls of his Ahmedabad home.

THEN

NOW

BHARADWAJ BHAGAT 21
Earlier known as
DHRUMIL UPADHAYA Past life Pharmacy student at Sydney University.As a child, he used to idolise actor Hrithik Roshan.
into monkhood are scientific and practical. The minimum age is 21. From the time one dons white robes through the period of training towards becoming a monk, a person can return to family life if he desires. It is only after a year that he gets saffron robes." BAPS has a 900-plus order of monks and 1.5 million followers worldwide. Known for their modern outlook to religion and majestic temples, including the Akshardham temple in Delhi, the sect has a stellar record of public service. It earned praise for its relief work after the 2001 Gujarat earthquake and 2005 tsunami, and for retaliating with peace when the Akshardham temple in Gandhinagar was attacked in 2002. "I salute Pramukh Swami for keeping an ancient Indian tradition alive," said scientist Vijay Bhatkar, best known as the architect of India's first supercomputer, who attended the diksha ceremony. I

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

THEN

NOW

matic recovery of my mother from cancer five years ago was a sign for me--I felt God had himself intervened for me." Dharmesh had been into selfhelp and motivational books for long, so his decision didn't surprise his father. "I had seen that streak in him SANDIPANI since childhood," says Savjibhai. Manish Patel, 23, now Vyas BhaBHAGAT 31 gat, had completed his MBBS and was Earlier known as doing his internship in Ahmedabad Dharmesh Patel Worked as Software when he decided to embrace monkhood. He used to put up Sachin engineer in Tendulkar posters on the wall of his Houston,Texas.

small tenement when he was a child. An avid cricket player and debater in school, he was equally fond of stories from Hindu scriptures. "My wife Manjula was elated when impressed by Pramukh Swami, he declared his intention last year to become a monk. She had always wished that our only son should become a monk," says Jairambhai, his father. On March 13, a day before the 44 youths were initiated into monkhood at Salangpur, they were taught by senior monks how to wear their own

MONKS BEING INITIATED INTO THE ORDER BY PRAMUKH SWAMI MAHARAJ (CENTRE)

white pagri (head-dress), shaven, bathed and asked to fast till next evening's diksha (initiation) ceremony. They spent their last night of `worldliness' with their relatives at the venue. On D-Day, in front of a huge crowd of onlookers, Pramukh Swami blessed them one by one before they got into their new white robes. They were then embraced by older sadhus. Swami Brahmavihari, a monk, explained: "Our rules for initiating one

66

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

67

