Mail

Will UPA Survive This Summer?
MARCH 19, 2012

A battered Congress stares at an ominous future as belligerent allies are likely to strike at the UPA Government's weakest moment.

J A N G A B A H A D U R S U N U WA R ,

Hanging in Balance
While the election results of the states were unimaginable and scripted magnificent victories for the Samajwadi party in Uttar Pradesh and SAD-BJP in Punjab, they were unpalatable for the Congress party and left it in political wilderness ("Will UPA Survive This Summer?", March 19). The survival of the UPA Government will now lie in its ability to perform under any kind of circumstance, and not only to the satisfaction of its allies but also that of the public. The Government also needs to make drastic changes in the manner it operates, fasttrack bills pending in Parliament and also cooperate with the nonCongress states or it will risk perishing.
SANJIV GUPTA, Perth

The Battle Within
In order to fulfil individual interest and ego, few senior army officers have started playing a game of mudslinging at each other without realising that this will present a very gloomy picture of the army ("Generals at War", March 19). In addition, this will make the warring officers a laughing stock for the junior rankers in the army. Normally, the officers' lot are supposed to lead; instead, regrettably, they are now engaged in different type of activities. If this does not end, then the reputation that Indian Army acquired over decades will be fully destroyed.
RANJIT SINHA, www.intoday.com

The date of birth controversy revolving around General V.K. Singh alarmed the Government about one thing-- even after bidding goodbye to the battlefield, a soldier remains a fighter at heart forever.
RAJNEESH BATRA, Delhi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

``
UPA

``

Taking a lesson from this debacle, UPA must act soon to salvage its ruined image, not through the politics of anger and economic catastrophe but with engagement and toleration.
West Bengal

is caught between the devil and the deep sea. Its opponents would like to pull it down from its rule at the Centre. Assembly election results have weakened its position drastically. The Congress party even failed to project its chief ministerial candidate in Uttarakhand. It will take a lot of manoeuvring and wisdom to continue its governance at such a delicate juncture. The Congress has to do a tight-rope walk in the days to come. Its so-called allies will now make it dance to their tunes. UPA should have strengthened the economy through a pragmatic Budget. The public now want effective, clean, corruption-free governance. All this is a tall order for UPA, rendering mid-term polls a strong probability.

V.K.TANGRI, Dehradun

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

Mail
The dice appears heavily loaded against UPA's survival. It is indeed ironic that despite the writing on the wall, UPA does not appear to have shed its arrogance. It is bewildering that despite being neckdeep in scams, which now seem to be never ending, there apparently exists a misplaced aura of invincibility which had made UPA 2 ridiculously overconfident. The Rahul Gandhi charisma is slowly but surely waning. He can't be so naive as to not realise that he has around him a coterie of plain sycophants--not genuine advisers.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

35
derful job in implementing jail reforms by constructing the Lajpore Jail. ("This Jailhouse Rocks", March 19). Jails should be converted into reformation houses. Every sinner has a potential for greatness. Given the right environment and conducive conditions, this can help inmates become better human beings. Gujarat has really initiated wonderful moves in many progressive areas. Kudos to Narendra Modi.
MOHAN SINGHAL, Pune

Fire in the Belly
The article made for an interesting read ("Kitchen Couturiers", March 19). It is encouraging to see young talent achieve success at such an early stage in life. It inspires others to think out of the box. Please carry more stories like this one in your magazine.
REKHA SURI, Chandigarh

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
APRIL 15-31, 1977

Gone With the Wind
His is the story of Maruti, the small car which made big news. The story of the spoiled child insisting on making a car which he could not produce.The story of a pampered child who happened to be the son of the Prime Minister. It is this which made the project the biggest black mark in Indian politics. This then is the story of one child's petulance dictating the promises of a decade of a government which kow-towed to dictates. It is the narration of what should not have been. Sanjay's small car project started in 1969. Having returned from London where he ostensibly underwent threeyears training at the Rolls-Royce factory, Sanjay came back to "experiment"in a small garage near Old Delhi's Roshanara Gardens.The garage was owned by a petty mechanic called Arjan Das who was made a member of Delhi's Metropolitan Council and became the uncrowned king of Delhi.The small car project has a long history. It was the brainchild of Manubhai Shah, a Central minister in the mid-50s. It has had a chequered career. First, it was to be manufactured in the public sector. Next, it was rumoured to be made by the private sector with or without foreign collaboration.
by C. Joshi, T.N.N., with S. Sethi and D. Bobb

Clarifications
In the list of Aditya Birla Group Companies (Chairman Kumar Mangalam Birla), Hindustan Everest Tools Ltd has also been included in the group companies ("Battle for Billions", March 5). This is to clarify that Hindustan Everest Tools Ltd is an independent Public Limited listed Company and none of the Birla groups have any significant stake in the company.
S.K. MANDELA, chairman and managing director, Hindustan Everest Tools Ltd.

Future Tense
The deteriorating condition of the education system and the blunders in textbooks have very simple reasons that anyone who has rational thinking and analytic approach can elicit ("In Karnataka, Pakistan is Part of India", March 19). The level of knowledge of teachers has gone down drastically. Mostly second and third class degree holders opt for BEd courses and join the profession of teaching, but they lack expository skills. Further, they become writers, evaluators and examiners. Therefore, the errors in language and content.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

Reform Movement
Gujarat has done a won-

Having initiated such jail welfare reforms through a rather unique privatepublic partnership that provides not only abundant space but also academic and vocational courses to the prisoners and revenue generation to help reintegrate them into society, the Lajpore Central Jail is inarguably the first of its kind in India. However, even if a more humane approach to prisoners is indeed necessary, the probability of going overboard with prisonerfriendly reforms is highly debatable. One should not overlook the fact that rigorous imprisonment acts as a deterrent to crime. Instead of penalising criminals, one should not end up rewarding them for their crimes.
NALINI VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Thiruvananthapuram

In the news item "Sharp Memory" in the March 5 issue, it has been mentioned that the Union Budget was once presented as late as March 15 in 1976. However, the Budget of 1995-96 was also presented on March 15, 1995. Hence there are two precedents for presentation of Union Budget on March 15-- 1976 and 1995.
TRILOKI DAS KHANDELWAL, secretary-general, Social Security Foundation

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

THE MYTH AND THE MAN

10

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

