tumblr tales

NET FLUX

Hillary Say What?
by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

PROTEST AGAINST ALAWADI'S KILLING IN SAN DIEGO, US

Hijabs United
The death of Shaima Alawadi, 32, whose body was found at her home in San Diego on March 21 with a note calling her a terrorist, has sparked a wave of outrage online.`One Million Hijabs for Shaima', a Facebook page, which was created shortly after her death, has encouraged women of various religions, races and age groups to show their solidarity by posting pictures of themselves wearing hijabs. Speculation is rife that Alawadi, who wore the garment in public, was a victim of hate crime.The movement has banded with people fighting for Trayvon Martin, a teenager who was killed in Florida. He was deemed suspicious because he was wearing a hoodie.

Pictures of US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton sporting chic sunglasses and texting on her BlackBerry have provided fodder for a hilarious Tumblr blog--`Texts from Hillary' . Each post has two pictures with imagined text conversations with various people, from boss Barack Obama and husband Bill to Beyonce and Lady Gaga. One post has Republican politician Mitt Romney asking for advice and she replies `Drink' . Another shows her rejecting Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg's friend request. All of `Hillary's texts'have a no-nonsense tone, not unlike the attitude of the woman.
CLINTON'S `CONVERSATION'WITH OBAMA

buzz feed

viral video

Bohemian Arrest

Insta Buy
Facebook spent a whopping $1 billion (Rs 5,000 crore) on April 9 to buy photo-sharing application Instagram. The app, that allows people to take photographs and put them through filters to convert them to Polaroid shots, has a user base of 30 million. Apple had named Instagram its iPhone App of the Year in 2011.

When Robert Wilkinson, a Canadian, got drunk in a pub in Edson in November 2011, he didn't know he would be a YouTube sensation. The grainy video of the inebriated man sitting in the backseat of a police car, belting out Queen's Bohemian Rhapsody, has gone viral. Over 7 million people have watched it in a week.
BRICK

web wow

Candid Talk

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for aspiring poets, space geeks and environmentalists. For those who own smartphones, these apps could be a cool addition: Instant Poetry will make random words appear on your screen. So create beautiful poetry. Wonders of Universe will take you with Professor Brian Cox to discover 3D models of planets. Carbon Footprint Calculator will help you calculate emissions based on the distance you drive.

Two people's faces went viral on April 4, with mixed reactions. One was the blonde, blue-eyed photograph of Londoner Samantha Brick, 41, who wrote a blog in The Daily Mail about the downside of being pretty. Brick has since faced flak, with comments informing her that she is not that beautiful. The second picture is a candid shot of Zeddie Little, 25, a public relations adviser in New York, running a 10-km race in South Carolina. Since being uploaded on Flickr, Little has been termed `Ridiculously Photogenic Guy'. A GEM FROM THE SEA OF THE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet

Brand or Bat?
Novelist and historian Mukul Kesavan's article on Cricinfo about Sachin Tendulkar's century of centuries has garnered both bouquets and brickbats.Writing about the press meets after his triumph in Bangladesh,Kesavan said Tendulkar did not elaborate that one of the reasons why India had lost that match was because his run rate had dropped drastically.Calling Tendulkar a great player, but also the greatest human brand in the history of Indian advertising,he said the Master Blaster's bat should do the talking instead.

KESAVAN

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

67

