Bu siness & Economy GOLD

GLITTER HARMS GROWTH
India's fascination for gold comes in the way of investment in productive assets
PRANAV PURUSHOTHAM

that Indians are apprehenndians' continued fetish for sive about investing in the gold has dented the counstock market and continue try's financial markets to invest their money in gold. which have lost out on cash "Gold is always a time-tested spent on the yellow metal. hedge against recession but In the first two-and-a-half Indians must realise that inmonths of 2012, gold purvestment in gold does not chase in India jumped nearly guarantee safe returns. 35 per cent, impacting anThere are multiple instrunual investments in instruments in markets through ments like property, shares which people can monetise and mutual funds. This, in their savings," he says. turn, has created an incurAs soaring inflation hits able drain on the country's disposable incomes, India's savings, threatening to derail household savings rate India's economic progress. plummeted in the financial India is the world's single year that ended on March largest gold bullion consumer 31, 2011, to 9.7 per cent of with 18,000 tonnes of aboveGDP, compared with 12.1 per ground stocks worth a little cent in the previous fiscal over Rs 40 lakh crore-- year. The figure was the almost double the gold mainworst in 13 years; the last tained by the US Federal time net household savings Reserve--sitting idle in famdipped below 10 per cent ily vaults as ornaments, coins of GDP was in 1997-98 at and bars, says global consult9.6 per cent. ant McKinsey & Company. ASSOCHAM SAYS INDIA'S GOLD IMPORT The Reserve Bank of The Government would preBILL COULD RISE TO RS 5 LAKH CRORE India (RBI), in a report refer savings to be invested in more productive assets BY 2015-16, PUTTING PRESSURE ON THE leased in March, said stock market investments were such as equity and mutual CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT. at a low because of an acute funds that would help boost disinterest among people. the growth rate. "If Indians had invested in other counted for 2.1 per cent of GDP and 13 "There are chances that Indians will continue to see gold as a popular investinstruments, the country's annual GDP per cent of non-oil imports in 2011. Industry chamber Assocham has ment. The situation needs urgent acwould have been higher by 0.4 per cent," says Chetan Ahya, a senior estimated that India's gold import tion. The money could be used to boost economist with Morgan Stanley. "The bill could rise to Rs 5 lakh crore by real estate and equities," says former cumulative GDP value lost by parking 2015-16, putting pressure on the RBI governor Y. Venugopal Reddy. Rs 40 lakh crore worth of savings in current account deficit. "This gold Data compiled by Thomson gold is huge. Investment in gold fixation should end for Indians. Reuters shows that funds that invest in has been trending upwards while in- The Government should undertake gold have been outperforming most vestments in stock markets have extensive education campaigns and other investment instruments, with encourage channelising savings in exchange traded funds --or `paper fallen sharply," he says. Economists have also warned that other financial instruments. Perhaps gold'--offering returns of 15.2 per cent rising imports to meet the demand for post offices could be used to sell to investors. India's gold exchange gold have resulted in Delhi using pre- such instruments," says D.S. Rawat, traded funds investment stands at cious foreign-exchange earnings. At secretary-general, Assocham. 15 tonnes in 2011-12, and is expected Rs 2.2 lakh crore, gold imports, Agrees Abheek Barua, the chief to double in a year. second-biggest after crude oil, ac- economist of HDFC Bank, who feels Shantanu Guha Ray

I

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

55

