Int erview of theWeek HAFIZSAEED
UPDATE
CARE TODAY
AN INDIA TODAY GROUP INITIATIVE

``

WHEN US PULLS OUTOFKABUL, DELHI WILL CYCLONE THANE REHABILITATION FUND HAVE TROUBLE IN KASHMIR
Correspondent QASWAR ABBAS in Lahore. Q. What do you think of the US price on your head? A. It was a big surprise for me. Normally, bounty is placed on individuals who are hiding somewhere. I am not hiding in any cave. I think the US is frustrated because with the help of Defence of Pakistan Council, which is a combination of 40 religious and political parties, I am staging countrywide protests against the resumption of NATO supplies and drone strikes. Either the US has very
INDIA TODAY

He started his career as a teacher of Islamic studies at the University of Engineering and Technology in Lahore. But Hafiz Saeed's name made headlines globally after the 2001 attack on Parliament in Delhi. In November 2008, his name surfaced again. India blamed jihadi groups, mainly Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) allegedly run by Saeed, for the 26/11 attack in Mumbai. The 61-year-old vehemently denies both allegations. It doesn't change the fact that the $10 million bounty (Rs 50 crore) on his head, announced on April 2, has made him one of the most wanted men in US and India. Yet he is a free man in Pakistan. Its Supreme Court cleared him of involvement in the Mumbai attack in May 2010 and he often addresses public gatherings as well as press conferences. One of the most powerful men of Pakistan, he is the supreme leader of Jamaat-udDawa (JUD), formerly known as LeT. Relaxed and confident, Saeed talks to

THE DAMAGED SOS CHILDREN'S VILLAGE IN PUDUCHERRY

"Iam easily accessible.US officials can come to meet me anytime; however,theyshould bring the bounty."

yclone Thane, a severe storm with wind speed of 140 kmph, hit the Indian coast on December 30, 2011, resulting in massive damage to villages in the coastal districts of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry. The fury of the cyclone resulted in loss of 48 lives and extensive damage to property. With an intention to support rehabilitation efforts, we established the Cyclone Thane Rehabilitation Fund. In response, we received Rs 2,21,801 as contribution till the end of March. While we thank all the donors for their support, it is disheartening to note that the contributions are not adequate to undertake rehabilitation work on a large and meaningful scale. Care Today Fund is in discussion with the SOS Children's Villages of India to donate the collections received so far, to undertake activities that could help the inhabitants of the SOS village in Puducherry.

C

We thank the following donors who have contributed in excess of Rs 5,000:
P.K. Shukla Nainesh and Nita Thakrar G.V. Satyawati J. Ankineedu Prasad A.R. Periakaruppan Vijaya J. Manjrekar Nirmala and K.K. Puri Rs 5,000 Rs 5,001 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 6,000 Rs 5,100 Rs 7,616 S. Banerjee M.C. Koranmath K.V. Srinivasan V.S. Ranganathan Bharat Singh Champalal H. Virwal Rs 6,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,100 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,005

Care Today announces the closure of Thane Rehabilitation Fund.

MAKE A DIFFERENCE
For further queries, please contact C. Balaji Singh at 011-23314216/+91-9810088836 or email balaji.singh@intoday.com
APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

AP PHOTO

48

SOS CHILDREN `S VILLAGES OF INDIA

little knowledge or is basing its decisions on wrong information being provided by India, or indeed, they are just frustrated. As a matter of fact, I am easily accessible. US officials can come to meet me any time; however, they should bring the bounty with them as well which our organisation, JuD, can use to carry out relief operations across the country. Q. Don't you think the Americans can get you like they got Osama bin Laden? A. The Americans should know it will not be possible for them to get me

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

``

like they got Osama bin Laden. I am not afraid of them. Q. What do you hope to achieve with the rallies against the US? A. A cut in NATO supplies will compel the US-led NATO forces to flee from Afghanistan soon. And this will ultimately help the Mujahideen to revert their attention to India-held Kashmir. Let me tell you, a full-scale armed jihad will begin soon in Kashmir after American forces withdraw from Afghanistan. The freedom movement in Kashmir will also gain momentum following the withdrawal of NATO troops from Afghanistan. I'm sure India will face a tough time as the Mujahideen revert their attention to Kashmir. Q. Who are your friends? Who is standing by you during these testing times? A. I have the full support of Defence of Pakistan Council. They have condemned the US move of placing a bounty on my head. They have also held countrywide demonstrations against the US bounty. Q. Law enforcement agencies in Pakistan have claimed that they have arrested operators of JUD in connection with the Mumbai attack. Can you confirm it? A. Yes, there are a few workers of JUD currently languishing in jail. Their trial is under way and I am sure the court will set them free as soon as the government sees that there is no proof against them. Just as the Supreme Court of Pakistan set me free in connection with the Mumbai case due to lack of evidence, the court will set the workers of JuD free soon, Inshallah. I

Care Today announces the closure of the Thane Rehabilitation Fund

49

