GLOSSARY
TRIPPING ON SOUL MUSIC
Sneha Khanwalkar, 28, is the woman behind peppy numbers in films such as Oye Lucky! Lucky Oye! and LSD: Love, Sex Aur Dhokha. From April 14, Khanwalkar will host a show on MTV, Sound Trippin. It will script her journey across the country, capturing the unheard and unique sounds of music. Coming up next? The soundtrack of Anurag Kashyap's Gangs of Wasseypur.Tune in.
KHANWALKAR IMRAN

HAIR,THERE, EVERYWHERE
Ever since Sachin Tendulkar straightened his hair, our celebrities just can't get enough of a pair of scissors. Here they are, with their hair dos and hair don'ts.
Imran Khan has grown up. Or at least his hair has. Catch him in the bearded look for Vishal Bhardwaj's Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola. Zaheer Khan has done away with his shortcropped hair. Retro is back in fashion for him.Those long wavy locks seem to be taking us back to the '70s. But did he have to look like Rajesh Khanna?
ZAHEER

DHONI

M.S. Dhoni We loved him with long hair. He shocked us in 2011 with a bald pate after the World Cup. Now,Team India's captain seems to be going back to his original look.The skipper's current hairstyle with slight sideburns, makes him look like an innocent college boy. Mrs Dhoni's choice? Preity Zinta has chopped off her long jet-black hair, revisiting her look in Koi...Mil Gaya.This time she has done it to suit the role in her maiden production Ishkq in Paris.The chirpy actor has gone on to donate her tresses to a cancer foundation in the US. Call that hair power?

BRAIN GAIN
Manoj Bhargava, 58, says he is the wealthiest Indian in the US with net worth of Rs 6,500 crore.The Lucknowborn Indian-American entrepreneur who owns 5-Hour Energy, an energy drink company, has pledged 90 per cent of his earnings towards charity in India. BharBHARGAVA gava has been involved in over 200 charities in rural India, which carry out initiatives like hospitals for the poor and education for women. Certainly the benefits of brain drain.

Q& A

HABIB FAISAL
DIRECTOR

FOTOCORP

PTI

PTI

BIRDS OF THE SAME FEATHER
Item girl and reality TV star Pooja Misrra is trying hard to show off that soft side. Misrra has been roped in by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) for their campaign to save birds from being caged. It uses the slogan `Spare Me!', a phrase which she often used on Bigg Boss 5 during her eight-week-long stint inside the house. Dressed as a colourful bird in a yellow-and-pink dress with shocking pink eyelashes, she poses beside a huge cage holding the placard. Spare us.

MISRRA

LEVEL PLAYING FIELD
Both Sidhartha Mallya and Ranbir Kapoor have dated Deepika Padukone. Now they have one more thing in common. Mallya, 24, inheritor of the United Breweries Group and Kingfisher Airlines, has signed up with media marketing company Kwan, which also handles the Bollywood's actor. Kapoor, 29, is busy shooting with Padukone for Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani in Manali, reliving their onscreen chemistry. Mallya may be looking for an alternative career. Could Kapoor help him?
MALLYA KAPOOR

"When I am writing for myself, I seem like an idiot."
Habib Faisal, 45, should be nervous before the release of his second film Ishaqzaade. But not quite. Perhaps his debut film Do Dooni Chaar winning the National Award for Best Hindi Film in 2011 may have something to do with it. Faisal, who wrote the script for Band Baaja Baaraat, speaks on his life and work at Yash Raj Films. Q. Are your story ideas borrowed from your own life? A. A story has a superstructure by way of an idea and plot. Then I create characters based on real-life experiences. Q. Tell us something about Ishaqzaade. A. It's about small-town India and the spunk in these places, but with a love story as the overriding structure. Q. What are Arjun Kapoor and Parineeti Chopra's roles? A. They are edgy, trigger-happy and anti-establishment. The story is about what happens when they clash. Q. How do you switch between writing and directing? A. When I am writing for someone else, it's clear that if they change anything, I will kill the director. But when I am writing for myself, then the writer Habib becomes an idiot. Q. What do you think of Indian cinema today? A. Even though these are exciting times and all kinds of films are being made that push the envelope, people are still cautious about how to approach new ideas and issues. Q. What change would you like to see? A. The small budget film on fresh ideas is a very important domain, but it needs to be structured properly.
as told to Nishat Bari

FOTOCORP

AFP

FOTOCORP

VS
SHAM A fake Twitter account in OF THE the name of media baron Nari Hira has tweets like "Where are you Aditya Pancholi, Urmila Matondkar? I gave you your first breaks."

CONCERT British musician Norman OF THE Cook, also called Fatboy Slim, will be staging his maiden concert in India in Bangalore on May 4, before heading to other metros.

WEEK

CHARITY Jean-Benoit Jaouen, a OF THE Frenchman, who took part in the Mumbai Marathon in January, donated half his prize money (Rs 9,000) to a tea stall worker.

WEEK

WEEK

by Prachi Rege and Nishat Bari
APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

71

