RaimaSen
GUEST COLUMN
The writer is an actor

the invisible goddess
e brought in my grandmother Suchitra Sen's 81st birthday on April 6 without much fanfare. We gathered at our Ballygunge home and ordered Chinese for lunch from Red Hot Chilli Pepper and a Mughlai dinner from Chote Nawab. She has been away from the public gaze for nearly two decades now. But people ask us all the time about my legendary grandmother and why she has chosen to live like a recluse. It requires tremendous willpower to be able to totally give up a life of stardom and we have always respected her privacy. Surprisingly, we have never once felt the need to discover the reason behind her decision. For me, she is just my Amma, someone I love to be around when I am home. As children, my sister Riya and I would stay over at her place on weekends or even go out with her after school. We would sometimes go to AC Market in Kolkata to buy little things such as pencil boxes and erasers and she would always wear sunglasses that would cover three-fourths of her face. She wore saris or salwar suits and a dupatta over her head. In spite of that, people would recognise her and chase her for autographs. When we were younger, we were surrounded by many beautiful women. Besides my superstar grandmother, of course, we had my mother (Moonmoon Sen), Gayatri Devi (my paternal grand aunt) and all the lovely ladies from the royal families of Cooch Behar and Jaipur. My father ensured that we had a normal upbringing and were not at all affected or awestruck. Seeing our mother dressing up for film shoots, our choice of profession was almost a given: We were seduced by the glamour of the job. Years later, after I had stepped into the world of films, I sat down to watch her films and was amazed by the dignity she exuded in each of her films. Her characters are so strongly imprinted in people's minds that I would never attempt to do something close to that. Just the fact that she came from a regu-

She was the darling of the Bengali silver screen in the 1950s and 1960s. On her 81st birthday, Suchitra Sen's granddaughter talks about the reclusive life the actor now prefers.

W

SUCHITRA SEN
INDIAN EXPRESS

lar middle-class family and achieved so much ing those from her films with Uttam Kumar like Sare Chuattar (Bengali, 1953), Sagarika is definitely a great source of inspiration. Among my grandmother's films that I like (Bengali, 1956), Pathey Holo Deri (Bengali, most are Harano Sur (Bengali, 1957), Saat 1957), Chaowa Paowa (Bengali, 1959) and Paake Bandha (Bengali, 1963), Aandhi (Hindi, Saptapadi (Bengali, 1961). They would 1975), and Datta (Bengali, 1976). She looks always try to upstage each other while deliverstunning in every frame, and manages to get ing dialogues but it was all in jest. In those days, maximum attention for her histrionics. Her acting required a lot of struggle as well as debold yet restrained performances in each of termination and it was after her success that a them have been great acting lessons. Aarti showbiz career began to be respected. Nobody Devi's character in Aandhi is my absolute was allowed on her film sets; people were favourite; the sophistication and elegance that petrified of her, I guess. A few years ago, she refused the Dadasaheb she portrayed on screen is difficult to match. Phalke Award because she She had not seen any of was not willing to step out to our films until last year receive the award. Somewhen she happened to catch times we tell her she should Anuranan (Bengali, 2006) SOMETIMES WE come along with us to on television. Later she told Mumbai and although she me she had liked me so TELL HER SHE SHOULD says she will, we know that's much in the film that she COME WITH US never going to happen. She saw it four times and that I never really liked Mumbai should work more often TO MUMBAI AND and although she talks occawith Tony (Aniruddha Roy ALTHOUGH SHE SAYS sionally of Sanjeev Kumar, Chowdhury, director of SHE WILL, WE KNOW her co-star in Aandhi, as Anuranan). When she one of the greatest actors expressed her desire to THAT'S NEVER GOING she has known, she could watch more of my films, I TO HAPPEN. SHE NEVER never make Mumbai her showed her Rituparno own. She has always loved Ghosh's Noukadubi (BenREALLY LIKED MUMBAI. Kolkata dearly. gali, 2011), which she also Now that she lives next liked very much. In fact, it door to us, we have our was my grandmother who read out to me both the texts of Noukadubi and meals together whenever we are in Kolkata. I Chokher Bali (Bengali, 2003) and helped me complain to her that I put on weight whenever I visit her because she stuffs me with so much understand the characters well. When I was preparing for Kadambari's role food every time. She does not offer advice about in the yet-untitled documentary on Tagore (be- diets but points out that I must go to the gym ing directed by Rituparno Ghosh), she explai- regularly. She does not meet anyone except her ned the character to me and how it is different doctor and a few relatives, but she is extremely from that of Hemnalini (of Noukadubi). sharp and clued in to all that's happening Recently, I showed her some photographs of a around us. She reads voraciously, mostly shoot and she commented on how I should not Bengali literature, and spends a lot of time have my hands so prominently in the frame be- praying. Amma often comments about how I cause they take attention away from my face. look so much like her. As for me, I am just happy She gives acting tips once in a while and shares to be her little doll. innumerable anecdotes from her past, includas told to Tithi Sarkar

68

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

69

