GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

JOBS FOR ALL P

laying the generous benefactor in his fifth, and perhaps final, term as Punjab's Chief Minister, Parkash Singh Badal, 84, is set to reward his flock of legislators. After inducting the maximum permissible 17 as Cabinet ministers, he named an unprecedented 21 MLAs as chief parliamentary secretaries (CPS). The 17 Akalis and four BJP men

will have no governmental powers but will enjoy the perks of state ministers. Each CPS gets an official car complete with a red beacon and unlimited fuel, a four-bedroom house (estimated monthly market rent: Rs 75,000), a personal staff of four besides a minister's salary and allowances--which means Rs 60,000 in monthly emoluments, an annual petty grant of Rs 75,000, out-ofstate travel allowance of Rs 2 lakh per year. Perks also include
ANIL DAYAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

BADAL (CENTRE) WITH 21 MLAS SWORN-IN AS CHIEF PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARIES

furnished accommodation along with free electricity and water supply. The job also comes with a security cover of half-a-dozen policemen and an escort Gypsy. Given Badal's magnanimous mood, 29 of the 68 coalition MLAs, who are still without `official' jobs, are eagerly lining up expecting `employment' as chairmen of the state's boards, positions that come with similar privileges.

BABY TALK

DIFFERENT STROKES

B

ilawal Bhutto Zardari and Rahul Gandhi were both described by breathless journalists as Young Turks but Zardari junior's penchant for Twitterfriendly acronyms betrays his real age, 23, almost half of 41-year-old Rahul's. AOA, as in Allah O Akbar, he said on landing in India, reminding tweeple that "SMBB also accompanied SZAB to India". That's Shaheed Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto and Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto for the uninitiated. He also called his father Prez. All this shorthand enthusiasm caused 59year-old Imran Khan to huff that "Bilawal has no knowledge of the difficulties faced by the people of Pakistan and cannot even speak proper Urdu". Awww.
BILAWAL
AP

B

HOODA (LEFT) AND PAES

hupinder Singh Hooda has the perfect way of relieving the many frustrations of his job as Haryana's Chief Minister. The normally khadiclad mukhya mantri loves to end his day on the tennis court in sneakers, T-shirt and track pants. He showed his sporting skills in an exhibition match at the Chandigarh Lawn Tennis Association's court on April 10 where he partnered Leander Paes against two local youngsters Ranjit Singh, 15, and Anuj Bhatti, 17. A trifle out of breath, Hooda surprised Paes the pro with a few aces of his own.
PTI

TWEET FOR TWAT
ocial media is fast replacing TV studios as the new battleground. The world of Twitter is abuzz with the recent war of words between Kiran Bedi and Pawan Khera, political secretary to the Delhi Chief Minister. When Bedi suggested "compulsory retirement" for all Punjab prison officials who broke the rules to provide a comfortable lodging for jailed SAD leader Bibi Jagir Kaur, Khera immediately hit back."Whether it is Jagir Kaur or Charles Sobhraj, a prisoner is a prisoner and should be dealt with accordingly." Khera was referring to allegations that as DG Tihar Jail, Bedi had given certain perks to a VIP prisoner. Touche.

S

BIBI JAGIR KAUR

NEW

GLASS HOUSE FOLLOW THE LEADER
ahul Gandhi's political aide Kanishka Singh is under fire for poor candidate selection in the Uttar Pradesh polls. The 34-year-old Wharton MBA graduate is known to put down everything on his laptop and then reproduce information in detailed spreadsheets that tend to confuse the average cow-belt worker. But all gloss in the world cannot change the fact that Congress vote share has declined from 18.2 per cent in the 2009 General Elections to 11.63 per cent in the Assembly polls in 2012. Perhaps that is why Kanishka too has grown a beard--as a sign of empathy with his leader.

R

GANDHI (RIGHT) WITH SINGH

PARVEEN NEGI

POOR RELATIONS

JOKES
O F T H E W E E K

P

unjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal has never been shy about expressing his admiration for Sikhs who win acclaim. But good friend Montek Singh Ahluwalia's Rs 28 and Rs 32 poverty line caps have managed to irritate him. "It is ridiculous!" Badal told supporters in his home constituency Lambi on April 7. Even a man who can recall times when a ser of desi ghee cost only 2 annas and 40 kilos of wheat came for under Rs 2 knows that "people who fix such caps are ignorant".
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Pakistan was the toast of Twitter, from Bilawal Bhutto Zardari's visit to Hina Rabbani Khar's imminent departure.

Bilawal is one of those lucky ones who saw Rahul Gandhi eating food in the house of someone who is not Dalit. Hina Rabbani Khar could lose her job. S.M. Krishna is trying to recall if she was a Kingfisher employee.

POWER GAMES
young police intelligence officer from St Stephen's College who now has an office at Delhi's Moti Lal Nehru Marg has been asked by a key aide to Rahul Gandhi to do a post-mortem on the Congress fiasco in Uttar Pradesh. This has given him an ostensible reason to interact with journalists which enables him to drop a few hints unfavourable to some ministers. Reason? He is part of inter-ministerial battles being played out in the media. His mentor is a senior Cabinet minister, who is also responsible for promoting his proximity to the Rahul aide.

A

BLAME SHAME

D

"Pakistan should never hand over Hafiz Saeed to India as India will start spending billions of rupees for his food and security."
TASLIMA NASREEN Author

"Ramdev is sitting on RSS's lap. He was quite good till he was doing only yoga, now he has diverted his attention."
RAM VILAS PASWAN LJP chief

"I am going to stay in Uttar Pradesh. I am not going to accept the defeat."
RAHUL GANDHI

Congress General Secretary

uring a meeting on April 5 and 6 at the Congress party war room in Delhi to review the Uttar Pradesh polls, Rahul Gandhi was asked by a losing candidate,"You went to Dalit houses, but did you also visit Brahmin houses?" "Yes. I did," said Rahul and went on to list the various villages where he had dined with Brahmins. And added, "But the media never covered this, so what can I do?"Yes, go right ahead, Rahul, blame the media.

NASREEN
AFP

with ASIT JOLLY, PRIYA SAHGAL

14

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

NEW

