Na tion HIMACHALPRADESH
Photographs by A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

LAND WAR IN HIMACHAL
State government confronts the Army over a piece of property near Shimla
By Asit Jolly

A

harshly worded press release has triggered off a war of words between the Indian Army and the Himachal Pradesh government. The April 14 press release, believed to have been authored by senior officers at the Western Command Headquarters in Chandimandir, questioned the state government's attempt to recover a

backed down from the threat following assurances from Defence Minister A.K. Anthony and a placatory call from General V.K. Singh who informed Dhumal that the Western Command had ordered a Court of Inquiry and would do everything necessary to "rectify" the problem. The plot has been with the Army since 1955. It has not parted with the land despite the expiry of its lease on March 31, 1982. The Army has a nine-

volve his son and Member of Parliament Anurag Thakur in the controversy. The latter has spearheaded the move for a stadium as president of the Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association. In October 2011, Thakur restarted his campaign. On April 7, 14 Shimla-based sports associations submitted 1.08 lakh signatures to the chief minister's office in support of the stadium. The Army press release questions the state's proposal to build

people of Himachal Pradesh. Thakur says that the state needs the land for various activities. The Army can use the ground to land helicopters in an emergency, he adds. Dhumal is sceptical of the Army's claims. According to him, in 2002 the state had offered the Army an alternative 25 acre site within 8 km of Annandale at Ghandal village. "The Army sat on the proposal for nine long years before rejecting it," he says. "Annandale is worth thousands of crores and cannot be given up for a few Army officers to play golf," Dhumal told INDIA TODAY. The Army is not backing down either. On April 16, when General Singh and Anthony were assuring Dhumal,

REDDY

KUMAR

ANDHRAPRADESH

TOP GUNS TRADE CHARGES
High court steps in as two of the state's most senior policemen level corruption charges against each other
he Andhra Pradesh High Court has come down heavily on the state police after two of its most senior officers levelled corruption charges against each other. On April 11, Justice Ramesh Ranganathan directed the state government to probe the allegations traded between state police chief V. Dinesh Reddy, 59, and his immediate senior Umesh Kumar, 58, now chairman of the Godavari Valley Authority. Kumar has accused Reddy of illegally amassing huge property in the name of his wife, alleging that 31 land transactions involving her were not declared in the mandatory annual property returns filed by him and that he was holding more than 500 benami properties. Reddy has alleged Kumar's involvement in a multi-crore scam in the purchase of materials for the police department when he was in charge of procurement. The scam came to light after Kumar was transferred from the post. The court has directed the government to institute an inquiry within a fortnight and submit a report in the next four months. "Any

T

"Annandale is worth thousands of crores and cannot be given up so that a few Army officers can play golf."
PREM KUMAR DHUMAL Chief Minister

ARMY COMMANDOS DURING THE APRIL 16-EXERCISE AT ANNANDALE

"We are on good terms with the chief minister. We have asked Western Command about it. We will rectify it."
GENERAL V.K. SINGH Army Chief

48.4 hectare plot held by the Army in Annandale, 4 km from Shimla. "The state seems to be hell-bent on destroying the meagre forest cover, all at the behest of the land mafia, eyeing phenomenal profits," the release says. Incensed Chief Minister Prem Kumar Dhumal has threatened to sue the Army for defamation. He raised the issue with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on the sidelines of the Chief Ministers' Conference on Internal Security in Delhi on April 16. He

hole golf course on the plot. The state government wants it for use as a sports facility. In 1988, then defence minister K.C. Pant said that he had no objection to the land being returned to the state government "on the condition that the Army should have overriding priority to use the helipad". The issue was raised again in 1999 by the Dhumal administration but the Army refused to hand over the land. The Chief Minister's anger also has to do with the Army's attempts to in-

a stadium. "Annandale is of paramount strategic significance for the Army which can never be ignored in favour of any game," it says. The ground is currently fenced off and guarded by the Army. On April 16, civilian protesters shouted slogans against the Army from the fringes of the historic dale. The demonstrators, mostly members of local sports associations, accused the Army of "illegally occupying" property they believe belongs to the

the Western Command flew in Mi-17 helicopters, special force commandos and infantry soldiers to showcase mock disaster management drills at Annandale. Brigadier A.K. Sharma, the officer supervising the exercise, reiterated the Army's viewpoint. "Annandale is, logistically, operationally and from the disaster management point of view, very critical," he said, describing the ground as a "mother helipad" essential for rapid deployment in times of crisis. 

delay in the inquiry of these allegations would further damage the institutional integrity of the police force in the state," the judge observed. Kumar's tenure as additional director general of police (provisioning and logistics) from May 18, 2010 to September 1, 2010, will now come under the scanner. He was initially made an accused on September 24, 2011, and will face trial for using forged documents, criminal conspiracy and providing false information. Kumar allegedly fabricated a document claiming to represent former Rajya Sabha MP M.A. Khan. The document made allegations against Reddy in an effort to jeopardise his chances of becoming the police chief. Reddy assumed charge on June 30, 2011, and will demit office on September 30, 2013. Kumar, who was overlooked along with four others for the job of the state's directorgeneral of police even at the time of Reddy's predecessor K. Aravinda Rao's appointment, is due to retire on March 31, 2014.
by Amarnath K. Menon

42

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

NEW

APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

NEW

