NET FLUX

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

tumblr tales

LOSTAND FOUND
It could be a Slumdog Millionaire reboot with a digital twist. Saroo Brierley lost his family and his way when he fell asleep on a train to Kolkata.Twenty-five years later, he found his kin again using Google Earth. After spending some time in a slum in Kolkata, Brierley, now 30, was adopted from an orphanage by an Australian couple.While at peace in his new home in Tasmania, he always wondered what happened to his old family. He decided to find a solution to the problem with the help of

A GEM FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

Feminist Fatale
On April 11,16 students at Duke University in the US launched `Who Needs Feminism?' , a Tumblr blog that encourages feminist and gender equality discussions.Featuring posters of women holding signs explaining why they need feminism,the messages ranged from personal--"I need feminism because my boyfriend shouldn't have to A POSTER feel ashamed for having longer hair than I do" ,to global--"I need feminism because it's 2012 and only 3 per cent of Fortune's 500 CEOs are women" . Over 27,000 people have viewed the page.

BRIERLEYWHEN HE WAS FIVE YEARS OLD (LEFT) AND NOW

simple mathematics and technology. By multiplying the time he was on the train with the speed of the train, he hit upon an area in Khandwa in Madhya Pradesh, which he thought could be his home. Using the application that captures satellite images, he matched images of Khandwa

with his memories."It was like being Superman.You are able to go over and take a photo mentally and ask,`Does this match?'And when you say, `No', you keep on going and going," he said in an interview with BBC.After finding out about his family, Brierley reunited with his mother.

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for dreamers, the health-conscious and those who are tidy. Download these apps on your smartphone. Rxmind Me reminds you of what medicines you should be taking on a regular basis. . Dream:ON will measure your dream patterns and play soundtracks that influence your dreams. . Taskforce will convert your email into tasks so that you can clear your inbox and stay organised.

web wow

Tweet Chills

R.L. Stine, author of the beloved Goosebumps series, tweeted a short story on Friday the 13th. Calling the spooky day his national holiday, Stine narrated The Brave Kid, the story of Michael who lived on 13 Endless Darkness Road. Readers know the author's penchant for the surprise twist, and this story has one, too.

viral video net ninjas

Power of Music

War of Words
Barack Obama and Republican candidate Mitt Romney are taking shots at each other on Twitter. Romney has often put down Obama on social networking sites, but the president has remained silent. Now that Romney has been unofficially declared the Republican candidate for the presidential race, Obama is hitting back.They are debating taxes, unemployment and women's rights. Romney first tweeted, saying that it is a fact that 92.3 per cent of women lost their jobs during Obama's term. In retaliation, Obama accused Romney of having millions of dollars in offshore tax havens like the Cayman Islands.

buzz feed

Catching the Mole
Online news site Gawker.com published a series of blogs in April from `The Fox Mole' , an unknown writer who worked at conservative news channel Fox News.The mole released a picture of veteran anchor Bill O'Reilly posing with a topless woman and called his office "a truly soul-crushing workplace" .Gawker later revealed the mole was Joe Muto,a producer at Fox for four years.Muto was fired immediately.
64
INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

A video of an old man's face lighting up on listening to music has been viewed by four million people. Henry, who has been staying at Cobble Hill Health Center, a nursing home in the US for a decade, was barely responsive and suffered from seizures. All that changed when he was given an iPod. "I'll be home for Christmas," Henry sings. The video is from a forthcoming documentary, Alive Inside, that follows a social worker who introduces iPods at a nursing home to investigate the power of music.

ROMNEY (LEFT) AND OBAMA

