Spe cial Report

THE KASKARS

MUMBAI'S FIRST FAMILYOF CRIME

Slum redevelopment. Rent collection.Loan recovery.Dawood Ibrahim's siblings control the Karachi-based don's expanding business interests in Mumbai, right under the noses of the police.

By Sandeep Unnithan and Kiran Tare

rom his four-room apartment atop Dambarwala building in Nagpada, Iqbal Kaskar, 46, can see the police headquarters at Crawford market over seven km away. It is a constant reminder of how close the law is. And how powerless it is to nail him. Since his deportation from Dubai in 2003, the police have tried to arrest Dawood Ibrahim's younger brother at least twice but failed. First, it was a 2007 case over the Sara-Sahara (no connection with the

F

IQBAL KASKAR 46
Dawood's brother served a four-year prison sentence between 2003 and 2007 for a murder. He is believed to have invested in real estate in Mira Road and Bhayandar as well as in central Mumbai.

DAWOOD IBRAHIM 56
He's now the Boss, a nickname to mark his transformation into a businessman. Police sources say he is worth Rs 75,000 crore and has invested in projects in Andheri and Jogeshwari in Mumbai.

HASEENA PARKAR 52 She managed Dawood's empire till brother Iqbal's return from UAE in 2003. She even ran a loan recovery business called Creative. She continues to collect rent from the Kaskar family properties.

Sahara Group) shopping malls in Crawford market. Police say Iqbal entered into a criminal conspiracy with Dawood and Chhota Shakeel to build the malls on land reserved for a civic school. They colluded with Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation officials. The sessions court acquitted Iqbal in June 2007 for lack of proof. Next, it was the midnight blaze that completely gutted the Sara-Sahara malls and parts of Manish market in November 2011. Police suspect sabotage. It was an attempt to clear the land, which cost Rs 200 crore, for redevelopment. Again, there was no evidence to nail prime suspect Iqbal Kaskar. There is plenty of evidence, however, to nail Dawood as the architect of the March 12, 1993, Mumbai serial bomb blasts that killed over 260 people. Pakistan continues to deny he is in Karachi. Dawood was once known as `Bhai' and `Mucchad'. Over the past five years, he has acquired a new nickname, Boss, evidently to mark his transformation into a legitimate businessman. He has an estimated net worth of Rs 75,000 crore with investments in shipping and airlines, among others, and business interests spread across Asia, Europe and Africa. "In the 1990s, the underworld took money out of the city through extortion. In the last few years, they have been pumping money into real estate and the stock market," says a senior officer from the Mumbai Police's Crime Branch. The police, as well as the Enforcement Directorate (ED), have been unable to prove the underworld link to funds flowing into building projects. Dawood's legacy continues to loom large over the metropolis. Nowhere does it cast a longer shadow than over Nagpada, an urban ghetto of four-storeyed building clusters. This is where the son of a police head constable from Ratnagiri district graduated to someone the US calls an "internationally designated global terrorist" in 2003. A 2010 US Congressional report warned that Dawood and his gang posed a direct threat to US interests in South Asia. The Kaskars live in a heav-

Photo Imaging: SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

NEW

Spe cial Report
PROXY PROPERTIES
In September 2001, the IT department put up on auction 11 benami properties of Dawood Ibrahim. They were confiscated under the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act 1976. A July 14, 1998, order said they were "illegally acquired properties of Dawood Ibrahim Sheikh and liable to be forfeited..." Only a building at Jayraj Bhai Lane was sold to a Delhi-based lawyer for Rs 2.5 lakh. A few are sealed while tenants occupy the rest. Rajgara Mansion, Bibi Jann Path, Mandvi 4,109 99/101, Ghaswala Lane, Temkar Street 2,832 sq

THE KASKARS LIVE IN THE HEART OF MUMBAI

(Left) Iqbal Kaskar's apartment atop Dambarwala building in Nagpada; Gordon Hall, where Haseena Parkar lives

sq ft Rs 24.65 cr*
Raunaq Hotel, Pakmodia Street

ft Rs 17 cr
Mohammed Mansion, Mazgaon 13,343 sq ft

"The Kaskar family does not need to work," says a small-time Nagpada businessman close to the family. "They own property worth several hundred crores," he says. The income tax department has listed several properties which they say are benami (see Proxy Properties). After the 1992-93 riots, the department attached 11 alleged benami properties of Dawood. No buyers attended a September 2001 auction announced by the IT department in Colaba. "We assured police protection to potential buyers. We waited the whole day but few came forward," says a police officer. Only one buyer, a Delhi-based lawyer

Konkani-Muslim community. It was an arranged marriage. Tragedy struck less than a decade later. Parkar was gunned down by Arun Gawli's shooter, Shailesh Haldankar, in 1992 near J.J. Hospital. Gawli's stronghold, Dagdi Chawl, lay just two km east of Nagpada. Haldankar and other gang members entered Nagpada to carry out the hit. The don vowed vengeance. Twentyfour `D company' gangsters broke into the hospital and gunned down Haldankar with an AK-47 in
SARA MALLWAS GUTTED IN A FIRE IN NOVEMBER 26, 2011. IT HAS NOT BEEN REBUILT.

775 sq ft Rs 4.65 cr
Dambarwala Building, Pakmodia Street 8,595

Rs 80 cr 80.50 lakh
Gharib Nawaz Guest House, Nagpada Rs Parker Mansion, Nagpada

sq ft Rs 51.57 cr
Unnamed Building at Yakub Street 1,610 sq ft

Rs 9.66 cr
Umera Engineering Works, Tardeo

6,992 sq ft Rs 41.95 cr
22, Temkar Street 3,792

sq ft

144 sq ft Rs 86 lakh

Rs 22.75 cr
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

*Estimates by three real estate agents

ily guarded bungalow complex in Karachi's posh Clifton enclave. The rump of the family, younger brother Iqbal and sister Haseena, live down the infamy of their surname in the don's nursery, Nagpada. Iqbal has a little fortress atop a grey and yellow building on Pakmodia Street, a congested bylane that runs parallel to a 2.4 kmlong flyover snaking over the busy Mohammed Ali Road. An unshaven potbellied bodyguard with a shirt hanging loose over his trousers sits on a metal chair outside the building, cautiously watching passersby. A white domed CCTV camera fitted above the narrow staircase monitors the street. Intruders into the ghetto attract instant attention. Photographers have been beaten up and have had their cameras snatched away. Rival gangs breached this stronghold on May 17, 2011, when Chhota Rajan gunmen shot and killed Iqbal's

driver Arif Syed Abu Bukha. Iqbal now stays indoors, watching Hollywood action films and reality TV shows. When he must step out, he slips into a white kurta-pyjama, takes the backdoor and flags down a taxi. Iqbal retains the Kaskars' obsession with Bollywood. He has connections with the film world through a gangster-turned-film producer. Two of Bollywood's biggest stars still keep in touch with him using predecided aliases like `Salim' to identify themselves. Iqbal is believed to have invested in real estate in the distant suburbs of Mira Road and Bhayandar as well as around central Mumbai. Iqbal's brother-in-law Zanzeb Khan alias Guddu Pathan, 43, is believed to run Dawood's real estate business. "Zanzeb invests Dawood's money in his legitimate real estate business. He ensures Iqbal stays away from the limelight," says a police informer. The

grandson of late gangster Karim Lala, Zanzeb's sister-in-law Rizwana is married to Iqbal. An inspector from Nagpada Police Station confirms that Dawood has invested a lot of money in slum rehabilitation projects in Andheri and Jogeshwari areas of Mumbai. "Finding the money trail is ED's responsibility. We take care of law and order in our area," he says. Most of the Kaskars fled Mumbai after the 1993 blasts, never to return. Iqbal was deported in 2003 by the UAE government. He stood trial for the 1998 murder of a Customs Department informer, Ravindra Babulal Singh. Iqbal and his elder brother Noora were the alleged conspirators in the killing. Mumbai police say they brought Iqbal back but he maintains that he came on his own after his UAE visa expired. Insiders say his return had much to do with Dawood's need to

get a family man to get a grip on his business in Mumbai. Iqbal served a four-year prison sentence between 2003 and 2007 and was back in the thick of things after that. Police say Iqbal's return partly had to do with Dawood's real estate empire now valued at over Rs 250 crore (see box: Proxy Properties) left behind in the care of sister Haseena. A burst of construction over the past decade has led to the gentrification of lowbrow central Mumbai, an underworld stronghold. Chawls and red light areas are being demolished to make way for 30-storey skyscrapers. Land prices are now over Rs 60,000 per sq ft. The worth of the Kaskar estate continues to increase.

Ajay Shrivastava, turned up. He bought Dawood's building at Jayraj Bhai Lane for Rs 2.5 lakh. Haseena, however, filed a stay against his takeover in 2003. The case was finally decided in Shrivastava's favour in March 2011. Haseena lives in Gordon Hall, an eight-storeyed building less than a kilometre north of Pakmodia Street. Black tinted glasses shield the twin flats converted into a single dwelling unit on the building's first floor. A CCTV and an iron grille greet visitors. Till Iqbal's return, the empire was managed by Haseena aapa (elder sister) as she is called. A school dropout, she married her brother's aide Ibrahim Ismail Parkar, a tall, well-built gangster from the same

POLICE SAY IQBAL'S RETURN PARTLY HAD TO DO WITH DAWOOD'S EMPIRE, NOW VALUED AT OVER RS 250 CRORE. IT WAS LEFT IN THE CARE OF SISTER HASEENA.

September 1992. Two police constables, too, died in the crossfire. The sensational shootout was the start of the gang wars of the 1990s. Temporarily eclipsed by the blasts of 1993, the war continued through the 1990s. Members of the Gawli, Amar Naik, Abu Salem and Rajan gangs battled for turf, influence and a slice of the booming real estate and film business. Haseena's descent into the underworld allegedly began with small dispute settlements. She held court at her firstfloor flat in Nagpada's poshest address, Gordon Hall, a complex built in the early 1980s. She mediated between builders and businessmen and even ran a loan recovery business called Creative. She is believed to maintain cordial relations with Dawood's erstwhile aide-turneddeadly foe Rajan and his wife Sujata Nikalje. The Southeast Asia-based gangster still sends her a rakhi every

36

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

37

NEW

NEW

Spe cial Report

THE KASKARS

ISLANDS OF INFLUENCE
GHATKOPAR KURLA BANDRA CHEMBUR

Mumbai's dons have carved the city into their respective territories of dominance CHHOTARAJAN
The Southeast Asiabased don controls real estate deals and extortion rackets around Chembur. Wife Sujata was held in a case in 2005 but let off in 2007.

MANKHURD PAREL ANTOPHILL DADAR CHINCHPOKLI BYCULLA NAGPADA GRANTROAD

ARUN GAWLI
In jail for murder, he controls labour unions and real estate businesses around Dagdi Chawl. His daughter Geeta and sister-in-law are corporators.

DAWOOD IBRAHIM
CHURCHGATE The 56-year-old controls the area south of Nagpada through Chhota Shakeel. He is involved in dispute settlement, protection money and real estate.
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

CUFFE PARADE

year. But the fear of death still hangs over her. Haseena keeps a small automatic pistol in her purse. Iqbal's release from jail coincided with Haseena's appearance on the police radar. In April 2007, a builder, Vinod Avlani, filed a police complaint accusing her of threatening him over a realty deal gone sour. The police filed a case against Haseena. The metropolitan court issued an arrest warrant. She was a step ahead. Haseena made a dramatic appearance in the sessions court in May 2007, leading an entourage of burqa-clad women to claim anticipatory bail. She could be identified only when she signed on the antic-

ipatory bail application, lifting her burqa for a split second before the judge. She was granted bail. The case continues in the sessions court. Haseena's lawyer Shyam Keswani, who has known her for seven years, describes her as a "God-fearing woman who does not interfere in her brothers' affairs". "She has suffered a lot in life. After her husband's death, her son Danish died in a road accident in 2006 near Alibag. She stays close to the Nagpada Police Station. The police have her phone number and address. What have they got against her so far? Nothing!" he says. Keswani denies that Haseena runs Dawood's real estate

DAWOOD'S AIDE-TURNED-DEADLY FOE RAJAN SENDS HASEENA A RAKHI EVERY YEAR. BUT SHE STILL KEEPS A SMALL AUTOMATIC PISTOL IN HER PURSE.
38
INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

business. "She is a school dropout. How can she run Dawood's business? There has been no police case against her in the past few years. She gets rent from her tenants. Why would she live in Nagpada if she had lots of money?" Keswani plans to move the metropolitan court to get her discharged from the 2007 case. While Haseena and Iqbal milk the Dawood family surname, Zubair Khan, 34, is uncomfortable with it. He married Haseena's daughter Sana in 2005. The TV journalist-turned-filmmaker has his first film ready for release. Lakeer ke Fakeer is about three smalltime hoodlums from Nagpada. Zubair skips family functions and has not spoken to his mother-in-law Haseena since his marriage, an arranged one. "I married Sana, not her family," he says of their blood-soaked legacy. "Mumbai today is a bit like the 1970s when dons like Haji Mastan, Karim Lala and Varadarajan Mudaliar carved their areas of influence," says an associate of Dawood's lieutenant Chhota Shakeel. "The gangs stay in their territories. There is no violence anymore because everyone--politicians, builders, police and the underworld--makes money," he says. Insiders whisper that the Kaskars still have connections in the Mumbai Police. Iqbal was encouraged to move back to Mumbai by Aslam Momin, a former police inspector with the Crime Branch who was summarily dismissed from his job in 2005 after the police recorded incriminating conversations between him and Iqbal. Keswani claims the brother-sister duo is targeted because the police cannot get Dawood: "Dawood is not very clean but why did the police not get evidence against him?" Senior Crime Branch officers say Dawood's extradition is now a political matter, far beyond the pale of the Mumbai Police. Another small-time businessman friend of Iqbal claims the police just look the other way. "They told us: Do what you want to, but just ensure there's no shooting. If shots are fired, then we will be forced to move in," he says. A tough act when Mumbai's first family of crime calls the shots. 

NEW

