Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

WHEN LIFE IS ASONG
Power is verse for the low-caste women of rural north India
By Urvashi Butalia

NEW RELEASES
PRINCES AND PAINTERS IN MUGHAL DELHI, 1707-1857
Edited byWilliam Dalrymple and Yuthika Sharma; Yale UniversityPress
Offshoot of an exhibition sponsored by Asia Society, this pictorial volume not only brings out the rich cultural panorama of Delhi and north India but highlights the relationship between late Mughal paintings and the early Raj works as well. Essays by, among others,William Dalrymple,Jean-Marie Lafont and Malini Roy on the various phases and personalities of Mughal era are an additional delight of this illustrated book.

UNEARTHING GENDER: FOLKSONGS OF NORTH INDIA
bySmita Tewari Jassal Duke UniversityPress Price: NOT LISTED Pages: 296 BETWEEN THE COVERS Tewari Jassal maps not onlythe songs, presenting a valuable archive of oral culture, but also looks at them differently,seeking out those sung bylow caste or Dalit women.

mita Tewari Jassal's mapping of women's songs in north India, more specifically in parts of Uttar Pradesh (in and around Jaunpur district and Varanasi) and Bihar (Chapra district), reveals an intricate and complex web of a subculture of questioning, resistance, mourning, loss, humour and the subtleties of relations of power that shape and surround the lives of women, more specifically low-caste women, in rural north India. Led into this rich terrain almost accidentally--having set off to research women's land rights--the author found nearly every discussion ending in a song session where even those who were silent would join in, enthusiastically, and if away from the presence of men, often without restraint. Women's songs are of course familiar terrain in much of India. Whether at weddings, or at moments of birth and death, or during the harvest and while sowing, women sing. Tewari Jassal here maps not only the songs, presenting a valuable archive of oral culture, but also looks at them differently, seeking out those sung by low caste or Dalit women, sung for themselves and at their high caste masters, offering both wisdom and irony, sometimes a bitter humour at the way relationships of power are played out, and sometimes an unrestrained expression of sexuality, and a realistic understanding of the forces that shape their lives--whe-

S

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

ther it is the loss of their claim to property via marriage, the prevalence of incest, the relationship with mothersin-law, being duped in love and romance (of particular interest here are the songs of elopement). Tewari Jassal divides this rich archive thematically, looking more closely at songs that describe the daily tasks women do, especially the grinding of grain (the jatsar or grinding song) and those that speak of family relationships, the power equations between natal and married families and their shifting equations in which it is the woman who often comes off the worst. Further chapters look at the songs women sing when performing a variety of agricultural tasks, songs of `unfreedom', or those that describe departures and losses, marriage and migration, the cultural universe of village women, the pervasiveness of patriarchies and more, creating what the author calls a sparkling sense of women's community. She describes a rich repertoire of songs that offer an alternative telling of the Ramayana, focusing on Sita and her life. The women's universe of songs are not only the stuff of real life, but if read with the seriousness that they deserve, also provide a complex, multilayered and nuanced map of the social, political and economic terrain of their lives and those of the communities in which they live. There is much that makes this book worth reading, not least its crossing and confounding of disciplinary boundaries and its offering of a different, a more poetic archive. 

THE OXFORD COMPANION TO PAKISTANI HISTORY
Edited byAyesha Jalal; Oxford (Karachi)
This encyclopaedic volume, edited by one of the foremost scholars of Pakistan,covers every aspect of the country's evolution beginning with the pre-Partition colonial period.

MUGHALARCHITECTURE AND GARDENS
ByGeorge Michell and Amit Pasricha; The Shoestring Publisher
Documents over 100 Mughal monuments and gardens in India,Pakistan and Bangladesh.

THE WAY ITWAS ONCE: FAIZ AHMED FAIZ: HIS LIFE, HIS POEMS
BiographybyAli Madeeh Hashmi, Poems translated byShoaib Hashmi; HarperCollins
Captures the spirit and flavour of the iconic Urdu poet's verses.

MUMBAI NOIR
Edited byAltaf Tyrewala; HarperCollins
Stories that depict the shadowy side of the metropolis.

IFTHE ELEPHANT FLIES: INDIA CONFRONTS THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
ByAntonio Armellini; Har-Anand
Aformer Italian ambassador to India on India Rising.

NOCTURNAL MUSIC IN THE LAND OFTHE SUFIS: UNHEARD PAKISTAN
ByJurgen Wasim Frembgen; Oxford (Karachi)
Afascinating journey into the world of mystic music in Pakistan.

68

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

