A SHOP SELLING CDS BLOWN UP BY EXTREMISTS NEAR PESHAWAR

THE TALIBAN WANTTO ENFORCE THE WAHHABI VERSION OF SHARIA which declares music as unIslamic.Three popular singers were shot dead in 2009.
The killings and death threats have prompted many artists to attempt a shift to devotional music or give up their musical careers altogether. Ali Haider of `Purani Jeans' fame made the transition from pop to devotional songs and qawwalis in 2009. Pop singer Junaid Jamshed, a sensation in Pakistan in the late 1980s and known to his fans as JJ, too gave up his musical career for "religious reasons". Female Pashtun singers Shakeela Naz, Farzana and Farida Khan too have abruptly ended their careers. A number of artists from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province have sought political asylum in Europe and the US. In 2008, Haroon Bacha, 39, a prominent Pashtun singer from the province, fled his homeland. He now performs for the Pakistani-American community in New York. Film shoots and music concerts have ground to a halt in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. The Taliban have destroyed as many as 600 music and CD shops in the area over the past five years. Authorities say they are doing all they can to encourage music. "We want to defeat terrorism through music and art. We have built a 600-seater Nishtar Hall for cultural activities," Mian Iftikhar Hussain, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa culture minister, told INDIA TODAY. As if the situation in the restive frontier province wasn't enough, music is dying in the heart of Pakistan. Lawmakers in Punjab province passed a controversial bill on January 24 , 2012, which imposed a ban on musical concerts in educational institutions. It's no surprise that Pakistan has not produced a single new musical star since 2004. by Qaswar Abbas

Nei ghbours

PAKISTAN
AP PHOTO

IF MUSIC BE THE FOOD OF DEATH...
Threats prompt artists to flee Pakistan, switch to devotional music or give up their careers
o Mina Gul, 33, from Abbottabad, a Pashto language singer, music was life. But her life itself was under threat from forces of terror. She quit singing in February after getting threatening letters. "I bowed down to the Taliban. I don't want be killed and humiliated like Shabana of Swat," Gul told INDIA TODAY, referring to the 25-year-old Pashtun singer and mujra dancer who was gunned down and whose body was left hanging from an electric pole by Taliban fighters in January 2009. The Pashtun entertainment industry, with its base in Peshawar and an outpost in Swat valley, was a flourishing business until Tehreek-e-Taliban

T

Pakistan (TTP) reared its head in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa region in 2007. Over two-thirds of the population is Pashtun, an ethnic group that straddles the Pakistan-Afghan border. They provide the main support for the Taliban, who want to enforce the Wahhabi version of Sharia, which declares music as unIslamic. TTP has used a combination of death threats, killings and violence to muffle the entertainment industry over the years. Four months after Shabana's death, a local singer, Ghani Dad, was gunned down in Swat. Another woman Pashtun singer, Ayman Udas, met the same tragic end at her Peshawar home in 2009.

NEW

APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

