Na tion ANDHRAPRADESH

SEX,CDS & ASTARLET'S DIARY
Tara's arrest blows the lid off a sex and extortion racket targeting top policemen and politicians
By Amarnath K. Menon

LEGISLATION

eldom has a starlet left tongues wagging as much as Tara Chowdary, 35, a former small-time actor in Tollywood and an alleged prostitution ringleader. In raids at her home on April 10, Hyderabad Police has recovered visiting cards, spy cameras, sexually explicit video and audio clips as well as a diary. The seizures reveal records of six MPs, 18 MLAs, influential politicians, eight police officers including a retired Additional Director General of Police (ADGP), 20 businessmen--some from the film industry--as well as a number of rich students. Chowdary has, for the past seven years, allegedly been running a sex, blackmail and extortion racket. Police investigations reveal that Chowdary and her husband R. Durga Prasad, 28, not only provided girls to the high-profile clients but also recorded phone conversations and videos to extort money. The police have called in forensic experts to verify the recordings and have also launched a hunt to arrest her recording assistant. Police say more than 90 video CDs of clients with Chowdary and other sex workers, supplied by her, were recovered during the raids. But this is not all. Chowdary told a local court on April 11 that Assistant Commissioner of Police (Banjara Hills) E. Shanker Reddy propositioned her after she was taken into police custody between April 8 and 11. She also alleged that Reddy ordered a woman constable to assault her after she refused. She claims that the police have not only foisted a false case on her but also made extortion calls to

S

CHOWDARY BEING TAKEN INTO CUSTODY IN HYDERABAD

other people in contact with her, threatening to implicate them. Chowdary claims the CDs were created by the police to besmirch her reputation. On March 31, Marepalli Lakshmi, 20, from Visakhapatnam, made charges of sexual exploitation against Chowdary on local channel HMTV. The police then registered a complaint and arrested her. Police say Chowdary lured girls by offering them film roles but instead forced them into prostitution. She will be in judicial custody till April 27. "Chowdary herself approached us some years ago to rescue her from the clutches of another woman running a sex racket. We managed to free her then," says women's rights activist Jaya Vindhyala. Till now, Chowdary has managed minor roles in five Telugu films-- Kalisochchina Adrushtam, Racket, Priyasakhi, Love Ticket and Maska. She developed contacts not just in Tollywood but also among politicians and officials. She allegedly built a call girl network extending to Bangalore, Chennai and Mumbai, besides Guntur and Chilakaluripet in Andhra Pradesh. Preliminary investigations have revealed that her list of victims also includes an influential businessman from the ruling Congress in the state and a former mayor of Guntur. The police are also probing allegations that she blackmailed a Congress MP. Chowdary reportedly used the extortion money for financing films and is all set to produce an untitled Telugu movie soon. Chowdary, who is from Prakasam district and whose real name is Ravilla Rajeshwari, was first arrested by the Banjara Hills police from a brothel in 2005. She subsequently drew media attention in 2010 by filing a complaint against a sub-inspector in Guntur alleging that the policeman had tried to rape her maid. The raids have provided fresh material to the police to find out the truth. 

HOUSE ARREST
The Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill
The Bill aims to set new standards of probity in the judiciary.Anyone can make a complaint against a judge to an Oversight Committee on grounds of `misbehaviour' . Hurdles Oversight Committee has nonjudicial members which might impinge on the independence of the judiciary. BJP may oppose it in the Rajya Sabha over composition of the investigative committee. Status Not yet passed by the Rajya Sabha.

With UPA in a minority in Rajya Sabha, cynical allies and aggressive Opposition are giving the Government a tough time in passing key bills
The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill
The Bill seeks to institute an anti-corruption ombudsman to investigate and prosecute cases of corruption. The Lokpal can recommend disciplinary action and file a case if it finds that an offence has been committed. Hurdles The civil society movement led by Anna Hazare has called the Bill toothless. BJP and other Opposition parties want an independent investigative agency which should have some administrative relationship with the Lokpal. Status The Bill was brought in the Rajya Sabha but deferred after protests.

The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill
The Bill seeks to give statutory powers to the interim authority set up in 2003. It also alters the name of the New Pension System to National Pension System. Subscribers will choose fund managers and schemes to manage their pension wealth.The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on March 24, 2011. Hurdles Investment risk is entirely borne by employees.Though BJP supports the Bill, the Left parties and key ally Trinamool Congress oppose it as anti-workers. Status Not yet passed by the Rajya Sabha.

The Mines and Mineral Development and Regulation Bill
The Bill amends the Mines Act, 1952, which regulates the operation of mines and provides a mechanism for the supervision and safety of miners. It amends the definition of "owner" of a mine from immediate occupier to a person having "ultimate control"over the affairs of the mine. Hurdles The Bill has been brought in focus after scams in the mining sector. Inter-ministerial disputes are coming in the way. Status Standing Committee to submit report in May.

The Education Tribunals Bill
The Bill seeks to set up educational tribunals to expedite adjudication of disputes in the education sector.The Bill was piloted by the Human Resource Development Ministry in the Rajya Sabha. Hurdles The Bill faces resistance from the Opposition parties and even within the Congress. Only the chairperson of the state tribunals is a judicial member.This provision creates the possibility of cases being heard without a judicial member. Status The Bill was brought in the Rajya Sabha but deferred after protests.

National Food Security Bill
The Bill specifies that up to 75 per cent of the rural population and 50 per cent of the urban population shall be entitled to foodgrain. In the case of non-supply of foodgrain or meals to entitled persons, they will get a food security allowance. Hurdles There is a difference of opinion over identifying the people entitled for allowance.The chief ministers of Kerala and Tamil Nadu have opposed it, saying it would disrupt an effective Public Distribution System already in place in those states. Status Standing Committee to by Shafi Rahman submit report.

44

A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

NEW

NEW

