GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

PUTTING A BRAKE
he minute Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav decided to switch to the humble Ambassador from the flashy Prado for official use, his party faithful praised his austerity. Samajwadi Party spokesman Rajendra Chaudhary issued a statement hailing Akhilesh as the leader of common people and calling Mayawati a spendthrift. That was until the embarrassing truth was discovered: That the six Prado SUVs in the Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister's motorcade were bought by Mulayam Singh Yadav in 2006 when he was in office. The Prado costs Rs 28 lakh and the Ambassador is Rs 8 lakh.

T

A.PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

HOME TUITION
ndhra Pradesh Panchayati Raj Minister K. Jana Reddy, 66, hopes to unseat N. Kiran Kumar Reddy as chief minister after elections to a Lok Sabha and 18 Assembly constituencies, likely to be held by midJune, where the Congress is expected to lose. He's already started preparations, taking English and Hindi lessons at home to converse with national leaders in his potential new role. Sadasiva Sharma, 53, a journalist, spends over an hour with him every morning when he is in Hyderabad, teaching him the nuances. The six-time MLA started out as a TDP activist before switching over to the Congress in 1988. Will he finally get lucky?
REDDY

DHUMAL (LEFT) WITH RUDYAND THAKUR

A

PTI

DIFFERENT PITCH

H

e may not be scoring in the Uttar Pradesh battlefield but cricketerturned-MP Mohammed Azharuddin scored a century in a T20 match between Indian MPs and a team of visiting British MPs on April 13. The

match was organised by BJP MP Anurag Thakur at the stadium he has built in his hometown Dharamshala. While Thakur was the captain, other MPs who took the field included Rajiv Pratap Rudy, Kuldeep Bishnoi, Dushyant Singh and Kalikesh Singh Deo. The Indian team won, scoring 226, while the visitors could score only 170 for nine wickets. Now, Thakur plans to invite his neighbours in South Asia for what is emerging as the Indian Politicians League.

ON A SONG

A
A.PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

ll it took was a jaadu ki jhappi from Deputy Chief Minister Sukhbir Badal to bring Punjab's best known Sufi singer Hans Raj Hans back to the Akali Dal. Dejected after losing the 2009 Lok Sabha election from Jalandhar as an Akali Dal nominee, he had relocated to Mumbai two years ago. Now, Sukhbir has brought him back to politics by appointing him vice-president and a member of

the party's apex political affairs committee."What can I say? Sukhbirji hugged me and reminded me of the 3.85 lakh people who had voted for me," says the singer. Ah. Such harmony.
HANS

BADAL

12

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

GLASS HOUSE
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com AMIT KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

CRITICAL APPRECIATION
n event on April 14 to celebrate a book of essays in honour of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh turned funereal as speaker after speaker mourned the sorry state of the Indian economy. In a direct affront to the chief guest, Isher Judge Ahluwalia, the editor of the book and wife of Singh's right hand man Montek, pointed a finger at the deteriorating macroeconomic environment and downturn in investment. Isher's comments emboldened the normally reticent RBI Governor D. Subbarao to criticise the Government's policies right under the nose of his ultimate boss, the Prime Minister. Singh maintained his signature look of total silence.
AHLUWALIA (LEFT) WITH SINGH

HIT LIST
oliticians, official and unofficial, still wield some influence, at least on Twitter. BurstonMarsteller, a global PR firm, drew up a list of Top 10 in G20 countries. India's list includes Team Anna member Kiran Bedi, Mamata's spokesman Derek O'Brien, Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh, Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi, Kerala MP Shashi Tharoor,Janata Party chief Subramanian Swamy and Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha Sushma Swaraj.The power was measured by Klout, a tool that analyses engagement across social networks.

A

P

SELJA

HOODA

OPEN SEASON
hat Union Culture Minister Kumari Selja and Bhupinder Singh Hooda don't get along is no secret. On April 13, Selja snubbed the Haryana Chief Minister yet again while hosting a cultural extravaganza, Maati Ke Rang, at Panchkula to mark the silver jubilee of India's zonal cultural centres. Not only was Hooda's name dropped from the invitation cards for the mega event in his own state, his photograph, too, was removed from publicity hoardings. Then, even as the chief guests--Congress President Sonia Gandhi and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh--looked on approvingly, Selja skipped mentioning the unsmiling Hooda's name while formally welcoming the invitees.

T

MAMATA

A HOUSE FOR MR SIDDIQUI

CO R N E R

B

SP General Secretary Naseemuddin Siddiqui would

rather live next door to Mayawati than wife Husna, an MLC. But the Uttar Pradesh government has come in the way. Siddiqui, who is leader of Opposition in the Legislative Council, was keen on the house next to Mayawati's official home at 13, Mall Avenue in Lucknow. But his request was turned down. Now the government has given him the next best option--a flat in Bahukhandi building, next door to the one allotted to his wife.

She doesn't like humour but the world has discovered the laughs in her. Here are some Mamata Banerjee jokes:

Why did Mamata Banerjee cross the road? To see if the chicken was making fun of her. Dear Mamata, Normally, the cartoonist tries to capture the subject. Not vice versa. Mamata declares The Dark Knight tax-free. Because The Joker dies. Mamata Banerjee can take a joke.And put it in jail.

PTI

"If I arrested everyone who made fun of me or a cartoon of me, I would run out of prison space." "Whenever I start feeling too arrogant about myself, I always take a trip to America. The immigration guys kicked the star out of stardom."
SHAH RUKH KHAN Actor
KHAN
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

OMAR ABDULLAH Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister

"An army of deer led by a lion is to be feared more than an army of lions led by a deer."
GENERAL V.K. SINGH Army Chief

with ASHISH MISRA, ASIT JOLLY, AMARNATH K. MENON, BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA, PRIYA SAHGAL, DHIRAJ NAYYAR

14

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

