Na tion CUSTODIALDEATHS
AP PHOTO

Policemen are killers in khaki
Custodial deaths are on the rise across the country, but little has been done to improve the system
By Amitabh Srivastava
MANOJ YADAV'S WIDOW CRIES BESIDE HIS BODY, IN BIHAR'S NAWADA DISTRICT

REENA DEVI, Manoj Yadav's widow

anoj Yadav, 28, was crying when his father Dayanand Yadav met him in the lockup of Sadar police station in Bihar's Nawada district on January 14. The police torture had left the tube-well mechanic in excruciating pain. He could not even eat the home-cooked food his father had brought. The next day, Manoj's body was found in a barren field, sprawled in the dust, saliva oozing from his gaping mouth. This was the second time the police had arrested Manoj, who had no criminal record. In November 2011, he was arrested for using a murdered businessman's mobile phone, which he had found abandoned in the streets. The police released him after interrogation when he was found innocent. But with pressure mounting to crack the murder case, the police picked up Manoj again on January 11. This time, the police thrashed him in an effort to make him talk, killing him in the end. His widow Reena Devi, a 25-year-old mother of three children, says, "My husband was naive to have used a lost mobile phone and paid with his life for the mistake. How do we survive now?" The incident sparked off a furore, forcing the police to file an FIR against five policemen. Superintendent of Police, Nawada, Surendra Lal Das claims Manoj was never arrested, but he fails to explain why, in that case, was the FIR lodged against the policemen.

M

ASHOK PRIYADARSHI

officer, explaining the discrepancy. The NCRB report appears a deliberate attempt to conceal police torture. Sample this: The NCRB table on reasons of custodial deaths makes no mention of torture in lock-up. Instead, it has entries such as death during hospitalisation, assault by other criminals, death during mob attacks/riots, suicide or while escaping from custody. Another NCRB table of human rights violations by the police shows only one incident of police torture in the entire country in 2010, the same year when NHRC had recorded 1,321 custodial deaths. In many cases, the police claim the victim committed "suicide". In September 2011, Dashrathji Thakor, 37, hanged himself in Gujarat's Virangam police station using his shoelaces within three hours of his arrest in an abduction case. On January 13, Pudiyami Mada, a suspected Naxal, "committed suicide" at the Sukma police station in Dantewada, Chhattisgarh. Medical reports, however, confirmed abrasions on his private parts. There are hardly any deterrents. Complaints alleging lock-up executions filed by victims' relatives or human rights groups have secured only a negligible number of convictions for extra-judicial killings. The November 2011 verdict of the Supreme Court, which upheld the life term awarded to four former Punjab police officers, is an eye-opener. Deputy Superintendent of Police Jaspal Singh,

ARRESTED ITALIAN MARINES IN KOCHI

KERALA

Pizza on a Platter
Italian marines get special treatment in jail
ven as Italy argues in courts that the two Italian marines arrested in connection with the killing of two Indian fishermen be tried under international law, it is making every possible effort to make their life easy inside the central prison in Thiruvananthapuram. The marines onboard Italian merchant vessel Enrica Lexie were arrested after they allegedly shot dead the fishermen off the Kerala coast on February 15 mistaking them to be pirates. On March 5, the chief judicial magistrate of Kollam remanded the two to judicial custody till April 4. Italy had requested that the marines be allowed to have lunch with its defence minister. The government turned down the request, saying the law does not permit it. Earlier attempts by Italian External Affairs Minister Stefan de Mistura to shift the marines to a guesthouse were also turned down. Recently, the marines' request for a television set, too, was rejected. However, the marines have been granted other privileges in the prison on the direction of the court, including exclusive cell, Italian food, special medical attention as well as an hour-long interaction with visitors everyday. by M.G. Radhakrishnan

E

The figure of custodial death cases registered by the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) between April 2010 and March 31, 2011, is a shocking 1,574--four deaths a day. The figure includes both those in police custody and judicial custody. Uttar Pradesh tops the list with 331 deaths, followed by Bihar (136) and Maharashtra (130). These three states alone account for 37 per cent of total custodial deaths in the country. A suspect is kept in lock-up before being produced in court and does not have the legal protection accorded to

1,574
44

custodial deaths were reported in 2010-2011. It rose from 1,324 in 2009-2010.

those under judicial custody or jail. The law mandates that the arrested person cannot be detained for more than 24 hours, but the period before the police record the time of arrest is not counted. Police custody is recorded only if the court grants it, not when an accused is picked up, the reason why the Nawada police could disown Manoj's arrest. Justice (retd) S.N. Jha, chairman of the Bihar Human Rights Commission, says: "The police are supposed to protect human rights. But, there is hardly any protection when cops violate the law. Often, they don't produce an accused before a court within 24 hours of making an arrest. Lock-ups are outside public view, and nobody knows what happens there." The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)

UP, Bihar and Maharashtra alone account for 37% of custodial deaths across the country.
annual report acknowledges 1,321 cases of custodial deaths between April 2010 and December 2010, according to NHRC. So far, the NHRC'S investigation division has probed 88 police custody deaths, says the report. But the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), an MHA body considered to provide the most authoritative database of crime in the country, has recorded only 72 deaths in police custody. "Police report all custodial deaths to NHRC, therefore the MHA report has a higher figure. Only a few cases are forwarded to NCRB," says a senior IPS Head Constable Prithpal Singh and Sub-Inspectors Satnam Singh and Jasbir Singh were convicted for kidnapping and killing human rights activist Jaswant Singh Khalra in 1995. In the last decade, Maharashtra has recorded 250 deaths in police custody, followed by Uttar Pradesh (174), Gujarat (134) and Andhra Pradesh (109). But these figures relate only to those cases reported to the NHRC. Increased awareness about human rights has brought the issue of custodial deaths to the centre of debates. But the focus has brought little improvement in the system. 

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

APRIL 9, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

