Mail

Trapped
MARCH 26, 2012

A single Budget cannot solve the most serious problems of the Indian economy. A sustained reform effort is necessary to lift India to 10 per cent growth path.

A S H AY A N A N D ,

Budget Blues
The lacklustre Budget presented by UPA Government lacks priority and is devoid of sustained continuity in the direction of reforms ("Trapped", March 26). Political partners like the Trinamool Congress must not be allowed to overtly dominate the functioning of the Government. The Congress-led UPA Government must not end up as a faceless entity.
K.V. RAGHURAM, Kerala

Walking into a Brighter Future
Every Indian needs to be proud of not only the children of the slain Khalistani militants but the organisations or trusts who have been running these orphanages who have sheltered and raised these hapless orphaned kids ("Children of Khalistan", March 26). The fact that is most pertinent to note is the apparent absence of hatred and spite. This, perhaps, is a reflection of their acceptance that the militant path undertaken by their misled fathers was not appropriate.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

Though this Budget for 2012-13 has been welcomed by the business community, yet there are many shortfalls. Funds paucity ought to be met through recall of black money stashed abroad. There has to be a strong co-ordination among Centre and the states.

The orphanages seem to have imparted the right values and inspired the children to pursue education to realise their professional ambitions. The Children of Khalistan do not seem to hold any rancour against the government.
RAJNEESH BATRA, Delhi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

``

``

A high economic growth rate and a prosperous economy will involve burying internal differences, taking sound policy decisions and getting over the tendency of appeasement of all.
Delhi

ANIL DAYAL

Gujarat's growth model should be emulated by the entire country. Fiscal deficit has to be brought under control. The country must achieve a GDP growth rate of at least 8 per cent in the coming year.
SHOBHA DAS, Kolkata

I feel this year's Budget is one of the worst budgets ever. The finance minister has directly imposed 1 per cent excise duty on all types of jewellery, branded or unbranded. This is definitely going to increase gold prices further, thus creating more pressure on the middle-class population of India already reeling under inflation caused by the wrong financial policies of UPA 2. About 9 crore people, who are directly or indirectly involved with the jewellery

Mail
trade, are going to be affected by this Budget. India's population will definitely keep the bad decisions in mind while voting for the Lok Sabha elections in 2014.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

35
projects is overdue from the time Mamata was at the helm of Railways' affairs. Unfortunately, though she was in full knowledge of the Railways' needs, for the sake of her political popularity she chose to look away from the reality.
DIPTI RAWAT, Hyderabad

best efforts to salvage the Government's image must be executed at the earliest.
TANIA SINGH, Chandigarh

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
M AY 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

The Indian economy has been going off-track due to overall recession, rising crude oil prices, high interest rates, lack of power supply to the manufacturing units, procedural delays in proposed projects, lack of skilled labour, etc. We need to remove administrative delays in sanctioning of new units, make distribution of mining rights on merit basis and raise subsidies on export-oriented units to compete with China. Concrete reforms in policy formulation are inevitable for the fast-track growth of the country.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

The Trinamool Congress is well within its right to oppose Dinesh Trivedi's laudable budget proposals. But what its opposition has exposed is Mamata's churlishness that she dresses up as populism and pro-people politics. One hopes UPA realises the danger of having such self-serving allies. As for Trivedi, we applaud his courage for presenting a budget that hasn't gone down well with his party.
K.S. JAYATHEERTHA, Bangalore

The rejection of Rahul Gandhi in the Assembly elections of 2012 shows the maturity of the voter. The voter of Uttar Pradesh realised that elections are won through a collective effort and not simply by name or charisma. Rahul might have promised the success of welfare schemes but the voter refrained from not looking at a distant guide.
VINIT DABUR, Kanpur

The People's Patriarch
l'm a people's Minister. Yes, I am. I am elected by the people to serve them. I am here to minister to their needs. That's in English; that's what Minister means, ministering to the needs of the underprivileged, the deprived, the janata. You know what janata means? It means people. And do you know who are the masters of the ministers --the people. And that's why I say I am a people's Minister. In Hindi, I am their sewak, not their master. I must identify with them." Raj Narain is a character straight out of bohemia. He accepts no norms. He sets his own standards and adheres to them--very strictly. For instance, he decides one day that he must grow a beard, that he will not shave: It is a protest against the treatment meted out to prisoners during the Emergency. So there he is with a long unkempt beard at the end of his jail term. He shaves it off with great gusto outside an ashram a few days after he is made a minister.Vindication. It is debatable whether his mentor, the late Dr Ram Manohar Lohia, would have approved of his eye-catching protests, or his strange apparel. He would, however, have been proud of Raj Narain's identification with the people. Dr Lohia was a total rebel; he was an intellectual giant who took great delight in debunking intellectuals.
by M.L. Kotru

Action Off the Pitch
Kerry Packer's famous words about day and night matches, "Big boys play at night", appears to have been misinterpreted by the present-day players ("Cricketers Bet Big on Sex", March 26). It looks like they have taken the game into their bedrooms.
KAMAL KUMAR, Kota

On the Wrong Track
The Railway Budget 2012 has taken an ugly turn ("In Sackcloth and Ashes", March 26). Mamata Banerjee acted in an autocratic manner without ever considering the dismal condition of the Railways. The system requires to be updated immediately for the sake of the common man. However, due to funds crunch, plans have not been fully implemented. Many railway projects are in cold storage due to funds crunch. Work on these

Looking Back
It is high time the Congress introspects and pinpoints the reasons for its fall from grace ("The Day After", March 26). Corruption, price rise and maladministration have to be drastically checked. Coalition partners must be made to see reason before they sabotage the alliance. Black money stashed in foreign banks must be recalled to develop the country faster. A general amnesty be granted to those who bring back the funds stashed abroad. The

Promises Unkept
The Karnataka bypoll manifesto of BJP reveals its hypocrisy. Its promises paint the party as great friends of the impoverished ("BJP Searches For New Agenda", March 26). A cursory glance at its performance as Opposition since 2004 would show that the policies followed by BJP have only increased the inequalities in society.
RAJNEESH BATRA, Delhi

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

RAJ NARAIN--NOT A SAHIB BUT PART OF EVERYBODY

APRIL 9, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

