BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

A CLOUD IN THE HALO
t is an uncomplicated requirement. To get the right ans- How honourable is it for an army chief to leak secret letwer, you have to ask the right question. This simple fact ters he has sent, in his official capacity, to the Prime often seems to escape the curious or even the querulous. Minister on military readiness? Did he discover that India In 2011 India's single-minded Army Chief V.K. Singh was "unprepared" only on March 12, when he sent his informed our high-minded Defence Minister A.K. Antony letter, because he wanted to embarrass a Government that that a brother-officer, Lieutenant-General Tejinder Singh, had denied further tenure? He is still wearing his uniform: who retired as head of defence intelligence agency, had Does he have any respect for it? It is in the nature of this variable animal called the offered him a bribe of Rs 14 crore. Tejinder Singh was senior enough to have been a candidate for army chief himself, human being to pay out the highest interest to self-interest. stark proof of spreading venality at the top of an institution- Honour is the abdication of self-interest to the larger good. ally honed pyramid. This was fish rotting from the head, not It is, consequently, the bedrock value of institutions like the mid-level grease shared with smooth arms dealers and oily defence forces, critical as they are to the integrity and stapoliticians. The army chief clearly had this bribery conver- bility of the land we call our motherland. Parliament also sation taped, possibly because he suspected what its con- considers honour a fundamental virtue. It is still the correct tents would be, and wanted a record. There was always form to address those who have taken the oath of office in sufficient basis for investigation in order to discover in Government as "Hon'ble Minister" (I don't know either why there is an apostrophe in the first word, but maybe no one which other directions this rot had travelled. Antony raised a shocked hand to a fevered brow. Then was ever certain about the accolade). Experience has, howthe moral minister and the martial chief decided to cover ever, shown that honour seems to have flexible norms. Shakespeare's Mark Antony taunted Brutus, the assassin of up this nasty episode in a blanket of silence. Julius Caesar, for losing the difference between honour and Why? Antony's official, weak and limp answer is that he did betrayal. (Our defence minister, incidentally, is named after not receive any written complaint from General Singh. But the Christian St Anthony, not the polytheist Roman general.) there was no written complaint in March 2012 either. This An old proverb bemoans that there is honour even among time around, the General spoke through the press, and thieves, evident in the protective pact of silence. We have reached a point in public life where the only more than once when his initial salvo failed to hit. Did Antony order a CBI enquiry because he suddenly became definition of culpable self-interest is theft and bribery. But interested in the truth or because he was unnerved by the betrayal of the code of honour, the parade of lies, deception and overreach can be as, if not more, slosh of muck beginning to swirl SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com damaging. General Singh is untainted around his feet in the middle of a by allegations of financial corruption. Parliament session? Ironically, a Perhaps this has led to an unconconfidential enquiry in 2011 would scious sense of superiority, enhanced have protected the image of the by the usual coterie of sycophants, armed forces. Has, then, the CBI been which persuades him that his camset up to play a charade? Antony arpaign of revenge is burnished by some gued that General Singh did not want moral horizon. If the damage he has the matter pursued. So what? The deinflicted were merely upon himself, it fence minister takes the decisions in would have been a sorry enough our democracy. It was his call. He sight. But he has also hurt India's chose to collude with the army chief in proudest institution, the armed the grey zone of silence. forces, and thereby the nation itself. It takes one side to smash a Antony has spent a lifetime maksilence. But why did General Singh ing a virtue of placidity. If you do nothdiscover his conscience this March ing except wring your hands, your after having put it into cold storage for hands are unlikely to get dirty. But a year? Was it because the Antony raised a shocked hand there are occasions when indecision Government refused to change his to a fevered brow. Then is a crime, and crime tends to seek date of birth and give him a 10-month the moral minister and the punishment. Antony has been extension? Would he have been such martial chief decided to cover stirred, but not yet shaken. A cloud a cheerleader for honesty if Governhas darkened the halo that was his ment had buckled before his selfup this nasty episode in a preferred headgear. And the weather promoting campaign, which he desblanket of silence. Why? has not cleared. cribed as a "question of honour"? 

I

APRIL 9, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

NEW

