Soc iety FUSION FOOD

MASALA MAFIA PASTA, ANYONE?
Schezwan sauce and melted mozzarella on grilled vada-pav. Samosa stuffed with chicken chowmein. Gulkand cheesecake. Grilled Fish on Dal. East meets West, on a plate.
he Indian palate recognises no boundaries, gastronomic or political. Urban India is gleefully infusing Italian pastas, Mexican enchiladas, cheesecakes and pizzas with the familiarity of a desi tadka. Local fare is getting that extra, albeit sometimes discordant, zing of a western or oriental tweak. Gourmet author Esther David, 67, first noticed the shift at weddings in the 1990s when multi-cuisine buffets became a means to showcase wealth. "I was surprised to see karela (bitter gourd) with a stuffing of tutti-fruity. It was the perfect example of fusion food," the foodie recalls. Around the same time, Baljit Singh, a young illegal immigrant who was deported from Germany, set up the Indo-German Dhaba along the ChandigarhLudhiana Road at Neelon and served a range of pastas to curious Punjabi travellers. He shut shop a decade later but the odd motorist still stops by to ask for Singh's zesty spaghetti. Priya, 37, and Abhay Jagat, 38, who run five cafes and fine dining restaurants in Chandigarh, believe fusion is inevitable in a rapidly shrinking world. Their Café Nomad is a meeting point for Italian (pastas and pizzas), Indian (cottage cheese and southern spices) and oriental (vegetables, soya and fish sauce). "The Oriental-Mediterranean combo jives with desi palates," says Abhay. There is an explosion of fusion foods on the streets of India. Evenings in Surat, Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Ludhiana, Chandigarh, Jaipur, Hyderabad, besides the metros, present an unbelievable culinary array crafted over long years. Itchy-feet Gujaratis have been tossing the definitive, pure vegetarian Jain pizza, Jain tacos and enchiladas in Ahmedabad's Law Garden and Ambawadi for more than three decades. Chowmein-stuffed samosas are a huge hit from Ludhiana to Ahmedabad. Dabelis (desi potato patty burgers) are universal staple for students everywhere. Thrilled with the new mood, top chefs are turning up never before delights like the distinctive Gulkand Cheesecake and Khubani ka Crème brûlée. Kolkata's Pradip Rozario serves local fish varieties--padda in an Indonesian sauce, deboned tangra in Thai curry and tiny mourola deep-fried and dipped into a Schezwan sauce. Chef Manu Mohindra, 39, of Under One Roof, a Delhi firm that sets up restaurants, cafes and food courts for private clients, says, "The gastronomic mix that first began in French cuisine is now the future here." Jagat agrees, pointing out that the desi palate has for long had the advantage of multiple cuisines, local as well as those brought by the succession of traders and invaders. Fusing food, he says, began long ago and it is now taking the form of a culinary genre of its own in India.
ANIL DAYAL KRISHNENDU HALDER

T

MINCED MEAT DOSA
This was India Coffee House's effort to bridge the north-south divide, 50 years back. The mutton dosa--dosa with spicy keema--is an acquired taste, but is coming of age in Bangalore and Chandigarh. Going by the demand of this dosa at The Empire, Bangalore, Hot Millions, Chandigarh, India Coffee Houses all over the country, one can easily tell the north and south are getting along very well.
DID YOU

KHUBANI KA CRÈME BRÛLÉE
The favourite sweet-tooth indulgence of the Dakani Nawabs is being refreshingly re-enacted. Hyderabad's age-old khubani (khurmani or apricot) ka meetha presented with a Parisian style brûlée or caramelised sugar crust. Available at The Park, Hyderabad, Nawab sahib would have loved this one.

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

DABELI
A spicy potato cutlet sandwiched in a bun and pepped up with tamarind, jaggery and mint chutney with anaardana and peanuts. Hugely popular street fare, rumoured to have been `invented' in the Kutchi port city of Mandvi in 1960. Dabeli, meaning `pressed', is a Kutchi burger in Mandvi, a bun-tikki in Amritsar, Ludhiana and Jalandhar, and simply a desi burger everywhere else.
DID YOU
The sugar-free Jamun Gelato is the highest selling monsoon flavour at Monica's, a popular Chandigarh cafe.

KNOW
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

The samosa has many foreign cousins:Fatayer in the Middle East; aloo pie in Trinidad and Tobago; pierogi in Poland and empanada in Spain.

CHAMOSA
A typical Indian crunchy, munchy samosa, but stuffed with chicken chowmein instead of the usual potato mash. Jay Sharma, 48, director of Gwalia Sweets in Ahmedabad, claims he fried the first chamosa five years ago, but there's no patent on street food. Indeed, from Ahmedabad to Ludhiana, Amritsar, Chandigarh, and Delhi, the chamosa is a hit everywhere. Time to export it to China?

KNOW

ANIL DAYAL

MASALA MAFIA PASTA
Penne, fusilli and spaghetti tempered with a generous tadka (chonk) with green chillies and the all-encompassing garam masala. It's 25-year-old restaurateur Ronak Singhi's special at Jalpaan, Hyderabad. The dish is served with a sauce prepared with mustard and cumin seeds and whole green chillies. Diners love the desi tadka to ordinarily bland pasta. But rumour has it that the Godfather isn't happy.

GRILLED FISH ON DAL
Between tossing in the wok and searing inside a wood-fired oven Chandigarh has taken fusion food into a whole new realm. Consider this: Fish a la Luxor--grilled sole on a bed of urad dal and cheese. These guys could teach the Italians a thing or two about good... no, great food. Try it at Café Nomad, Chandigarh.

TANDOORI CHICKEN SPINACH RICOTTA BURGER
Ricotta cheese, sliced tandoori chicken, spinach, all inside a burger served with lachcha pyaaz (red onion rings), garlic and chilly-tossed French fries. "To please guests who like their food masaaledaar (spicy)," says chef Anshuman Kumar, 25, the man who put it all together first. A fusion cuisine aficionado, Kumar of Deccan Pavilion at ITC Kakatiya in Hyderabad, is now thinking of Chinese Biryani. The TCSR Burger has the makings of becoming a truly international takeaway.

GOLGAPPA SHOTS
Feni puri in Goa or simply a very neat way to down vodka or tequila at bigfat Punjabi weddings. It is essentially the good old puchka, golgappa or pani puri but filled with alcohol. Delhi restaurateur Arjun Puri has finetuned the concept: "We mastered the art of fermenting vodka with Indian spices." Variations of the theme can be found at: Punjabi by Nature (Delhi); Park Plaza (Ludhiana); GW Marriot (Goa); and every true-blue Punjabi wedding.

KRISHNENDU HALDER

by Asit Jolly and Devika Chaturvedi

OCTOBER 13, 2008  INDIA TODAY

00

Soc iety

FUSION FOOD
KRISHNENDU HALDER

CHINESE BHEL & SCHEZWAN VADA PAV
Classic Maharashtrian bhel puri using chopsuey instead of puffed rice. Schezwan sauce and melted mozzarella on grilled vada-pav. It is certainly not fine dining but costs under Rs 50 and is "very, very popular" according to Mitesh Damani, 25, manager of The Vada Pav Factory, Hyderabad, who says "customers get to experience the best of both worlds".

ACHARI AND JALFREZI PIZZA
After travelling the world, true-blue Punjabis always come back to their favourite tandoori chicken. Pizza Hut in Chandigarh does roaring business with its current range of chicken tikka, jalfrezi and kadai chicken pizzas. There is even an achari version with jalapenos, sweet corn, red bell pepper, cheese and pickleflavoured pieces of chicken.

GULKAND CHEESECAKE
Chef Thimma Reddy, 32, says "flavours need to blend seamlessly" in fusion cuisine. Indeed, the melt-inyour-mouth cheesecake, delicately flavoured with gulkand (candied red rose petals), is a fine example of that. Crafted to tease with its delightfully desi relish, it lends a new elegance to the north American dessert at The Park, Hyderabad.
KRISHNENDU HALDER

MALAI BROCCOLI
Radisson's Great Kebab Factory's unique combination of broccoli and crème cheese, carefully fried together with choice spices to delight the usually bored vegetarians. Who would ever have thought the bland, mossy, green cauliflower could ever taste this great.

DAAB SHORSE MOUSSE & GONDHORAJ SOUFFLÉ
On the menu at The Bohemian, Kolkata, the daab shorse mousse dares to inject the pungency of mustard to the cream of tender coconut to create a delightful mousse. The man who crafted the delicacy, chef Joymalya Banerjee, 42, believes the city deserves contemporary cuisine that is distinctly Bengali. Another of the chef's star desserts, gondhoraj souffle, mixes the juice, zest and leaves of gondhoraj (king of lime) into a sabayon.
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

DID YOU

KNOW
Mulligatawny is one of the earliest Indian attempts to serve up a stand-alone soup dish. Created by cooks in Chennai shortly after the British landed, it is now an international recipe and has either chicken, lamb or beef in a tangy-spicy soup. Classic dak bungalow fare.

MALABARI RISOTTO
Rice cooked with vegetables and coconut milk with a generous layer of cheese. The Malabari curry weds Italian risotto and the fusion gels with the old spice route tradition of blending local cuisines with those shipped in by traders. Can be devoured at the Indian Art Café, Hyderabad.
DID YOU

KRISHNENDU HALDER

KHORESH FESENJAN
The traditional Persian dish is glazed duck cooked with pomegranate juice. In its fusion version in Indian kitchens, duck is replaced with chicken. Cooked to perfection with onions, finely ground walnuts in pomegranate juice, the chicken is served on a bed of saffron-tinted basmati rice. Look for it at Delhi Darbar in Delhi.
with Ayesha Aleem, Mona Ramavat and Tithi Sarkar

KNOW
Army and Air Force messes had some of the earliest kitchens dishing up fusion food. Clement Town's (Dehradun) IAF officers'mess still does the Potato Putty Mash (mashed potatoes with coriander, mint and pepper) and distinctly desi flame puddings.

58

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

