Bus iness
By Dhiraj Nayyar

CABLE TV

PASSENGERS WATCH NEWS AT THE DELHI AIRPORT
AP PHOTO

KVL NARAYAN RAO, President, NBA

TRAI'S DIGITAL DUD
of doing away with carriage fee, which imposes a huge financial burden on broadcasters, particularly news channels which are free to air, allows continuation of the fee. "The Authority has decided that every MSO may fix a Carriage Fee," it says in the clause. The clause says that TRAI wants broadcasters to share the burden of the "substantial investment for implementation of Digital Addressable Cable TV Systems... made by the MSO, and the cost of carriage of the channels." The News Broadcasters Association (NBA) is outraged by the order. "This (carriage fee) unfairly penalises broadcasters and threatens the very survival of the broadcasting industry," says the association in a press release on May 1. Sunil Lulla, CEO of Times Broadcasting Co, estimates that carriage fee amounts to Rs 2,500Rs 3,000 crore every year, and says "half of this amount is paid by news broadcasters". Says KVL Narayan Rao, executive vice-chairman of and president of NBA, "Carriage fee can be up to 30 per cent of the total costs incurred by a news broadcaster. So it's a very significant burden. That amount could easily be invested to improve content." Like other broadcasters, Rao was expecting carriage fee to be abolished. Instead, according to critics, the Act favours cable operators. MSOs disagree. Ashok Mansukhani, president of the MSO Alliance, says, "How can the entire cost of upgradation of technology to digital be borne by operators alone? For 100 million households, the cost is Rs 35,000 crore." He argues that since broadcasters will eventually benefit from digitisation, they must share the burden. "The broadcasters, particularly NBA which is protesting loudest, will gain the most by getting more viewers and a solid subscription base which can both be used to generate more advertising revenues. Therefore, they have to share the burden of the cost with us," he says. The only alternative is getting the consumer
NDTV

Regulator favours cable networks over broadcasters. It could undo the real gains from digitisation.
controversy. He argues that once capacities of the MSOs increase, their bargaining power to charge carriage fee will go down. "Right now, they can charge carriage fee because they have limited capacity. We have made it compulsory in the order for them to increase their capacity (from an average of 200 to 500 channels). Once they do that, they will have to go to channels and ask for their signals, rather than channels going to them and paying a fee. The market power of MSOs will become very limited." Rao is not convinced. "The guidelines are not fine-tuned enough. They may still refuse to carry the channel if carriage fee is not paid." Says Lulla, "I wouldn't have had a problem if TRAI said that carriage fee can only be charged after 500 channels are in the bouquet. But they haven't said that." Rao argues that TRAI needs to issue clarifications so that uncertainty can be avoided. There are no guidelines in the April 30 order on what the car-

to shell out much higher tariffs. Mansukhani does not want to pass the burden onto consumers. The TRAI order accepts this reasoning and makes it clear that it expects carriage fee to finance the upgradation of technology and enhancement of capacities in MSOs. TRAI Secretary Rajeev Agrawal says, "We have put no additional financial burden on broadcasters. Carriage fees are already a reality." However, TRAI insists it has made the system more transparent. Under the April 30 order, each MSO is supposed to publish a Reference Interconnect Offer in which it will have to state its carriage fee which will have to be applied in a "uniform, non-discriminatory and transparent" manner. Lulla disagrees with TRAI's logic. "If you are in a particular business, you have to invest in it. Why should the burden of that investment be passed on to others?" he asks. Agrawal believes that while broadcasters have every right to their opinion, there really should be no

riage fee should be. Rao says, "TRAI says it will intervene if the carriage fee is unreasonable, but who is to define what is unreasonable?" Lulla points out another problem: "The process of appealing to TRAI if an MSO is being unreasonable will take time. It may take a month or more. What happens in the interim? Will the channel be taken off air? That will cost the consumer--who can't view the channel--and the broadcaster, which will see the viewer base shrink. Out of sight is out of mind," he says. TRAI is not willing to budge. Says Agrawal, "All our orders are well thought-out." Interestingly, TRAI's order comes just two weeks before its chairman, J.S. Sarma, completes his three-year tenure in office. Government rules bar him from a second term. The next chairman of TRAI who takes over after May 15 will, in all likelihood, have to handle the repercussions from his predecessor's order. So far, the logic of good, simple economics continues to defy this Government and its regulators. Consumers and businesses suffer the consequences. The new telecom regulator will have an opportunity to make amends. 

48

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

``

he UPA Government and its functionaries have made a habit of undoing sensible reform measures. On April 30, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) issued an order specifying the modalities to enable the implementation of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act of December 2011. A controversial clause in the order puts the broadcasting business, particularly television news, in a difficult spot. It threatens to derail a good Act. The main purpose of the 2011 Act is to make it mandatory for cable television networks to transfer from outdated analogue technologies to new digital technologies within a set timeframe-- as early as July 2012 for the four metros and no later than 2014 for the entire country. The change in technology would rid cable networks of serious capacity constraints which limits the number of channels they can broadcast. In an analogue signal system, a single channel requires 7-8 Mhz of bandwidth to be broadcast. In a digital system, which compresses and encrypts signals, 10-15 channels can be broadcast using the same bandwidth. A digital system would bring consumers much greater choice in the channels they can view. Digitisation will also bring better quality of picture, including high definition, besides top quality sound to consumers. The 10-15 fold increase in capacity was also expected to help business. Digitisation was supposed to rid broadcasters of one of the most extortionist features of the old system--carriage fee. Broadcasters had to pay multisystem operators (MSOs), for example Hathaway and Digicable, which own major cable networks across the country and extend their services as franchises to neighbourhood cable operators to transmit their signals to homes. Since MSOs had limited capacity to transmit signals, carriage fee was somewhat like a competitive bidding process to ensure that a broadcaster's channel reached viewers. The clause of the TRAI order, instead

T

ASHOK MANSUKHANI, President, MSO Alliance

``

Carriage fee can be up to 30 per cent of the total costs incurred by a news broadcaster. That amount could be invested to improve content.

``

``

Cost of upgradation of technology to digital for 100 million households is Rs 35,000 crore. The burden must be shared.

49

