In vestigation

OPIUM SMUGGLING
WOMEN AT A POPPY FIELD IN MANDSAUR, MADHYA PRADESH

AP

tive a proposition to resist. Smugglers offer Rs 7,000 a kg; it's much more if it is processed into heroin. Poppy has a short growing season from September to March."It needs expertise to take opium out of poppy," says Khan as he slits poppy bulbs to bleed opium. Farmers slit the bulbs in the evening and collect opium early next morning. Nilgais are a nuisance in the belt, with farmers often having to keep vigil tolling bells through the night. "I think they have developed an addiction. They raid the fields frequently," says Khan. Scorpions and snakes also get attracted to poppy. "But human snakes are the most venomous," says farmer Madan Lal, 54, referring to thieves. The government sets a minimum qualifying yield (MQY) at the beginning of the season, 45 kg per hectare this year. MQY is the cornerstone of the control mechanism. If a farmer fails to produce 45 kg per hectare, he loses his licence. From December, over a six-week period Central Bureau of
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Narcotics officials begin measuring the fields. The licensee and two independent witnesses accompany officials on each measurement. Later, the district opium officer takes random samples from fields to ensure authenticity. If the licensees are found cultivating an area in excess of that in the records at any point of time, their licence is cancelled permanently. At Nimbahera, farmers cultivating poppy are put to their final yearly test and made to hand over the year's crop to the government. The produce is then transported to the government-run alkaloid factories at Ghazipur in Rajasthan and Neemuch. At Nimbahera, beneath a huge tent, District Opium Officer N.C. Singh, 48, is inspecting neatly-packed opium cans. "You are a thief," he shouts at Raman Lal, 26, who has landed up with only 4 kg of opium from his half-hectare field, way below the target set by the Government. Raman Lal says his crop was affected by extreme cold winds. Farmers are supposed to destroy their crop in the presence of officials if they feel they

OPIUM SMUGGLING HITS NEWHIGH
Illicit poppy trade reaches unprecedented levels in the Malwa-Mewar belt. Low procurem ent prices are to blame.
By Shafi Rahman

PRIVATISATION PUSH
Farmers' no to entry of private players
he Government's decision in April to throwopen the T opium sector to private corporates has drawn stiff opposition from farmers.The plan is to allowprivate corporates to produce concentrate of poppystrawto make pain relievers.Currently,licensed farmers are allowed to sell poppyplants onlyto two state-run opium and alkaloid factories.The licensees will be allowed to use a newtechnology--concentrate of poppystraw--for extracting opium.The Government thinks this will prevent leakages from the farms. "The plan to allowthe private sector will eventually lead to closing down of public sector units and will affect the livelihood of farmers," says Shailendra Singh Thakur of the Opium and Alkaloid FactoryWorkers' Union.Even the Congress is a divided house on the issue."The Government should make sure farmers are heard before taking anydecision," says Meenakshi Natrajan,MPfrom Mandsaur,Madhya Pradesh.District Congress leaders,however,accuse her of not doing enough."As an MP,she is not speaking on behalf of opium farmers.This makes one wonder if she is acting on behalf of private sector players," alleges former Mandsaur district Congress president Surender Sethi.

n Neemuch, the heat will strike you like a blast furnace. But what will blow you off is the aroma from the fields of swollen poppy bulbs dripping with opium. Sameer Yadav, 38, the district deputy superintendent of police, drives around in his Bolero looking for opium headed for illicit trade from the licensed fields of Neemuch's villages, one dustier than the last. "Opium smuggling has reached unprecedented levels this year," he says. The Malwa-Mewar belt spanning Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, in which Neemuch is situated, is home to 38,000 of the 44,000 hectares of li-

I

censed opium cultivation in the country. The belt is one of the few places in the world where poppy is cultivated under the supervision of the International Narcotics Control Board for legitimate medical needs. It has also become a hotbed of opium smuggling. "They devise new methods of smuggling. Sometimes, it is an extra fuel tank in a Maruti or public transport carrier," says Yadav, who patrols the highway leading to Kota, Rajasthan, with his team of five policemen. The police vigil in the region has resulted in some success. On New Year eve, 115 kg of opium straw was seized from the four-lane highway in Nimbahera, Rajasthan. On February

9, the police intercepted Dhannalal, a farmer, in Neemuch, and seized 8 kg of opium from his Maruti. Another farmer, Bhagatram Lohar, 38, was caught with 8 kg of opium at Rathanghat in Neemuch on February 26. On April 8, another 15 kg was seized in Daulapura village in Neemuch from Bhavrira Dhar, a farmer. Also in April, the police seized eight kg of opium concealed in sacks of garlic on its way to Kota from Neemuch in Madhya Pradesh. But the biggest catch for the police came when Dhanraj aka Dhanna Teli Rathore, 45, a notorious smuggler from Antrimata village, Neemuch, was arrested in March with 48 kg of opium.

Farmers are stuck with poor Government procurement prices and rising cost of cultivation. "The price of opium has remained static since 1996 at a rate of Rs 1,500 per kg while its price in the illicit trade has shot up manifold," says Ramchandra Nagola, 55, a farmer leader in Neemuch. "These are not onions, these are poppies. It needs care and affection and that won't come cheap. The labour charges have gone up to Rs 300 to Rs 350 for a day, while it is just Rs 100 for onion and garlic fields," says Jaffer Khan, 50, a farmer from Neemuch. With smugglers offering a much better bargain for their produce, under-reporting produce to make a killing in the grey market is too lucra-

A FARMER POURING OPIUM IN NEEMUCH

36

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

37

In vestigation

OPIUM SMUGGLING
Photographs by VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

"These are not onions, these are poppies. Labour charges have gone up to Rs 300-Rs 350 for a day."
JAFFER KHAN, Farmer, Neemuch

FARMERS BRING THEIR PRODUCE TO NIMBAHERA TO BE HANDED OVER TO THE GOVERNMENT

cannot meet the target. "I am sure you have sold your stuff," says Singh. The fact is, any crop in excess of 45 kg is vulnerable to illicit trade, though the Government pays a bonus price for excess produce. Drugs smuggled from the Malwa-Mewar belt make their way to Punjab and Delhi and further across the border to the international circuit. The smuggling had almost disappeared in 1996 when smuggler Mohammed Shafi, 55, went into hiding following a police offensive. He had his own brand of smack known as Crescent and Star. "Now there are hundreds of Mohammed Shafis operating on a low scale," says Yadav. The prosperity from poppy fields and the illicit trade in opium has trickled down everywhere. District Collector Lokesh Kumar Jatav quotes from The Godfather, Mario Puzo's gripping saga of crime and passion. The 2004-batch IAS officer stiffens his face for effect and says: "Behind every great fortune, there is a crime. The opium trade, legit and illicit, has brought prosperity to the area." Real estate prices have shot up. The

affluence is also reflected in twowheeler and car showrooms mushrooming in Neemuch town. However, there's a flip side to the belt's prosperity. The lucrative market for poppy straw and illicit opium has created new gangs. The Baffna and Pathan gangs of Rajasthan are engaged in a bloody war over rights for poppy straw contracts. The Pathan gang fired at the shop of poppy straw contractor Komal Baffna on February 18. Another

"Smugglers devise new methods all the time. Sometimes, it is an extra fuel tank in a Maruti."
SAMEER YADAV, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Neemuch

poppy straw contractor, Anil Trivedi, was killed in Pratapgarh district in Rajasthan in April and at least 16 bullets were recovered from his body during the post-mortem. The easy accessibility to opium has also led to an increase in the number of addicts. "Opium licences are a symbol of prestige. People with licences are much sought-after for marital alliances. But the availability of drugs has also created a huge number of drug addicts here. There is not a single family without drug addicts in villages like Harvar," says Kamlesh Upadhyay, assistant professor of psychology at Government Girls' College, Neemuch. In the past five years, Lahri Mukti Kendra, attached to the Neemuch alkaloid factory and run by the Red Cross, has treated around 1,200 people for addiction. Near the railway gate at Nimbahera, just before dawn, the kerosene lamp imbues a yellow glow to Kishen Lal's face. The 20-year-old tailor puts opium through a pipe and draws heavily. He settles into languor, a one-track dullness. He prepares another ball, repeats the ceremony and readjusts his universe. "Would you like to try?" he asks. In Malwa-Mewar belt's opium party, everyone--from nilgais to scorpions, smugglers to visiting scribes-- is welcome to gatecrash. 

38

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

