Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS

Game of Freedom
Cricket becomes a game of hope in this novel set in the Taliban country
By Gillian Wright

THE MAGIC OFFAITH
History and traditions of Muslims' holiest destination come alive in this book
By S.Y. Quraishi

THE HOLY SANCTUARY AT MECCA PHOTOGRAPHED THROUGH THE COLONNADE; (RIGHT) MODERN GUIDEBOOK ENTITLED HAJJ AND UMRAH MADE EASY

HAJJ: JOURNEY TO THE HEART OF ISLAM
Edited byVenetia Porter Roli Books Price: RS 2,975 Pages: 288 BETWEEN THE COVERS The beautiful illustrations and maps are fundamental to the usefulness of the book, while the references, further reading and Hajj travel narratives are the cherries on this feast for the eyes and mind.

nderstanding Hajj is integral to an understanding of Islam. Every Muslim aspires to make that journey. It is one of the five pillars of the faith. No words can describe the awe and emotion on first coming face to face with the modest cubical structure one has seen in print, film and TV millions of times. However, this book captures the magic of this holy ritual more graphically than any other. Written by five brilliant scholars of London, it was first published this year by the British Museum Press, intended as a companion to an exhibition on the subject. The exhibition displayed a fascinating range of objects from the key public and private collections drawn together. It is a very pleasing mix of text, photos and images for Muslims and non-Muslims alike. The intention of covering history, voices and material under one cover is amply achieved. The chronology starts with the Hijra--migration of the Prophet and his followers from Mecca to Medina--and is, therefore, confined to a concise overview of key Hajj-related events. Karen Armstrong's introductory piece "Pilgrimage: Why Do They Do It?" sets the foundation of the book, highlighting the commonalities of pilgrimages across different religions, something that not many consciously think about. Hajj did not originate with Prophet Mohammad, but thousands of years before, with Prophet Abraham. Most of Hajj rituals are based on the actions of Abraham and his family.

U

M.A.S. Abdel Haleem delves into the spirit and rituals of the Hajj, from its pre-Islamic origins to the first and only Hajj led by the Prophet Muhammad which fixed the various rites and sequence of events followed to this day. Hugh Kennedy and Robert Irwin cover the trials and tribulations of hujjaj (pilgrims) over a vast period in "The Journey to Mecca: A History". While Muslims who have performed the Hajj in modern times have it easy, from the early days to roughly the beginning of 1900 AD, the logistics involved were mind-boggling; for example: ensuring food and water availability along the route through the desert. "At its height, the

Caliphate (ed. Abbasid, from 750 AD) had the capacity for organisation and construction on a scale not seen since the Roman empire." The water tanks and reservoirs en route, the concept of "economy class passenger" 800 years ago, and the treatment of pilgrims on the way to and from Mecca and during Hajj all make fascinating reading. Ziauddin Sardar takes us from 1950 to 2012, and the monumental changes made by succeeding Saudi kings due to the vastly increased number of pilgrims resulting from the use of air transport: Impact on the Haram mosque, the sites around Mecca, the rethinking of pilgrims' modes of transportation during the Hajj period, the coordination with the countries of origin of the pilgrims. To summarise: "The Hajj pushes to the limit every system of organisation known to man," and the mutation is continuous. Venetia Porter ends this very commendable joint effort with description and illustrations of "The Modern Art of Hajj and Textiles of Mecca and Medina," which briefly recount the history of the cloth coverings of the Ka'ba through the ages. The beautiful illustrations and maps are fundamental to the usefulness of the book and the notes; the references and further reading and the Hajj travel narratives are the cherry on this feast for the eyes and mind. The book is a lot more than a coffee table. For the enormity of the information it contains, besides its weight, the book is best suited for the study table. I wish, however, that the events from the Prophet's birth to Hijra had been briefly included to complete the backdrop.
S.Y. Quraishi is the Chief Election Commissioner of India

BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF MECCA, BY CARL PONHEIMER, VIENNA, 1803, ENGRAVING

hen the Afghan national side played its first ever ODI against a Test-playing country this February, the Taliban joined President Hamid Karzai in sending messages of support for the team. The whole nation was said to be glued to the television, and even though Pakistan won by seven wickets, the THE TALIBAN Afghan Tigers, as they're known, acquitted CRICKET CLUB themselves more than respectably. byTimeri N.Murari The story of the rise of Afghan cricket merits Aleph not one but many novels. In five years, with poor Price: RS 595 facilities, they climbed from the fifth to the first Pages: 325 division of the World Cricket League and were ranked ninth in International Twenty20. In a three-day match in April, they defeated the Netherlands with an unbeaten 84 scored by 18-year-old Afsar Zalzal, clinching the match. Later this year, their Under-19s will take on India's in Brisbane. Historically, the story of Afghan cricket begins in the refugee camps in Pakistan after the Russian invasion of 1979, where boys joined local kids playing the game. Here one young man, Taj Malik, the father of Afghan cricket, SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com was dreaming of an Afghan team. In The Taliban Cricket Club, Timeri N. Murari has taken inspiration not from Malik but from Sovietperiod sporting news, and the Taliban's strange decision to give limited approval to cricket. Murari then leaps into pure fiction by making his central character, an Afghan cricket guru, a woman journalist who learned her sport during her college days in Delhi. There is a touch of Elizabeth from Lagaan (woman teaching cricket-ignorant men, with a lot at stake), and Rani Mukherjee from Dil Bole Hadippa! (false beard and male impersonation) about Ruksana. Still Murari knows how to pace his tale and create credible characters. Ruksana with her courage and liveliness is attractive, and her terror of the Taliban is convincing. Brought up in liberal times before the Taliban conquered Kabul, through her experience the author paints a stark picture of the Taliban takeover with its violence, oppression and toll on human values. The Taliban are portrayed as monsters rather than men, until their unexpected approval of cricket gives the glimmer of hope that forms the core of the suspense and the high drama of this novel. Murari also leaves space for human warmth, loyalty and romance, but above all, The Taliban Cricket Club is a thrilling tale that keeps you on the edge of your seat to the last. 

W

60

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

NEW

NEW

