Nation
CALICUT UNIVERSITY CAMPUS

RELIANCE INDUSTRIES

STOCK SLIDE
Reliance's share price slips on fears of low cost recovery of its investment in the KG-D6 gas field

YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

HIGH PRICE OFPOWER C
lose on the heels of wringing a fifth Cabinet berth from the ruling United Democratic Front (UDF) government in Kerala, coalition partner Indian Union Muslim League (IUML) has embarrassed the 11-month-old government again. This time, it's because IUML, which holds the education ministry, got 43 acres of prime land alloted in Kozhikode free of cost to three private organisations headed by prominent leaders or their close relatives. The land is part of Calicut University's Rs 100-crore infrastructure development plan called the Green Sports Complex. The allotment, which was made without inviting tenders, was decided in March by the university's syndicate, which is dominated by IUML nominees. The university's Vice-Chancellor A. Abdus Salam is also a League nominee. After a public outcry, the syndicate held a meeting on April 24 and cancelled the deals. Out of the 43 acres, 30 was to be gifted to Kerala Olympic Association (KOA), to be jointly developed by the university and the state government. KOA Secretary P.K. Hamza is the brother-in-law of Minister for Local Administration and Social Welfare and prominent IUML leader M.K. Muneer. The state government has distanced itself from the controversy. Even P.K. Abdu Rabb, education minister from IUML, said that neither his ministry nor the government was aware of the land deal and has asked for an inquiry. The league leadership also said that the party was unaware of the deals. But Salam says IUML knew about it. Opposition Left Democratic Front (LDF) has appealed to Governor

Coalition partner engages in rampant corruption as helpless Congress looks on
H.R. Bhardwaj to sack the vice-chancellor and the pro-LDF student organisations have launched an agitation demanding an investigation. However, Chief Minister Oommen Chandy has come to the League's rescue, saying that there was no need of a probe since the deal has been scrapped and no land was given away. "Chandy's only concern is to stick to the chief minister's seat," charges CPI(M) leader V.S. Achuthanandan. The development might hamper UDF's chances in the June 2 by-election to the Neyyattinkara Assembly constituency in Thiruvananthapuram district. After the League got its fifth berth, the total number of minority community members has over"Deals with private taken that of the Hindus in the 21 member-Cabinet. This has parties were already angered BJP and proentered into only UDF Hindu caste organisations because of the like Nair Service Society (NSS) university's finanand Sree Narayana Dharma Paripalanayogam. NSS says that cial constraints." it would keep equidistance from A. ABDUS SALAM both UDF and LDF. Vice-Chancellor,
Calicut University
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

AMBANI

YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

KERALA

REDDY

he standoff between Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas over honouring the production-sharing contract at KG-D6, the country's largest gas field, may affect the share value of India's largest company, brokers warn. RIL shares slid 15 per cent in March, the biggest slump since October 2008, after the Government said it was considering restrictions on cost recovery as output was lower than what was envisaged by the company. As of April 30, the share is trading at Rs 745 on both Bombay Stock Exchange and National Stock Exchange, from a high of Rs 964 in May 2011. "The shares could see a further slide if this slugfest does not end soon," says Niraj Mansingka, an analyst at Mumbaibased Edelweiss Capital. "RIL shares have been underperforming over the past few months as the company has not been able to ramp up gas production in the KG basin," says Hemen Kapadia of Chart Pundit, adding that retail investors have been moving away. A stock market analyst, who did not want to be named, says there is little clarity where

T

the company will get its incremental profits from. "The retail investor, who makes up nearly 12.33 per cent of the company's shareholding pattern, is worried. There's trouble at D6, the company's refining business is witnessing a two-year low margin squeeze of $6.8 (Rs 359) per barrel, there's slowdown in polymers and petrochemicals," he says. The low cost recovery, RIL officials have told the ministry, would affect its future output from the gas field, once seen as the game-changer in India's energy sector. While making a presentaKG-D6, INDIA'S LARGEST GAS FIELD

tion to investors on April 20, Mukesh Ambani, India's richest man, offered no clarity on his plans for D6. RIL is arguing that the petroleum ministry must honour the productionsharing contract which allows the operator to recover its entire cost from gas sales. RIL is allowed to recover expenditure on exploration and production before sharing profits from the KG-D6 field with the Government. But the ministry, under S. Jaipal Reddy, has rejected RIL's claim and an integrated plan submitted by the company for development and production of 16 gas finds. Instead, it has curtly asked RIL to restrict pre-development expenses only to fields that have proved commercial viability. In short, it means RIL will be allowed to recover Rs 9,250 crore less than its investment of Rs 28,500 crore. RIL claims output has fallen due to geological and technical problems and also blamed the ministry for not clearing exploration plans for years but that has not cut much ice with the Government. Reddy has squarely put the blame on Reliance, saying the company had not drilled as many wells as it promised to. Gas from the D6 block was expected to rise to 80 million cubic metres a day but has fallen sharply to less than 37 million cubic metres a day in April from 54 million cubic metres in June 2011. It is projected to fall further to around 27 million cubic metres next year. This, in turn, has reduced supplies to factories and cities, leading to higher and more expensive imports. Reliance appealed to the Supreme Court in 2010 to appointment an arbitrator to resolve the crisis. "We are in a high cash-rolling business where daily drilling expenditure costs Rs 3 crore. We have no option but to get ready for a long haul in court," Sanjay Joshi, a senior consultant for RIL, told INDIA TODAY. Reddy refused to talk on the subject but ministry insiders claim his stand was bolstered by advice in mid-April from the Comptroller and Auditor General not to validate RIL's entire expenditure in the D6 block because part of the money was spent after 2008, the period for which accounts have not been audited.
by Shantanu Guha Ray

46

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

NEW

NEW

