Mail

Double Cross
M AY 7, 2 0 1 2

Persecuted at home, Pakistani Hindu refugees discover they are being betrayed by India.

V I J AY VA L L U R I ,

www.intoday.com

PTI

Minority Misery
It is astounding for every rational Indian that helpless Hindus are being persecuted and young girls kidnapped, raped and coercively converted to Islam ("No Country for Pakistani Hindus", May 7). The Pakistani government had failed to check the rise of oppressive idiosyncrasy in their country. It is sad that the Indian Government also shirks its responsibilities on the unreasonable alibi that the issue is an internal matter of Pakistan. It is high time that the two countries work their differences out.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

Missile Muscle
India's deterrent against the ever-present Chinese threat has been given a shot in the arm by the successful test-firing of the Agni-5 & RISAT satellites ("India Takes on China", May 7). The Agni-5 missile can strike any target in China or Pakistan, something that gives us a big edge in case of any conflict. Expectedly, China has been rattled by the advances that India has made with the successful test-firing of the Agni missile.
AMBAR MALLICK, Kolkata

the reaction of the Indian Government and our `pseudo-secularists' on this sensitive issue. Imagine the situation if even 1 per cent of what is happening to minorities in Pakistan were to happen to minorities in India. I would also like to know what the official stand of BJP on this issue is. I would request the Government to take up the case strongly with the Pakistani government to ensure that such atrocities come to an immediate end.
D.K. SARDANA, Delhi

I read with shock and horror the cover story on the plight of minorities in Pakistan. Rinkle Kumari's pathetic plight made me weep. I would like to see

The test-firing of the missiles was long due and finally, the nation has stamped that much-needed stamp of authority--something that was necessary to mend China's errant ways. Now, China will think twice before plotting any kind of mischief that it is notorious for.
RISHABH RAJ, Patna

Most readers will be touched by the woes of these unfortunate refugees from Pakistan. And yet, just try to imagine the reverse. If a small fraction of the Muslim population in India--who did not migrate in 1947--

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

``

``

The grisly atrocities against Hindus depict ineffectiveness and failure of the Pakistani and Indian governments in controlling criminal fundamentalists.

Mail
were to go to Pakistan, do you think the government or the people there will have an iota of sympathy for them? So, to say that these poor people are victims of a double-cross or they are being betrayed by India is a bit far-fetched.
KRISHNA KALRA, www.intoday.com

35
of such a race is just what the doctor ordered.
ROHIT KAUL, Kolkata

Flying Blind
It is shocking that the Indian Air Force battle aircraft crashes are the highest in the world by quite some distance ("Air Power Becomes A Mirage", May 7). Something is terribly wrong somewhere and a comprehensive inquiry must be conducted to find out the root of the problem. The issue must be taken extremely seriously and the malady corrected at the earliest since at stake are the lives of many brilliant pilots of the country.
SIMRAN SINGH, Patiala

also book the advertiser, models and others associated with production and airing of such advertisements .
MADHU AGRAWAL, Delhi

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J U N E 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Ideas Infinite
Some of the stories of the young entrepreneurs are amazing and very inspiring, specially products like the green chulhas for rural homes which emit 80 per cent less smoke and are four times more efficient than the traditional mud chulhas ("Signatures of Success", May 7). Such home-bred, innovative entrepreneurs who want to make a change are the need of the hour. India will do well with many more of them.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

The report on the vagina fairness cream made an interesting read. Sensing the vulnerability of the modern women, the fairness industry has now come out with a product to brighten the most prized of their possessions.
THARCIUS S. FERNANDO, Chennai

Congress-CPI: Strange BedfeIIows
"The past with its crimes, its follies and its tragedy flashes away.... Any man or state who fights on against Nazidom will have our aid.The Russian danger is our danger...." was the public commitment Churchill made on June 22, 1941 when Hitler attacked the Soviet Union. Yet within five years President Truman, amidst moments of exasperation, felt "tired of babying the Soviets" and talked of facing them with "iron fist and strong language". This signifies the triumph of an alliance and the tragedy of a break-up resulting in a fierce cold war. This was as paradoxical a situation in international politics as the Congress-CPI relations in the post-independence political life of India, which began at the end of 1969, on the eve of the great split in the Congress, and ended in December 1976. These seven tense years were at the same time punctuated with disillusionment, disenchantment and often dismay. It has remained an uneasy affair throughout. In fact, both the parties were at loggerheads from the very beginning and the marriage of convenience reached its breaking point in December last year when Mrs Gandhi declared (on December 7, 1976) that "we want agreements but not at the cost of the strength of the Congress and this is what we must keep in mind". by F. Ahmed
MRS GANDHI AND RAO-- POLITICAL HOBNOBBING

`Talent Galore'
I strongly refute the observation of the writer in the report "If Music Be The Food Of Life" published on April 30, who believes that Pakistan has not produced a single new musical star since 2004. Nothing can be further from the truth. The music industry in Pakistan has seen unprecedented growth in the last decade. The popularity of our folk singers and artists in India is a manifestation of this. Over two dozen music channels like Play TV. MTV Pakistan, Aag TV, ARY Music, Oxygen, Indus Music, etc, were launched only in the last six years. Further, opening up of more than 100 FM radio channels in regional languages has helped promote music and hunt local talent in the country.
MANZOOR ALI MEMON, Press Attache, Pakistan High Commission, New Delhi

Fairness Frenzy
CPI(M) member T.N. Seema had justifiably objected in Rajya Sabha to TV advertisement of a cream depicting explicit graphics of a lady's private parts in bad taste ("My Fair Vagina", May 7). It is a matter of regret that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has, for so long, failed to take any palpable action against the advertisers and get the advertisement banned, despite the All India Democratic Women's Association having registered a formal complaint with the ministry. The Government should not only ban such advertisements, which are in extremely bad taste, but

The stories of young entrepreneurs who have succeeded despite all odds in their novel projects are highly inspiring. India is a difficult place to start an enterprise due to hurdles of all kinds-- ranging from bureaucratisation to corruption. It is indeed commendable that our young generation is breaking conventions and churning out ideas and products that are sure to help the masses in a massive way. The growth

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

10

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

