Na tion KERALA
MR NANDAKUMAR

CHANDRASEKHARAN (LEFT) IN 2009

MAHARASHTRA

BIHAR

PREMATURE CELEBRATION
Builders party on BMC commissioner's exit but he could return in a new role
he exit on April 30 of the tough Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) commissioner Subodh Kumar, who changed the city's development control rules in favour of home buyers, was reportedly greeted by some builders with a party in Dubai in the first week of May. But their celebrations might be short-lived, especially with Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan likely to appoint him as head of the proposed Maharashtra Housing Regulatory Authority (MHRA). Moreover, new BMC Commissioner Sitaram Kunte has announced that he will toe his predecessor's line. Kumar had stalled many forthcoming housing projects when he took over in December 2010, saying he would clear them only after amending the Development Control Rules. The project delays caused builders huge losses. The rules were finally amended on January 3, 2012, "to curb the corruption and minimise discretion in giving permission for construction". Under the new rule, builders aren't allowed to charge extra for balconies, flower beds, terraces as these are part of the floor space index (FSI). Builders are an unhappy lot. "If the builders are made to pay more for FSI, they will certainly pass on the cost to the customers. No builder will pay from his own pocket," says architect Arif Noorani, 38. A source in the chief minister's office says Kumar is likely to head MHRA after the Legislative Assembly passes the Maharashtra Housing (Regulation and Development) Bill, tabled by the government in April, in the monsoon session commencing in July. The builders can party, but at their peril.

LALU'S SAFEST BET
RJD chief nominates wife Rabri Devi as MLC, depends on her to bail him out politically

W

T

COSTOFDISSENT
The gruesome murder of a CPI(M) rebel exposes the blood-soaked politics of revenge in Kerala
he murder of T.P. Chandrasekharan, a CPI(M) dissident, on May 4 marks the return of violence in politics in northern Kerala. Chandrasekharan, 50, was on his way home to Onchiyam in Kozhikode district when he was waylaid by assailants who hurled country bombs at him, after which they hacked him to death with sharp-edged weapons. His assailants are yet to be identified, but police suspect they include jailed pro-CPI(M) supporters out on parole. Leaders of the ruling United Democratic Front (UDF) have accused the Marxists of the crime. "There is no doubt the killers were hired by CPI(M)," said Ramesh Chennithala, state Congress president. Chandrasekharan's widow, Rema, also said, "CPI(M) was my husband's only enemy. There were threats to his life from them ever since he left the party." Denying the allegations, Pinarayi Vijayan, the party's state secretary, said, "UDF is spreading lies. They want to keep alive the suspicion against us until the crucial by-election to Neyyattinkara (on June 2) is over." CPI(M) has even accused UDF of orchestrating the murder. Vijayan said the Innova car which the assailants had

T

by M.G. Radhakrishnan

by Kiran Tare

K M KISHAN

used belonged to a relative of Vayalar Ravi, Union minister for NonResident Indians, and that P.C. George, UDF's chief whip, had visited the area a few days before the murder to hatch the conspiracy. What rubbed salt into the CPI(M)'s wounds was Opposition leader V.S. Achuthanandan's presence at the funeral of Chandrasekharan, who was Achuthanandan's staunch supporter in the Marxist factional war. Achuthanandan, the only LDF leader to attend the funeral, called Chandrasekharan a brave Communist. CPI(M) has been restive ever since Chandrasekharan and hundreds of workers from Onchiyam panchayat, a Communist fortress, left the party in 2009. The dissidence began as part of the factional war within the CPI(M) between Achuthanandan and Vijayan. Chandrasekharan and his comrades formed the Revolutionary Marxist Party (RMP) and helped UDF candidate Mullappally Ramachandran win the Vadakara seat, a CPI(M) bastion, in the 2009 Lok Sabha polls. RMP stunned the CPI(M) again when it won many panchayat seats in Onchiyam in the 2010 local elections.

hen she lost in the 2010 Assembly polls from two seats, Rabri Devi's political career seemed all but over. But in less than two years, Rabri Devi has restarted her legislative career, having taken oath as a member of the Bihar Legislative Council on May 7. Rabri Devi's elevation assumes crucial significance because Lalu Yadav nominated his wife when his party could send just one candidate to the Upper House. While this may seem as a step back with chances of Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) chief Yadav receiving flak for foisting his wife on the party, insiders say it's a calculated move. Rabri Devi has always been Yadav's best bet. In July 1997, when he had to quit as chief minister, he ensured his political survival by making Rabri Devi succeed him. The surrogate chief minister ruled Bihar for eight years, helping Yadav consolidate

his political standing and go national without worrying about his home turf. 2012 is no less critical for Yadav. Having been comprehensively defeated in three successive elections (two Assembly and one parliamentary polls), the RJD is nervous as it prepares for the 2014 Lok Sabha elections. The ongoing fodder scam cases in the CBI court in Ranchi, where prosecution witnesses have deposed against Yadav, are only adding to his troubles. At this critical juncture, he has, very naturally, turned back to his most trusted confidante to bail him out of a tight spot. Yadav also has reasons to be hopeful. In the 2010 Assembly elections, when RJD recorded its worst performance, the party still polled 54, 66,693 votes, almost 19 per cent of the total votes polled in the elections. Yadav believes things will only get

better. Though the Nitish Kumar-led NDA has won the subsequent byelections in Daraunda and Laukaha in October and November 2011, following deaths of sitting Janata Dal (United) members, the numbers reaffirmed that Yadav is still a force to reckon with; RJD's candidates polled better than in the previous elections. The present situation indicates that the RJD chief's traditional Yadav supporters, Bihar's single largest caste which comprises about 15 per cent of the population, are backing him. Yadav has also ignored the murmurs within the party over nominating Rabri Devi for the lone party seat in the Upper House. He is clearly not willing to spend energy and time seeking an image makeover. Instead, he is concentrating on identity politics--consolidating his traditional Yadav supporters--with wife Rabri Devi ready to

RABRI DEVI AFTER BEING SWORN IN AS AN MLC, IN PATNA ON MAY 7

IN 1997, WHEN LALU YADAV HAD TO QUITAS CHIEFMINISTER, HE ENSURED HIS POLITICAL SURVIVAL BY MAKING RABRI DEVI SUCCEED HIM.
play on community emotions. Though Nitish Kumar still appears miles ahead of Yadav in terms of having a larger social support base, the RJD chief cannot stop himself from being hopeful. And, Rabri Devi obviously is still his best political cushion to face the future. Rabri Devi's proclamation about their son and daughter entering politics also assumes significance. "We will introduce our children into politics," she said. "What's wrong in it?" Nothing, perhaps. After all, it is aimed at consolidating Team Lalu.
by Amitabh Srivastava

44

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

MAY 21, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

45

