Na tion NAXALBELT

MEN WHO WALK THE RED LINE
By Sujay Bhattacharyya

CH HA TT IS GA RH

Bastar Bijapur Dantewada

ODISHA Koraput Malkangiri
Bay of Bengal

Five intrepid district collectors from Naxalite heartland live and work without the fear of assassination or abduction

RAJAT KUMAR IAS batch 2005 Education BA Family Wife

{

" Frankly, I was so happy to have made it to the civil services that I did not worry much about what cadre I got."

They took the first car of the convoy instead of the third. Minutes after setting off, the third car got blown up by a landmine, killing its three occupants. "I would be lying if I said I am never scared working here... but having worked in this region for three years now, I guess my mind has adapted to the fear," says the man who has survived four Naxal attacks until now.

46

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

{



he threat of abduction is a living reality. Assassination is a distinct possibility. Every time they step out of their offices or homes, guards or no guards, the IAS officers responsible for governance in the heart of Naxalite country know they could be the next Alex Paul Menon or R. Vineel Krishna. Meet the young district collectors of the Naxal districts of Dantewada, Bijapur, Bastar, Malkangiri and Koraput spanning the ChhattisgarhOdisha border. Omprakash Chowdhary, Anbalagan P., Rajat Kumar, Balwant Singh and Sachin R. Jhadav might have come from different parts of the country but they have two things in common--they are all prime Naxal targets and yet they are consumed by a missionary zeal to bring change to parts of the country still stuck in the bullock-cart age. Take Omprakash Chowdhary, 30, the collector of Dantewada. OP, as he is called, has found his survival tactic: Driving at 100-plus km per hour. "At that speed, Naxals will not be able to time a landmine to blow me up," he says. The 2005-batch IAS officer volunteered for a posting here after serving seven years in different parts of Chhattisgarh. "I am here by choice," he says. His mission: A 150-acre education hub in Dantewada town. A last-minute decision to swap cars saved Rajat Kumar his life. The 30year-old collector of Bijapur, a newly formed district carved out of Dantewada in 2011, was travelling on April 20 from Bhopalpatnam to Bijapur with the local MLA Mahesh Gagda.

T

30 Bijapur, Chhattisgarh Pet passions Music, playing cricket

KUMAR ON A VISIT TO PAMED, A NAXAL HOTBED ON THE CHHATTISGARH BORDER

One-third of Bijapur is a Naxal haven and bereft of Government presence, and it is this zone he wants to bring winds of change to. Anbalagan P., 33, did not know a word of Hindi when he passed his civil services exam. As collector of Bastar, this 2004-batch IAS officer now does all his official work in that language. "Here, all government work is in Hindi. So I read files, make notings, dictate letters, do everything in Hindi. But you could call my Hindi `prasashanic (administrative)', since I learnt it from the files," he says. In Bastar, files can go back 100 years. Anbalagan has launched a project scanning and digitising land records from 1925 onwards. This, he says, will help settle disputes over who is a domicile and

Na tion NAXALBELT
BALWANT SINGH 35 Malkangiri, Odisha IAS batch 2007 Unwinds with Education BA badminton Family Wife and son


{

"I come from a farming family from the deserts of Rajasthan. My father is not literate and had no idea of where I was being posted or what it meant."

help poor tribals get caste certificates. 2007-batch IAS officer Balwant Singh, 35, born and brought up in Kalewa in Barmer district of Rajasthan, took over as collector of Malkangiri in 2011 from R. Vineel Krishna, who had been abducted and released by Naxals during his tenure. Singh had had postings in Mayurbhanj and Kandhamal districts before coming to Malkangiri. "The Naxal threat is an occupational hazard," he shrugs. He is more worried about the quality of human resources at his disposal, or rather the lack of it. 2007-batch IAS officer Sachin R. Jhadav, 37, is the collector of Koraput, where MLA Jhina Hikaka was abducted by Naxals and released on April 26 after 33 days in captivity. A native of Satara, Maharashtra, he tours more than 20 days a month on an average and hasn't had time to visit Satara since he took up this assignment more than a year ago. "It is wrong to say that the administration is not doing anything," he insists. While these young collectors bristle with idealism, age-old issues of manpower crisis, lack of connectivity and infrastructure continue to remain

{
48
INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

"The distance between the common man and the collector is inversely proportional to the security paraphernalia we take along."

ANBALAGAN P. IN HIS BASTAR OFFICE

{

{
SINGH SHARING A LIGHT MOMENT WITH LOCAL CHILDREN

stumbling blocks. As Anbalagan says, "There is no dearth of ideas and funds, but where are the hands?" In Malkangiri, one of the most underdeveloped districts in the country, it takes a minimum 12 hours by road to get to the nearest airport or railway station in Bhubaneswar. Connectivity is also a major challenge for Kumar in Bijapur. Naxals have blown up culverts on the few roads that exist. "We managed to build 60 km all-weather roads, but a lot more remains to be done," says Kumar. Jhadav points to the sheer size of the area under his jurisdiction: "There are 4,558 villages in my district. Even if I travel to one village per day, how many days would I need to address each of their problems individually?" The collectors are fighting the odds, focusing on what they decided their dis-

ANBALAGAN P. 33 Bastar, Chhattisgarh IAS batch 2004 Reel-life hero Education MSc in Aamir Khan. Applied Microbiology Has seen all his Family Wife,son movies. and daughter

tricts need utmost. In Koraput, Jhadav has chosen to focus on women's economic emancipation. Others see education as the panacea. In Malkangiri, Bijapur and Dantewada, residential schools have been set up in the district headquarters where children from the interiors are enrolled and their entire cost is borne by the administration. In Bijapur, Kumar has already managed to get 5,500 school dropouts to enrol again. In Malkangiri, Singh has set himself a target of providing free education to 25,000 children. Chowdhary has already begun construction on a 150acre Edu-City in Dantewada town that will house 13 institutions. The collector is also making provisions for attractive salaries to draw good teachers to Dantewada. Instead of trying to lure talent from outside, Anbalagan has a scheme to create a local pool of talent in Bastar. "We are training 170 poor boys from Bastar to compete for engineering and medical entrance tests," he says. In Bastar, Anbalagan once came under Naxal firing. "My guard told me `Saab sar niche kar lo goli lag jayegi (Sir lower your head or else you'll get hit)' almost matter-of-factly. I began wondering if I had said goodbye to my son that morning," he recalls. Holding his two-month-old daughter in his lap, Jhadav says, "Not everyone in the bureaucracy is a file-pusher. The day I find out I have become a `babu', I will quit." Will this idealism survive the machinations of the `system'? 



