Going Places
Sahil Lavingia, 19, intends to conquer the online world. A former designer at photo sharing website Pinterest, Lavingia founded Gumroad, a start-up that connects people who want to sell items--ranging from music and illustrations to apps or even T-shirts, through a simple web link.The website also allows users to sync their products to Twitter and Facebook friends.The son of Singapore-based investment bankers of Indian origin, Lavingia dropped out of his computer science course at University of Southern California, lived in Hong Kong, London and New York before moving to Silicon Valley. Gumroad has received $7 million (Rs 37 crore) from venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield and Byers. Could this be a desi Zuckerberg story? LAVINGIA
REUTERS

viral video
Most tourists can't resist taking pictures of themselves, pretending to hold up the Leaning Tower of Pisa in Italy. Not if Romanian blogger Darius Groza can help it. Interrupting many moments of cliched photography, a video of a bespectacled Groza weaving in and out of the frame, high-fiving unsuspecting posers, has gone viral. Groza, 25, who writes for the blog JEG, calls it "troll high-fiving"and has advised fellow pranksters to be careful with tourists who climb on the chain fences surrounding the landmark.The video already has 1.4 million views on YouTube.

NET FLUX

High Five
by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

buzz watch

app buzz

Capture a Moment

Wonder Science
A hospital in Houston, US, showed a brain surgery to an audience of 14 million people on Twitter. Dr Dong Kim of Houston's Memorial Hermann Hospital performed a routine brain tumour re-section on a 21-year-old patient on May 9. Every move of his was documented via tweets, photographs and videos posted on Twitter and YouTube.

Sharing photos has become passe. Now, record videos and share them on Viddy. This app is similar to Instagram, but is in video format. You can record 15-second clips, run them through filters, give them music and share them with the world. Viddy was named iTunes app of the week on May 12 and has 26 million users.
WIDAK

web wow

Letter Mania

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for children, football fans and early risers. For those who own smartphones, these apps could be a cool addition: My Animals for Kids helps children learn about wildlife and identify animals based on their shape. Uniqlo Wake Up helps replace your alarm with a voice that sings about the time, weather and day. Bantr App is for football fans across the world and lets them pose questions and hold discussions.

Scott Widak, 47, from Massachusetts, US, has Down Syndrome and is terminally ill with liver disease. Widak's nephew Sean O'Connor decided to lift his uncle's spirits with some help from the online world. "He is currently bedridden and living out his last days at home with my 85-year-old grandmother. One of his favorite things to do is open mail... anyone feel like sending him a letter or card?" O'Connor posted on Reddit, a social news website. Widak has since received hundreds of letters from across the world. A GEM FROM THE SEA OF THE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet

WEST

Weight of the World
US writer Lindy West, 30,took on the cause of overweight people in America with her article "Being Mean to Fat People Is Pointless" ,in women's blog Jezebel.Calling herself overweight,she says the world's obsession with obesity is hurting fat people."Afat person has health problems of any kind? It's because they are fat.Afat person is single? Well,duh.Fat.They deserve it," she wrote in the article read by 7,500 people.Instead of shaming the obese,she suggests preventive measures like healthier school lunches and improved fitness programmes.

94

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

