The I D E A S Factory

special issue

Bionic Man
Pulkit Gaur 31

Two brothers who tell you how employable you are. A man who gives you a first-hand feel of rural India. App makers. A car `spa' owner. Here are 20 entrepreneurs, stars of Inspiration Inc.
ndia is not the best place in the world to become an entrepreneur. It is, by some measures, one of the worst. According to the World Bank's Doing Business Rankings for 2012, India is a very poor 166 out of 183 nations on parameters relating to ease of starting a new business. For this, the Government and its cumbersome rules, regulations and processes must take the blame. It is to the credit of Indian enterprise that it continues to sprout new ventures even while it operates in a difficult business environment. India's growth story is driven by the strength of its private sector. That is what distinguishes India from its closest competitor, China, where economic growth has been driven by the state. The sustainability of India's growth depends on the ability of its entrepreneurs to prosper. The last 18 months have been challenging for even the strongest pillars of Indian entrepreneurs like the Ambani brothers and Ratan Tata, as interest rates have soared and policy paralysis has gripped Government. But it isn't all gloom. Big business has a loud voice, so there is a lot of bad news. But across the country, there are hundreds of young people who are striving to create new businesses from scratch every day. Becoming an entrepreneur is not an easy choice for them. Many have professional qualifications and could find safer, lucrative employment elsewhere. Yet, they take the risk. Young Indians are bubbling with innovative ideas and slowly turning them into viable, even profitable, business ventures. What follows is a list of 20 young entrepreneurs from across India, mostly in their 20s and 30s, whose stories are an inspiration. None of them is a household name. But neither were N.R. Narayana Murthy, Nandan Nilekani, N. S. Raghavan, S. Gopalakrishnan, S. D. Shibulal, K. Dinesh and Ashok Arora when they started an information technology company called Infosys well before India's computer revolution. Some of the ideas may seem too small to ever become big. But remember that India's telecom tycoon Sunil Mittal began life by manufacturing bicycle parts. Many of the young men and women featured on the list are tapping into new markets--in rural areas and the less affluent segments that will grow the fastest. Others are investing in the Internet space, where the potential to be a world beater depends more on an idea than on India's shoddy infrastructure. Every one of them is doing something offbeat. They may well be mainstream tomorrow. by Dhiraj Nayyar
SHAILESH RAVAL/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Signatures of Success

FOUNDER Gridbots Technologies, Ahmedabad A job at Google or Adobe is a dream come true for many budding Indian engineers, but Pulkit Gaur decided to pass up on offers from these companies to set up his own research and innovation firm.A 2004 gold medallist from Government Engineering College, Jodhpur, Gaur quit his job as a technical manager with Meditab Software in Ahmedabad to launch Gridbots Technologies in 2007. He has since supervised the development of over 50 robots that have applications in a diverse range of fields from defence to home-making. Gridbots'creations such as the GSR-1 robot, India's first telepresence robot--a robot fixed with a camera that can be operated from a remote location--can be used at home as well as at the workplace."I am getting paid for doing what I really enjoy.We want to be a pioneer in developing specific task-based robots and also become a permanent player in the field of robotics," says Gaur, who became a TED fellow, a platform for young innovators from around the world to interact and exchange ideas, in 2009. by Sibi Arasu

I

Country First Gridbots'
clients includes the Ministry of Home Affairs, Indian Navy, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, and NTPC.

Role Models Apple co-founders Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs. SECOND OPINION
The venture has grown faster than expected. Both Government and industry are realising the value of robotics now."
Chintan Kella, Research Associate, IIM-Ahmedabad
MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

46

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

47

The I D E A S Factory special issue

Place Wise
Himanshu Aggarwal 32 Varun Aggarwal 29
CO-FOUNDERS Aspiring Minds, Delhi India produces graduates by the millions but how many of them are really employable? The question perturbed IIT-Delhi alumnus Himanshu Aggarwal no end when he was working with Network Appliance for four years in the US.With younger brother Varun, then doing a postgraduate course in computer science from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Himanshu devised AMCAT, an employability measurement test to map skills-to-job fitment, based on aptitude, personality and functional area.The brothers set up SECOND Aspiring Minds in June 2007 to OPINION push the concept."The purpose is to connect potential candi"It is an excellent tool dates with recruiters," says that connects colleges Varun.The test result benefits with employers. Students both students--as they get an from small towns are also analysed report on their made accessible." strength/weakness and can Mukund Rajan, Managing work upon them--and rePartner, Tata Opportunities Fund cruiters, who get a ready-to-use database. An in-house research team of over 40 people works continuously on upgrading and updating the test. It's all about a neat fit."We believe there is a right kind of job for everyone. We try to fit them there," says Varun. by Ekta Marwaha

H.K.RAJASHEKAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

LAXMAN (LEFT) AND KRISHNA

Door-to-Door Himanshu and Varun tied up with colleges to set up test centres and pitched AMCAT to companies as a credible test that does away with the need to line up campus placements for recruitment. Tested OK
AMCAT has become India's largest employability screening. More than 30,000 students take it each month. Over 110 companies, including Genpact and Tata Motors, take its scores for recruitment.

SECOND OPINION

I love their satirical take on current affairs. To get comic relief while being able to follow a topical matter is always welcome.
Gul Panag, Film Actor

VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

HIMANSHU (LEFT) AND VARUN

With Malice for All
Karthik Laxman 29 C.S. Krishna 33
FOUNDER The Unreal Times, Delhi Do we have the ability to laugh at ourselves? Two IIMA graduates are testing our humour quotient with a website that pokes fun at all and sundry, especially politicians. Karthik Laxman and C.S. Krishna were in rural Bihar working full-time with a BJP MP on development initiatives in his constituency, Purnia, when they turned to humour for relief. "We posted a blog after the 2011 Union Budget on how dropping money bags from the sky was the best way to implement a direct cash transfer programme for poverty alleviation. We got such a kick out of it that we went on to start The Unreal

Times in April 2011," says Laxman. The website is managed by them as an alternative passion and has already had a few hit videos, especially one of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, as Manmohan Singham, destroying price rise and corruption with his flying kicks. "A few Congress supporters filed a complaint against us. But slowly the issue died down," says Laxman. Then there was this hilarious piece on a

CNN broadcast journalist interviewing Bollywood actor Imran Khan, taking him for his namesake, the Pakistani cricketer-turned-politician. "The Imran story was an instant hit in Pakistan; Indians noticed it only thereafter," says Laxman. The Delhi-based duo is now focusing on building a strong reader base and on uploading content that doesn't malign anyone but lights up people's faces. "Writing a piece for The

Unreal Times allows us to flush out our frustrations through a creative outlet. Importantly, it complements our work on policy issues," says Krishna. For now, they

make money through the advertisements. Sustenance of a website demands only Rs 7,000 to Rs 8,000 as hosting charges.
by Devika Chaturvedi

Serious Business The Unreal Times gets around 2,000 hits daily on an average, 10,000 on a really good day. A regularly updated Twitter account draws in more readers every passing day. Inspired Idea The duo has modelled their site on British
satirical website Thespoof.co.uk and hopes to take Indian political humour to the level of American websites such as Theonion.com.

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

The I D E A S Factory
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

special issue
SECOND OPINION

He developed the technology of touch-based systems at a time when it was still evolving in the West. His technology-driven entrepreneurial spirit is rare and impressive."
Raghunath Mashelkar, National Research Professor at the National Chemical Laboratory, Pune

floor or a table-top. Its products, priced between Rs 75,000 and Rs 4.9 lakh, have found their way into malls and offices. Wipro and Infosys offices use TouchMagix as an information tool. For Reebok, Tapadia created a template where the brand's logo was recreated as a footprint every time a customer walked on the floor. Tapadia started with a Rs 3-crore investment with his first installation at a Mumbai jeweller's home. Today, he exports 80 per cent of his kits to 40 countries. by Aditi Pai

Bond With the Best
In 2000, Tapadia got a
letter from Bill Gates congratulating him on becoming the youngest Microsoft certified professional. In 2005, Wipro chief Azim Premji sent him a hand-written note saying,"Anup, I wish I was as smart as you" . In 2005, Irwin Jacobs of Qualcomm invited Tapadia to work with him.

Touch of Magic
Anup Tapadia 26
OWNER TouchMagix Media, Pune At 14, Anup Tapadia became the world's youngest professional to clear all Microsoft certifications for computer applications, a global exam. At 19, he completed a master's in computer science from International Institute of Information Technology, Pune. At 21, he finished a second master's in electrical engineering from the University of California. He returned to India in 2009 to "make a truly Indian product for the global market from Indian soil". An expert

in origami, the traditional Japanese art of paper-folding, Tapadia married technology with creativity by launching TouchMagix Media in 2009. "It delivers a break-the-clutter medium to marketers who are concerned about their advertisements getting lost in the chaos of mass media," he says. TouchMagix creates interactive spaces for advertising, be it a wall, the

The Challenge Trying
to gain acceptance for his products."It's a new technology and until people see it, they don't believe it," he says.

50

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

The I D E A S Factory

special issue
Morgan Stanley in New York and then Hillcrest Labs in Washington, D.C.-- and returned to India in 2009 to work on a mobile publishing platform. They chose Bangalore as their base. Potharaju and Pratap pooled their own funds and raised around $75,000 (Rs 37,50,000) from some IIT-Madras alumni and launched MobStac in 2009. Apart from the Mobstac app, they have also developed `Touchsite', which provides an interactive touch to a standard website. The two apps are available for a monthly subscription fee of Rs 250 to Rs 1 lakh depending on the range and scale of use. They have found takers ranging from independent bloggers to mainstream magazines and newspapers interested in digital publishing. Some of their clients are The Hindu, Intomobile.com, a San Francisco-based digital publisher, as well as Mdhil.com, an India-based healthcare portal. They have "just started generating revenue", but aim to cross Rs 5 crore in 201213. "We are creating the company that we want to work in. And we're just getting started," says Pratap.
by Ayesha Aleem

Surfers' Delight
Sharat Potharaju 32 and Ravi Pratap 31
CO-FOUNDERS MobStac, Bangalore Always had problems of websites turning up distorted on your mobile phone? MobStac, a software developed by two Hyderabad entrepreneurs, Sharat Potharaju and Ravi Pratap, has the answer. Once the owner of a website subscribes to the service, users can access a display customised to their phone. Childhood friends and chemical engineers from IIT-Madras, they realised that Internet consumption had shifted from PCs and laptops to mobile phones in a big way since the arrival of the iPhone and new-age android phones. They gave up their jobs--Sharat was working at Merrill Lynch in New York, Ravi with

SECOND OPINION

Sky's the Limit They plan to add a social networking
layer to the present service so that when one uses MobStac, it will reflect on their social media feeds.

Why Bangalore? Although hometown Hyderabad has
a significant IT presence, the duo chose to work in Bangalore because of a supportive ecosystem. Also, it has greater funding opportunities.

I have been using MobStac on my website for some time now. Sharat and Ravi have done a phenomenal job. We've seen significant traffic on the mobile website, so much so that it's become an entity on its own."
Ashish Sinha, Founder and
CEO of Pluggd.in, a popular

PRATAP (LEFT) POTHARAJU

entrepreneurship and technology blog

SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

52

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

The I D E A S Factory

Virtual Realty
Kalyan Manyam 32
FOUNDER/CEO Mojostreet,

special issue
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Hyderabad
Want to own prime locations in your city? You don't have to spend even a rupee. Simply get on to Mojostreet, a phone app-based game that lets you own any place in the city virtually, and is a city guide and friend finder to boot. Created by Kalyan Manyam in January 2011, the app already has 65,000 users and 5.5 million locations listed across India that one can own or buy virtually. It also enables people to share their location with friends on Facebook, Twitter and BlackBerry messenger. The next generation of BlackBerry phones will have this app preinstalled."It's also a way of connecting businesses with consumers. For instance, if you shared with three friends on Mojostreet that you are sitting at Café Coffee Day, you'll be rewarded with a freebie at Café Coffee Day. So it encourages the user to keep coming back," explains Manyam. A master's in information systems from Eastern Michigan University in 2004, Manyam launched Mojostreet with his brother Vishnu, a doctor, with an investment of Rs 1.5 crore. Today, at least 350 market players, including Subway and Barista, have tied up with Mojostreet. by Mona Ramavat

SUBBA (LEFT), GAUTAM

Mixed Doubles
Mamta Gautam 30 and Rajiv Subba 30
OWNER Dirty Hands prosthetics company,Ahmedabad When they approached Ra.One director Anubhav Sinha with their work, his reaction was, "You are five years ahead of your time." National Institute of Design graduates Mamta Gautam, an architect, and Rajiv Subba, a sculptor, are into making life-size silicone mannequins that look as real as they get. Their studio in Ahmedabad, Dirty Hands, which they set up in 2008 with a loan of Rs 2 lakh from Gautam's parents, has raised design, structure and hyperrealism into an art. Aren't their sculptures the silicone equivalent of Madame Tussauds's wax collection? Not really, says Subba. Albeit an expensive element, silicon affords possibilities wax doesn't, he

What's Your Mojo You compete with friends and unknown users on your `net worth' based on how many locations you own. To earn more mojo dollars, you need to keep checking into a place. For instance, if you own Hyderabad Central on Mojostreet, you need to actually--not virtually--keep going back to Hyderabad Central and check into Mojostreet from there to continue owning it.

SECOND OPINION

Kalyan is one of the very few young people I've met with strong technical and business skills. We have a potential winner."
Srini Koppolu, CEO, Setu Software Systems
SRINIVAS

says. "Wax needs a lot of maintenance and correct temperature whereas silicone material is more realistic. In movies, our sculptures can easily replace live body doubles," he adds. Mastering the art wasn't easy. "There was no one to teach us how to go about it. Besides, we had to import silicone from the US," says Subba. Practice makes perfect. And perfection comes at a price. Dirty Hands mannequins start from Rs 10 lakh onwards. Yet their turnover in 2011 was nearly Rs 50 lakh.

SECOND OPINION

Prosthetics for films has always scared me because of the poor quality. For Raaz 3, I met the Dirty Hands team. I was ecstatic at the quality of their work."
Vikram Bhatt, Filmmaker

Find a Friend The app can tell
you if any of your friends (from Mojostreet) are nearby. One also gets information about other users if they happen to check in from the same location as you do.

Ticket to Bollywood Dirty Hands sculpts prosthetics for films and has done work for
six films including Anurag Kashyap's Gangs of Wasseypur and Vikram Bhatt's Raaz 3.

Hand it to Them Gautam and Subba are now working on developing prosthetic body parts with silicone, which no one is using in India yet. Silicone looks more realistic, is more flexible and is low on maintenance, unlike wax figures. They also plan to create toilet seats and shower areas for elderly people.

Gautam says Dirty Hand's team of "15 talented and skilful individuals" is now working on building lifelike body parts. "The texture, colour and even patterns of body hair will be as close to the real thing as possible," she adds. They made a Gandhi sculpture for Gandhi Research Foundation at Jalgaon and many sculptures for the Jain Mahotsav that was held in Ahmedabad.
by Devika Chaturvedi

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

55

The I D E A S Factory

ANIRBAN (LEFT) AND ROMIRA

The Fringe Benefits
Anirban Roy 34 Romira Roy 32
FOUNDERS Seed, Delhi Husband-wife duo Anirban and Romira Roy realised during their corporate stints as senior consultant with Ernst and Young and HR manager with Tata Power respectively that there exists a huge chasm between corporate social responsibility (CSR) goals of companies and their implementation. Graduates of Indian Management Institute, Delhi, they decided to make a difference."We wanted Seed to act as a bridge for better implementation of CSR activities and to ensure communities receive greater benefits," says Anirban, its executive director. Founded in 2006, Seed's work includes facilitating financial inclusion by helping those with no access to banks. The Roys also work with companies such as SAIL and Reliance SECOND Industries to improve the OPINION living standards of communities in and around project Mining areas are sensisites. Romira puts things tive. We trusted Seed's in perspective,"CSR even credibility, so we today is seen by many as approached them just empty philanthropy. We to help us with our want to work towards esdevelopment projects." tablishing professional Mukund Gorakshkar, vigour in the field." Head of CSR, JSW Group
by Sibi Arasu

VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Seed to Sapling Seed began as a two-person team. It
now employs more than 3,000 people.

Growing Footprint Seed has now expanded into separate sections for financial services, infrastructure and CSR-oriented projects.
RACHIT GOSWAMI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Book Worm
Sunder Nookala 37
FOUNDER Kwench Library Solutions, Mumbai Sunder Nookala wanted to be an engineer but his father couldn't afford it. So he settled for chartered accountancy. Today, Kwench Library Solutions, the company he set up in April 2008 with his IIM-A friends Prashant John, Krishnan Madhabushi and Mitesh Damania, has 300 corporate clients, 85 employees and a turnover target of Rs 500 crore by 2018. Kwench was born out of their collective desire to address the lack of SECOND OPINION proper library facilities at workplaces. It ties up with clients to offer library solutions for employees with its collection of 50,000 books, besides magazines, journals and movies. Books are delivered at the employee's desk within 24 hours. The company turned cash positive in June 2010 and has stayed so since.
by Nishat Bari

Giant Leap Kwench started with 13 clients in 2008 and now has 300 clients spread over seven cities. Steal Deal In November 2011,
Kwench introduced Myperks.in, a purchase programme that offers everything from 30 categories, including books, magazines, travel packages, baby care and electronics, at discounted rates.

The services are innovative and user-friendly. Our employees are happy to avail of these at the workplace."
Binoj Vasu, Chief Learning Officer, YES Bank

The I D E A S Factory
TULI (LEFT) AND ANAND

special issue
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Joys of Singledom
Rahul Anand 37 Rajat Tuli 36
FOUNDER Happily Unmarried, Delhi Wear your attitude. Or spread it all over your home. Happily Unmarried's funky lifestyle products let you do all that and more. Rahul Anand's nine-year-old lifestyle brand was born out of lateral thinking, bachelorhood and no money. The dot com bust was on and Anand hadn't been paid for six months by his employer in Hyderabad. He moved to Delhi and partnered with Rajat Tuli, 36, his batchmate from Mudra Institute of Communications, Ahmedabad, to start Happily Unmarried. It was initially conceived as a one-stop shop for young people SECOND OPINION

Their ideas are completely original and rooted in an Indian ethos, not wannabe Western."
Meeta S., Founder, Either Or, a Pune store

living on their own, from finding them accommodation to sourcing fun gifts. Anand and Tuli then moved on to designing and retailing lifestyle products. From an initial investment that came off a pawned laptop for Rs 50,000 to a turnover of Rs 5 crore-plus this year from 100 retail stores in India and in three countries abroad, the duo has had some happy anniversaries. "Today, there are lots of new players who are trying to imitate us, which tells us we might be doing something right," says Anand.
by Mona Ramavat

Designed Differently
Happily Unmarried's products are unique, from tiffin box-shaped CD holders to fun graffiti T-shirts to their signature toiletshaped ashtray called the `sandas ashtray' , but they all have an unmistakable Indian connect."Our design ideas come from professionals and even the building security guard," says Anand.

Happy-Go-Lucky Tuli got married three years ago thanks to Happily Unmarried. His wife used to design for the company. Anand is still happily unmarried.

58

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

The I D E A S Factory
ABHISHEK MANDE VIKRAM RYAN

special issue
MATHUR (LEFT) AND JUNEJA

Green and Clean
Ankit Mathur 27 Neha Juneja 27
FOUNDERS Greenway Grameen

Infra, Mumbai
If Delhi College of Engineering graduates Ankit Mathur and Neha Juneja have their way, rural India would be lighting greener fires in the kitchen. The duo launched the Greenway Smart Stove in 2011, four times more efficient than the ubiquitous mud chulha and emitting 80 per cent less smoke. It followed more than a year of travelling across rural India researching on the cooking techniques. Priced at Rs 1,300, the duo has sold around 5,000 stoves, including 300 SECOND OPINION

in Bangladesh. The big leap would happen if the stove, which awaits government approval, gets an official subsidy for a country-wide cooking stove replacement programme. Mathur and Juneja entered the rural infrastructure sector in 2010 with Greenway Grameen Infra. In 2011-2012, they reached a turnover of Rs 40 lakh and are aiming for Rs 5-8 crore this year. "Getting a well-paying job won't be a problem even today. It is the satisfaction of working for the greater good of the country that keeps us going," says Mathur.
by Prachi Rege

Brand Builder
Adhvith Dhuddhu 25
FOUNDER AND CEO AliveNow,

Bangalore
He epitomises what the Facebook generation can do. Adhvith Dhuddhu handles social media marketing for corporate giants such as Barista Lavazza, Fortis and Honda. His experiment began when he was studying industrial engineering at Virginia Tech. He saw many corporate set-ups embracing the World Wide Web. He returned to India in 2009 and started AliveNow to market online space for companies. "We are a onestop shop for all social media needs," he says. Hard Rock Café was one of his first clients. AliveNow's annual turnover is Rs 60-75 lakh and is projected to cross Rs 1 crore by 2013. "Brands listen to us because we are the masters of this field," says Dhuddhu.
by Ayesha Aleem

Black Magic Convincing
villagers to give up their mud chulha was a big hurdle. It was not the pricing, or the less smoke that sold it to the villagers; it was the fact that the stove wouldn't blacken the walls.

It is going to be a long road ahead for them but they will reach a successful and profitable destination."
Anurag Bhatnagar, CEO, Grassroots Trading Network for Women, a SEWA initiative
MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Up Next A mobile charger called the thermoelectric device which helps in sustaining electricity in rural India. A pilot project on this was launched in Patna in end-2011. Rural Connect For someone
who didn't know any other language besides English, connecting with tribals in the countryside was a huge hurdle.What began as a village tour involving five Purushwadi families has now expanded to 80 families in that village.

SECOND OPINION

Back to the Village
Inir Pinheiro 31
OWNER Grassroutes

Journeys, Mumbai
He wants shining India to get a feel of how things work in the lights-out countryside. Inir Pinheiro owns Grassroutes Journeys, a tourism company that functions as a tour operator and gives urban Indians an opportunity to experience life in villages. Pinheiro and his team of seven people organise what they

call `experiential' trips to three Maharashtra villages: Purushwadi, Valvanda and Dehena. These are marginal farming areas where most families are landless and don't have a steady income. A two day-one night stay at a village of your choice costs anywhere between Rs 1,900 to Rs 2,500. Modern sanitation facilities have been put in place in all the villages; sleeping bags are provided to the tourists. Pinheiro, who completed his management degree in 2006 from Xavier Institute of

Management, Bhubaneswar, has invested Rs 35 lakh in the venture. Grassroutes Journeys hopes to break even in 2012-13.
by Prachi Rege

AliveNow started with handling just our social media marketing. In six months, that role extended to all online communication."
Kiran Nadkarni, CEO, Kaati Zone, a chain of fast-food restaurants

SECOND OPINION

Expand Footprint
Grassroutes Journeys aims to organise tours to 200 villages across India in the next five years, creating one million jobs.

Way to Go AliveNow won
the Nasscom Emerge 50 League Award in 2011. Dhuddu was shortlisted for British Council's Young Creative Entrepreneur Award in 2011.

Grassroutes Journeys is a great idea for creating sustainable employment."
Ritu Verma, Partner, Ankur Capital, a social investment seed fund

Owe it to Obama Barack Obama's use of digital media during his 2008 campaign showed Dhuddu that social media had effected a paradigm shift.

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

The I D E A S Factory

special issue
SANJAY RAMCHANDRAN

Start-up Specialists
Anand Chhatpar 30 Shikha Chhatpar 27
FOUNDERS of multiple Internet-based companies, Bangalore The need to "touch the lives of millions together and not just a handful" got this entrepreneur couple back to India from the US in 2010. Anand, a computer engineering graduate from University of Wisconsin, Madison, and Shikha, a biomedical engineer from the same university, have mastered the art of launching Internet-based companies. If IndiaRentalAgreement.com allows people to get a legal lease agreement at the click of a mouse, Phunwa.com, a project in the works, SECOND is a comprehensive teleOPINION phone directory that will list phone numbers from even They are great examthe remotest of villages. ples of the potential of "The initial investment has young India to lead the been predominantly time world in innovation." and knowledge. Our mission David Wittenberg, CEO, is to build projects that will The Innovation Workgroup, improve the lives of people which offers innovation consultation to corporates in India," says Anand.
by Mona Ramavat

SETHI (LEFT) AND AHLUWALIA

College Classic Anand floated his first company, BrainReactions, in 2004. It taps young minds and pitches their innovative ideas to corporate leaders. Source at Home The duo is setting up a team for Fame Express LLC in Bangalore whose Facebook applications in the dating and games category have been used by over 20 million people worldwide.
SHIKHA AND ANAND

Sound of Music
Manujendra Singh Ahluwalia 28 Vineet Sethi 28
OWNERS Hysteria store,

Bangalore

Cushy banking jobs after an MBA from IMT, Ghaziabad, in 2007, is a great move-up-inlife idea. Except that friends Manujendra Singh Ahluwalia and Vineet Sethi could never get used to corporate suits, corner cubicles and the sheer drudgery of 9-to-5 life. They fell back on old passions-- music and superheroes--to launch India's first youth-oriented concept store, Hysteria, in July 2010 in Bangalore. It sells original, licensed music and superhero merchandise

in apparel, accessories and artwork. The launch was preceded by six months of research and liaison with suppliers. "It helped that the city has a thriving music scene. We were also lucky to get a place at Church Street, Bangalore's Times Square," says Sethi. Two years on, Hysteria, which started with an initial investment of Rs 12 lakh, has an annual turnover of Rs 1 crore. The duo opened another store in Pune in February and has

also gone online to cater to buyers beyond Bangalore and Pune. "We wanted to do something that resounded with people of our age. And, of course, make a lot of money in the process," says Ahluwalia. The success has allowed them to do their bit for Indian music too. "We promote many Indian bands like Kryptos, Inner Sanctum, Shepherd by putting up their merchandise at our store," says Sethi.
by Devika Chaturvedi

One-Stop Shop Elvis to
The Doors, Superman to Batman, if you worship music or believe in superheroes, Hysteria is the goto place.

SECOND OPINION

Now in India The store
has become a landmark for philharmonics who until recently had to pester `foreign-based' cousins to source T-shirts, caps and action figures of superheroes and rock music idols.

From jazz to psychedelic, from rock to trance, every genre of music finds expression in their original merchandise. We don't find this kind of stuff anywhere else in India."
Nolan Lewis, founder of rock band Kryptos

SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

62

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

The I D E A S Factory
VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

special issue
SECOND OPINION

Food on the Go
Deepinder Goel 29 Pankaj Chaddah 26
CO-FOUNDERS Zomato.com, Delhi Craving for a cheesy pizza but don't know where to order from? IIT-Delhi graduates Deepinder Goel and Pankaj Chaddah encountered the same problem when they worked at consultancy firm Bain and Company's Delhi office between 2006 and 2009. "There was just one file with menu cards, and people would jostle with one another to grab it," says Goel. So they scanned the menu cards and put them up online."Within days, the file became redundant. Everyone was logging onto our website Foodiebay.com," says Chaddah. The two then approached restaurateurs to let them put up their menus online. As their blog started getting enough hits to become a business proposition, Goel and Chaddah quit their jobs and launched Zomato.com in July 2008. Standing for "tomato with a zing" , the site lists menus, pictures and even Google Maps links of 1,200-odd dine-in and delivery restaurants in and around Delhi. What's more, a section on events around town and restaurant reviews by people make it a userdriven portal. by Ekta Marwaha

It's very convenient to log on to one site that gives you so much information on restaurants. Even I use Zomato frequently. But there's one glitch; the reviews are not all authentic. There should be some streamlining."
Anusuiya Sikka, Director, Magique Hospitality

Make it Large Zomato.com has an events and nightlife section. Mobile apps and a GPS-enabled search system were added in 2011. It has also tied up with the iBall tablet to launch a pre-packaged application. Hit Menu 2.5 million people
visited the site in March. Chaddah and Goel plan to expand their listings to Dubai, Singapore and Shanghai.
64
INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

GOEL (LEFT) AND CHADDAH

The I D E A S Factory
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

special issue

Car Sewak
Harish Kumar Bhaskaran 31
OWNER Splash Spa, Bangalore He loves cars, like everyone else. But it's not getting behind the wheel that gets Harish Kumar Bhaskaran's adrenaline going. His passion for cars took a rather unusual route--he loves cleaning them. So much so that he quit his nine-tofive job with an insurance company to set up a car wash service, Splash Spa in Bangalore. He had to sell his first car, a Hyundai Accent, to launch his venture in October 2011. What makes his spa different from regular car wash centres? He cleans and shines right at your doorstep. Using a 22-year-old Maruti van fitSECOND ted with a 250-litre water OPINION tank and machines from Thailand, he gives showroom I was one of Harish's shine to cars. He is very parfirst customers. His ticular about the cloth he service is exceptional and not expensive. He is uses so that no scratches always punctual." are left behind."There's no point if you create a clone of Sanal Rao, Assistant Manager with a corporate firm something that already exists. If you start something, do it differently," he says. He charges Rs 600 per month for a five-day-a-week wash and vacuum cleaning once a month. Thanks to him, every day 450 Bangalore car owners get to drive around in gleaming cars. And the numbers are stacking up. by Ayesha Aleem

Voice of the Young
Shiv Bhaskar Dravid 26
FOUNDER The Viewspaper, Gurgaon When he was 21, he started an online publication called The Viewspaper, a forum where youngsters could be heard. "I wanted to dispel the notion that young people are incapable of having a serious opinion," says Shiv Bhaskar Dravid. Within a month of launch, he had 40 college-going contributors. In less than five SECOND OPINION years, The Viewspaper has 10,000 registered contributors. From write-ups on everything--politics, the Budget, environment and movies--the website has branched into photojournalism and videos. In January, The Viewspaper launched a 72-hour tweetathon aimed at changing the tone on Twitter from negative to positive. "We even had celebrities like Kiran Bedi pitching in," says the self-confessed workaholic. His turnover for 2011-12 is expected to touch Rs 20 lakh. The website is currently setting up a campaign on women's security. by Shravya Jain

First Love Bhaskaran would get dressed in formals just
to wash his car."I sometimes took leave from work so I could stay home and wash my car," he says.

Road Ahead He plans to set up an automobile service
centre soon, apart from branching out into professional house cleaning.

The content that Shiv publishes on youngsters by youngsters is a class apart."
Ravi Shankar, Co-founder of Proto.in, a support platform for start-ups

Cause Warrior The Viewspaper was adjudged as one of the top eight socially focused businesses in the world by the Virginia-based Ashoka Foundation in 2011. In Anna's Army Dravid helped Team Anna strategise on
how to leverage the online media.
SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

Sanjeev Bikhchandani
GUEST COLUMN
The writer is founder and executive vice-chairman of Naukri.com
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

special issue

Idea Evangelist
Dinesh Goel 31
FOUNDER Innovative Ideators, Indore He collects ideas through crowd sourcing and makes a successful business of it. Dinesh Goel chanced upon the idea while studying for his MBA degree at Thunderbird School of Global Management, US, in 2006. Believing the "time was still not right", he plunged into the family business of woollen products before setting up Innovative Ideators in 2011. "An idea can come from anyone, anywhere, anytime," he says. Innovative Ideators started with zero capital and generated revenue of Rs 1.25 crore with its first project. The business is driven by SECOND the fees a company has OPINION to pay to get access to ideas; there are no charges for participants. So, a company can pay anything between Rs 1 lakh and Rs 30 lakh depending on the `crowd' it sources ideas from.
by Aditi Pai

Learn to take a risk
Successful entrepreneurs keep at it. Don't give up.

Do
Solve an unsolved problem Some of the most successful businesses in the world have been built on deep customer insight. Specifically, they began by solving an unsolved problem for their customers. Sell to customers yourself It is important for an entrepreneur to really know the pulse of the market. The best way to do that is to go out into the field and sell to customers yourself. This not only earns revenue for the company and motivates the sales team, but it also sharpens your judgement and gives you invaluable feedback from customers directly. Be persistent Most entrepreneurs face financial struggle for several years before they succeed. It goes with the territory, so be prepared to face it. During this period your commitment will be tested and you will be tempted to throw in the towel. The best kept secret of most successful first generation entrepreneurs is that they kept at it. So don't give up. Be conservative and frugal Budget generously for cost overruns, time delays and revenue shortfalls. They will happen. Tighten your belt and make personal sacrifices, chances are that there will be months on end when you will not be able take a salary for yourself. Remember you are only in control of your costs, not your revenues. Set the bar high for hiring You cannot do it alone. You need good people with you. Don't compromise on the quality of the people you bring onto your team. The single biggest mistake that early stage entrepreneurs make is

they hire poor quality people initially either because they are in a hurry or because they believe they cannot afford to pay more. More often than not, they regret this in hindsight. Share the wealth Early on when the company is not worth much, most employees don't really bother about their employee stock options. However, should the company go on to become valuable and then if employees who joined early on feel they have been treated unfairly, then you could have a serious problem on your hands. It is really important that you treat everyone in the team fairly as far as company ownership is concerned.

It's a great concept. We now live in a world where for every corporate, it's innovate or die."
Piyush Mathur, President (India Region), The Nielsen Company

Future Bright He was named one of Businessweek's
top 20 upcoming young entrepreneurs in Asia in 2006.

Don't
Raise money from others without understanding the responsibility While people may be taking an equity risk when they invest in your company, you have to regard it as if they have given you a personal loan. Your personal reputation is your greatest asset. If people lose money by backing you, you can forget about raising money again from them. Overcommit When raising money, you will be tempted to give aggressive projections to get a higher valuation. Remember, investors will make you sign an agreement that will give them powers that are disproportionate to their shareholding. If you consistently deliver numbers that are way below what you promised, this chicken could come home to roost. Undercommit and overdeliver and you will be happier. Lose good people Do what it takes to retain valuable employees, they are worth their weight in gold.
SECOND OPINION

Ideas That Work A student team from Innovative
Ideators' MBA Challenge 2011 is now working for iInteract, a marketing consultancy service. Four students are in touch with Airtel for detailed branding ideas.

World in a Cup
Amar Patel 34
OWNER Buttercup Cupcake,Ahmedabad All through graduation, from Nirma University in Ahmedabad, he was a gold medallist.And even before he completed a double master's from the Univeristy of Wisconsin-Madison and Illinois Institute of Technology, Caterpillar Inc., the world's leading construction equipment manufacturer, picked him up. It's hard to believe all this when you know Amar Patel sells cupcakes for a living. "Working for a big company and moving up the ranks did seem like a smart thing to do. But nothing was more important to me than being close to my parents," he says.The transition from turbines,

by Devika Chaturvedi

Past Life Patel holds a US patent for Product Design Optimisation Method and System, issued on August 31, 2010. Baker's Dozens Patel loves meeting the people who flock to his shop daily."As an employee I never got to interact with so many people," he says."I am a cakewalla now."
Compiled by Abdus Salam
MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

PANKAJTIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

diesel engines and mining trucks to baking cupcakes was stark but smooth. Patel had no clue what he'd be doing when he decided in 2011 to pack his bags in the US. Caterpillar's India office was ruled out: It is in Chennai."One day, my wife Darshini baked me an exquisite cake with orange zests," he recalls,"and I thought to myself, if she can do this, why not make a business of it? So here we are, baking cupcakes in India after spending 11 years in a different country." Just two months into Buttercup Cupcake setting up

Amar has always been a positive person. No matter what he chooses to do in life, he will shine at it."
Vikas Lakhera, Professor, Nirma University

shop in Ahmedabad in February, and Patel is doing business worth Rs 5.5 lakh a month, selling up to 500 cupcakes a day.The bakery has got a great buzz, with inquiries coming in from other cities like Hyderabad and Delhi as well.

67

