AnimPACTfeaiure

*m

J
In recent times, higher education has emerged as India's major strength, especially in professional and technical education, and is the envy of the developing world. India, with its diversity, fascinates one and all. This became possible with the entry of the private sector in the higher education system. Private participation has not only accelerated the growth, but also added a new dimension to the higher education landscape. The private sector is the fastest growing segment in higher education. During the past few years, more private institutions than public ones have been established in India who have catapulted India at the forefront of the economics of the world This period also saw the emergence of certain areas which outpaced rest of the country and came to be known as Education Hubs of India. Important regions are Gurgaon and Noida in North, Bangalore and Chennai in the South. We bring to you some of the established institutes of these Education Hubs.

After the successful story of secondary schools, G.D Goenka forays into University Education

G D Goenka University hoti a of T:
nettle

w

he famous and highly reputed Lancaster University - one of the highest ranked foreign University - established an Indian partnership with the G.D Goenka Group in 2009. The group has always believed in providing Quality Education and maintained the best education standards in their schools as well as the college. And keeping this mission in mind, now the group is ready to get into the next level - G D Goenka University. The new University is undergoing construction at a massive sixty acre campus at Sohna, Gurgaon. All the necessary approvals have been filed and from 2013, G D Goenka University would be ready to roll. It is a momentous time for the Group and a lot is expected from them. Young Leadership at Helm

The G.D Goenka Group now sees the light of the future under the entrepreneurship of the scion, Nipun Goenka who is now at the forefront of the group's functioning along with his father. An alumnus of GD Goenka public school, Vasant Kunj, Nipun went to Warwick Business School for management studies and has completed two levels of Chartered Institute of Marketing from London.

jmp
ftiu have stepped into the corporate world at a relatively young age. How interesting or challenging do you find this? I started pretty early yes, at 21 with Spazio Travel and well with the guidance of ray father and the inspiration that he has been to me I know that all is going to be well with his blessings. It is very interesting because I plan to take the G.D Goenka Group into wider areas of business, apart from the education sector and challenging definitely to capitalize on my original ideas for the Group versus what my father has already established. We heard you interned abroad, tell us more,., My uncle heads Welspun Group. It is one of the biggest home textile and steel player in the world. I interned for three months in Welspun New Yorl Office on Fifth Avenue during summer break in college. The partnership with Lancaster University was your innovation, so ;;- behind this? · ' ' , I traveled across the UK exploring various Universities and finalized a partnership with Lancaster University. Lancaster is not one of England's most well known Universities but my reasoning behind the choice was sound. I wanted to attract the middle segment of Indian students, not the very wealthy, and so a middle ranking university like Lancaster was perfect. What are your future plans? I plan to scale up the education part of the business. Currently there are forty Schools in India and one in Dubai; I aim for over 100 in India and at least 10 abroad in the next five years. The stage is already set for a World Class University recognized by the Government with multiple foreign tie ups. We have 25 franchisee and operational schools at the moment and our net market value today is around 2000 crore. In the next five years, we plan *" more schools and have six ne in a sixty acre campus. We plan to have a market value of 5000

Goenka realizes that, at 26, he still has a lot to learn from his father. One important lesson he has already absorbed is the importance of trusting people. "When I joined the business, I tended to be suspicious. I didn't trust people. My father taught me how to build relationships," he says. Like any bright young man, he is impatient to make his own mark. Even when he was studying for his management degree from Warwick University in the UK, he developed the idea of adding specially packaged luxury tours to the travel business that his father had been running. Goenka believes that the government's bill aimed at attracting foreign universities to set up campuses in India will be passed and will be successful. Eventually, he predicts, the big names such as Oxford or Harvard will set up shop in India but not for at least five years. "Once the middle level players have entered India and shown success then the big players will gain confidence and come in too," he says. On a different stratosphere altogether, he is the only agent in India with sole marketing rights for Richard Branson's space travel agency, Virgin Galactic. As Director of Goenka World Travels, he launched the service in 2007 with Civil Aviation Minister Praful Patel present. The journey offered is into space -100 km above the earth - and back with four minutes of weightlessness at a cost of Rs 80 lakh. Goenka is giving space travel time to germinate in people's minds. He knows that people are anxious about travelling at incredible speeds and leaving the earth's orbit. No one wants to be the first to try it. It will take time .Once the first brave guinea pigs have gone and returned homes safely, he is confident, pun unintended, that it will take off. Goenka enjoys using the gym every day at the family farmhouse in Mehrauli. He enjoys traveling, movies, basketball, poker, Formulal racing, European football and reading the autobiographies of famous businessmen. His favourite businessman is his Dad. He respects him for pioneering the change in education that the first G. D. Goenka School represented. And while he might volunteer ideas to his father on the school, he happily recognizes the limits of his involvement because, as he says, the schools are his baby and he should be allowed to grow them the way he wants.

H- w- 9 ,,,,,,,. I

INTALKWITH
I NIPUN GOENKA MANAGING DIRECTOR, G D Goenka Group

KARNATAKA, the leading educational center.
The Southern states of India have seen a rise in terms of government initiatives, public- private partnerships and industry- institution collaboration; making it a conducive area for pursuit of education. The state of Karnataka emerges as a leading state with some of the greatest breakthrough educational facilities available in its territory. Dubbed as the leading educational center in India for Information and Technology; Karnataka's education system is a promising pasture for aspiring students.

SIT - Nurturing the young minds
X{lfc

Siddaganga Institute of Technology which was established in the year 1963 is one of the premier engineering institutions in the country and one among over 130 educational institutions run by Sree Siddaganga Education Society. The founder president of the society is Dr. Sree Sree Sivakumara Swamiji who is also the head of Sree Siddaganga Math.

^jL' J ;, -f; · jf
Dr. M.N. Channobasappa Director

T

he institute is located on a sprawling campus of 65 acres of lush green area in an ideal and congenial environment in Tumkur city on Bangatore-Pune National Highway (NH-4) 65 km from Bangalore. The institute offers 12 UG programmes in Engineering and 12 PG programmes including MCA and MBA. The institute has more than 60 Ph.D. holders on rolls of faculty and excellent laboratory facilities thus providing a very good research ambience. 13 departments are recognized as research centres and offer research programmes leading to Ph.D. The institute has become Autonomous under Visvesvaraya

Principal

and eight faculty from these deparfrr

ng for the project

BMSET - EXCELLENCE IN EDUCATION

T
I B.S. Ragini Narayan Donor Trustee & Member Secretary BMS Educational Trust

i

E

l " i

he BMS Educational Trust owes its existence to the great visionary Dharmaprakasha Rajakaryaprasakta Late Sri.B.M.Sreenivasaiah, an eminent Industrialist & Philanthropist. He strongly believed 'Education' was the key towards the economic and social development & advancement of society and he worked tirelessly towards this goal. He founded BMS College of Engineering (BMSCE) in 1946, the first private engineering college to be established in the country. After the demise of Sri B.M.Sreenivasaiah, Sri B S Narayan, the illustrious son of the founder developed BMSCE into one of the finest Engineering Colleges in the country. The BMS Educational Trust, Bangalore which was registered in 1958, manages six institutions with over 12000 students including 240 foreign students from 30 countries. The affairs of these institutions are now controlled by a Council of Trustees appointed by Smt. B.S. Ragini Narayan, Successor of Late Sri. B.S.Narayan and also the Donor Trustee & Member Secretary of BMS Educational Trust. BMS College of Engineering offers excellent infrastructure facilities with wi-fi connectivity and have highly qualified and experienced faculty. Currently over 4800 students are pursuing their PG/UG studies and 111 persons are pursuing the.Research work leading to Ph.D Degree. The college has

topped VTU rank list by securing 32 ranks & 4 Gold Medals during 2010-11 and over 90% of the students getting distinction. The college has signed MOU with Infosys Ltd. and Tata Consultancy Services on learning, hiring and research requirements. BMS Institute of Technology, Yelahanka, Bangalore - 64, was set up in 2002 with a goal of creating a premier technical institution on par with international standards. The college has gained reputation being in top ten Engineering colleges in Karnataka and amongst top 50 in the country. The college has secured five ranks for 2011. The college stood 2nd in the all India level with over 94% placements in the previous years. BMS School of Architecture was established in 2010. It offers five years Degree course in Architecture. It will have an impressive independent campus for the college in due course. BMS Evening College of Engineering was started in 1973 and helped thousands of Diploma Engineers to upgrade themselves to B.E qualification while continuing their jobs. BMS College for Women was established in 1964, offers three years degree courses and 2 year PU course and is dedicated to the cause of women's education. BMS College of Law was established in 1963 and affiliated to Bangalore University, the college offers 5 year and 3 year LLB Degree courses.

AnimPACTFeature

HAA - The threshold of a high flying career
mong India's top aviation institutions, Hindustan Academy, Bangalore under Mr. K.C. Samuel, the Chairman, stands out for its professional education that inspires excellence in students and transforms them into world class engineers. It tias three institutions under its wings and offers courses in six engineering disciplines. Hindustan Aviation Academy (HAA) offers a four-year B.Tech degree in Aerospace engineering, approved by the Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGN0U) in face to face mode; and a three-year (six semesters) AiE licence course approved by the Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). In AME final semester, students are deputed for hands-on training with reputed civil airmail organizations. Former students of HAA am today well -placed as Aircraft stance Engineers and technicians in loading global companies like Singapore International airlines. Kingfisher. Qatar, Emirates, Air Arabia as well as Ail India. : Hindustan Electronics Academy SHEA! conducts Diploma courses : « 9, et science, Mechanical, hlcciromcs & Communicaimn:;. Automobile and Aeronautics fields which Automobile and Mechanical Engineering streams) have been recently recruited on campus by Volkswagen, Mahindra & Mahindra, Toyota, Taneja Aerospace, Quest etc. Hindustan Business School, with an annual intake of 60 students, offers a three-year 8BM (Bachelor of Business Management) course approved by the Bangalore University. Exceptionally qualified visiting faculty share their rich industry expertise and conduct workshops that provide a solid platform for students in their future ventures. Academy Resources Students have direct access to many of ,t J trainer aircraft, Cessna aircraft simulator, Avionics & electrical accessories, flight & engine instruments, radio & navigation systems and additional aircraft training mockups. Other highlights include modem, well-equipped computer labs, workshops and a fully stocked library. The courses have bcmi approved by DTE, (iovt of Karnataka,^, AICTF. Bangaloie Univoisily & Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Government oi India. Out sister oii'.ani/ation, International Aviation Academy has a'recently inaugurated Hying School at Salem airport where training tor the first batch of Commercial Pilot : Licence ffiPl.) and 1'iivate Pilot Licence (PPL) has already commenced.

' need faculty, students

MYRA School of Business
YRA School of Business is one of the finest 'Research Based Learning' B-Schools in India. MYRA (Mysore Royal Academy) is set up by a group of distinguished academics and industry stalwarts--led by Prof. Shalini Urs, an internationally recognized Information Scientist, Fulbright scholar, and Executive Director of the International School of Information Management; and Prof Shrijay Devaraj Urs, veteran academician, UNDP consultant, and Professor at Institute of Development Studies, University of Mysore. Together, they bring more than seventy years of academic leadership experience and expertise. The Dean of MYRA School of Business, Prof. Rajiv K. Sinha is the Professor of Marketing and the Lonnie Ostrom Chair in Business at the W.R Carey School of Business, Arizona State University. Well known for his teaching, research, and consultancy, Prof. Sinha steers the academic programmes of MYRA School of Business. In 2007, he received the inaugural W. R Carey Outstanding MBA Teacher Award and is cited as Most Popular MBA Teacher in Business Week's annual ratings of the top Business Schools in America.

I

MYRA is guided by an eminent 'Governing Board' comprising global industry experts and academics like Arjun Malhotra, CEO & Chairman of Headstrong Corporation; Andrew Atzert, COO, Aresty Institute of Executive Education, Wharton School of University of Pennsylvania; Dr. Sunil Sharma, Director of International Monetary Fund (IMF) Regional Training Institute; Prof. Noshir Contractor, Kellogg School of Management; and Tony Kirton, CEO, Neurozone CC. The faculty has also been carefully chosen from a distinguished group of globally renowned professors from prestigious universities across United States of America and Europe to offer the highest quality education to students in India. MYRA currently offers three Programmes: an AICTE approved two-year Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM); an Executive Education programme and Corporate Training programme in partnership with W. R Carey School of Business, Arizona State University. Under the able guidance and expertise of the Dean and renowned faculty, MYRA School of Business will bring together Indian and Western teaching methodologies, heavily focusing on research-based learning and case study analysis, to help students gain the necessary critical thinking and practical skills to make an impact in today's rapidly globalizing industries. The third admission cycle ends on May 20th, 2012. Classes commence in July 2012.

