UP FRONT

MANVENDRA SINGH

ACOUP IN ATEACUP
aj-Gen Ahmed Shiyam of the Maldives Defence elements of two units moving towards Delhi need only Force is the only Indian-trained officer to get in- look closer around the Capital. The Indian Army maintains two brigades within the volved in a coup. His initial education was at Sandhurst, but he attended the prestigious National environs of Delhi, with air defence and artillery units in Defence College (NDC), New Delhi, in 2011. He returned support. In addition there are three Territorial Army to Maldives, joined the coup of 2012, and was promptly units within this political space, as well as two of the National Security Guard composed entirely of catapulted to Chief of Defence Force. His NDC experience obviously did not prevent him Army personnel on deputation. That is the quantum of from venturing into extra-constitutional territory. But combat power already available within the limits of Delhi another academic stint might have. He was also the first city; a division's worth of fighting forces. Anyone with Maldives officer to attend the Command and Staff Bonapartist inclinations had no need to call in elements Course in Quetta, Pakistan, where the Pakistan armed of mechanised infantry or the paratroopers. The Pakistan Army has a brigade in Rawalpindi, forces train their future military leadership. NDC New Delhi is clearly not where coups are made; but Quetta virtually earmarked as the coup task force. All coups begin with the first mobilisation scheme put into motion is a different story. This came to my mind during the recent murmur of by the Rawalpindi formation, and there are a number of an attempted coup in India. However far-fetched it may colloquial jokes about the appointment of Commander seem to most, there were some who took the coup story 161 Brigade, Rawalpindi. In India's case there are two seriously. It was certainly serious enough to warrant brigades in Delhi, physically already closer to the power animated discussion on primetime television. The story centres of the country, and nary a mention about who itself was false. There has never been a coup attempt in commands these formations. This reassurance is only because the Indian Army has never, and will never, counIndia, in the distant or the recent past. The essential ingredients for a successful coup do not tenance a military overthrow of civilian democratic exist in India. For starters, a coup requires that the offi- structures. It is simply not in the DNA of the Army. cer corps be dominated by a cabal, a clan, or a tribe. It So the moot question--why so much combat power is also vital that a faith in either within Delhi? Two reasons acSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com religion or ideology unites them. count for that. 1984 continues to It helps if they belong to a comhaunt the Indian Army. Even as mon region. If most speak the it lost scores of officers and men same language, it is always an to the savagery of those days, the advantage. Punjabi is the lingua breakdown of policing order in franca of the coup in Pakistan. Delhi remains etched in the blood The sociological composition of of innocents. The Capital cannot the Indian Army precludes a be allowed to live that hell again, coup from ever being planned, just as it cannot remain vulneralet alone launched. ble to the inefficiencies of buAll that happened on that reaucratic structures when foggy January day was a mobildisaster strikes, natural and/or isation scheme practice, which man-made. Saving lives of leadevery combat unit must reers motivates the Indian Army, hearse periodically. Nothing not taking them. In that sense, more, or less, than that. the movement of troops from Obviously a home ministry Hissar and Agra towards Delhi is spook was so spooked by the the least of the worries for India's The essential ingredients for a mid-January manoeuvres that political leadership. The Indian successful coup do not exist in he transmitted his anxiety up Army will never launch a coup India. For starters, a coup requires against democracy. the chain, setting off a series of perceptions that eventually that the officer corps be dominated found their way into the public by a cabal, a clan, or a tribe. It is also Manvendra Singh was a member of domain as moves of a coup. the Standing Committee on Defence, vital that a faith in either religion or Nothing could be further from 14th Lok Sabha. He is currently the ideology unites them. It helps if the truth. Any political personeditor of Defence & Security Alert, they belong to a common region. ality who feels destabilised by and co-convenor of BJP's Defence Cell.

M

10

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

