Special Report

Photographs by GETTY IMAGES

INDIAN PREMIER LEAGUE

WEST BENGAL CHIEF MINISTER MAMATA BANERJEE (LEFT) FELICITATES KKR OWNERS AND THE TEAM AT THE EDEN GARDENS

RETURN OF THE KNIGHTS
Long derided as a vanity project, Kolkata Knight Riders redeemed themselves with an emphatic win in IPL-5, blending cohesive teamwork with inspirational leadership
By Shantanu Guha Ray

T

he night before the crucial final on May 27 in Chennai, Kolkata Knight Riders (KKR) co-owner Shah Rukh Khan wanted his team to assemble at the conference room of Taj Coromandel at 8.30 p.m. He walked in a few minutes later. Australian coach Trevor Bayliss, appointed in March 2012, took a quick roll call. Khan, 46, had not shaved, his hair was dishevelled. He stood at the head of the table and started talking. "I want you to hear what people you love have said about you, listen to it. Sleep well. Wake up to a new

life, totally transformed," he said. Lights were dimmed and a support staff member switched on an eightminute video clip that Khan had hurriedly directed and voiced for his team. The players watched in awe. First up were Gautam Gambhir's parents, exhorting their son: "We know you will win the day, we are with you." Their images dissolved to make way for model Shamone Jardim, Jacques Kallis's fiancee. "Our engagement will acquire a new meaning tomorrow, you will win, my love," she said, in a scene worthy of Bollywood. Yusuf Pathan's parents urged their son to do them proud. And then there was Manvinder Sultan Singh

Bisla's father Sultan, a retired officer of Haryana Agriculture University, Hissar. "We have always supported you, our prayers will reach you in Chennai, you will win," he said, his voice choking. "It worked as a stress-buster," recalls Gambhir, allowing himself the luxury of a laugh. Throughout the 53-day tournament, KKR's 29-year-old skipper had made his players and the team his priority. "Limelight is a problem, stay out, stay out," he often told his players. It worked. But the transformation started in 2011. The year 2010 was KKR's worst. It had finished last among all teams. The following year, Khan and co-owner Jay Mehta, the 51-year-old owner of the Mumbai-based Mehta Group, called key members of the side, which included the new CEO Venky Mysore, marketing head Joy Bhattacharya and then coach, Australian Dav Whatmore. They all huddled together at Mannat, Khan's bungalow in Mumbai, for more than 48 hours. "Start again, fresh. Take hard calls, unpleasant calls. But let cricket prevail. Let the stars go, let the fans stay. They will, I am confident," said Khan. At the January 2011 auction in Bangalore, the owners dropped big stars, including skipper Sourav Ganguly

JUNE 11, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

63

Special Report INDIAN PREMIER LEAGUE
and the hard-hitting Chris Gayle. They spent a little over $5 million (Rs 25 crore) to pick Gautam Gambhir, Jacques Kallis, Yusuf Pathan and Sunil Narine in the first 30 minutes of the bidding process. In the run-up to the auction for IPL's 2012 edition, Gambhir, Khan and Mehta pushed the bar high. Whatmore headed for Pakistan, a three-member KKR team met Bayliss after receiving favourable reviews from former Sri Lankan skipper Sanath Jayasuriya. Once he came in, they started a monthlong preparation for IPL-5, in December 2011, by conducting mock auctions. Khan made one point clear: Replace the word star with cricket. Gambhir agreed. At the auction in Bangalore in February, KKR was the only team where the owners were not present. Khan wanted managers to represent the side. The change was felt at the 20 daylong preparatory camp that started in Kolkata in the second week of February. Teammates would often slip handwritten notes into the skipper's hotel room with ideas on how to revamp the team. The start was not good, the team lost its first two matches to Delhi Daredevils and Rajasthan Royals and mild depression set in. Khan would always join the side, playing Kabir Khan, his iconic role in the 2007 blockbuster Chak De! India, sharing real-life stories of success and failures. The turnaround started happening. Patient with underperforming players, Gambhir was exemplary as skipper. He backed everyone, even those who didn't fire. Like Yusuf Pathan, a $2.1 million (Rs 10.5 crore) investment, who performed only once. There were other factors that helped the Men in Purple. Narine flourished, justifying the stiff battle between KKR and Mumbai Indians at the auction. His $7,00,000 (Rs 3.5 crore) price tag was worth his weight in the Player of the Tournament trophy. Brendon McCullum, who was picked up for $900,000 (Rs 4.5 crore), scored 289 runs with one half-century in 12 innings. The team started to function as a cohesive unit. If one member walked to a nearby church, he would return to say he prayed for all. "The praise was for everyone. The one who got big runs, many wickets and those who stopped a

Rising

Mandeep Singh,20
TEAM Kings XI Punjab PAID Rs 30 lakh HIGHEST PRICED TEAMMATE

Shakib Al Hassan, 25
TEAM Kolkata Knight Riders BOUGHT FOR

BOWLING AVG

13.5
BEST vs MI* STRIKE RATE

Stars
Little-known names made headlines in IPL-5

Rs 2.1 crore
McCullum Rs 4.5 crore An ace all-rounder, he is the first Bangladeshi to reach 2,000 runs and 100 wickets in ODIS.
BOWLING AVG

4/15 6.36
Sunil Narine, 24
TEAM Kolkata Knight Riders BOUGHT FOR Rs 3.5 crore HIGHEST PRICED TEAMMATE Brendon

HIGHEST PRICED TEAMMATE Brendon

Manvinder Bisla, 27
TEAM Kolkata Knight Riders PAID Rs 30 lakh HIGHEST PRICED TEAMMATE Brendon

BATTING AVG

30.43
BEST STRIKE RATE

Azhar Mahmood Rs 1 crore A leading batsman in junior cricket, he excelled during the 2009 Under-19 tour of Australia.
BATTING AVG

89 133.12 vs

27
BEST STRIKE RATE

16.25
BEST STRIKE RATE

McCullum Rs 4.5 crore The Trinidad boy's peculiar bowling made him a runaway hit in the 2011 Champions League.

CSK* McCullum Rs 4.5 crore Haryana-born keeper and batsman, now represents Himachal Pradesh in Ranji.

75 126.32 vs
DC*

3/17 vs
RR*

15

Ajinkya Rahane,23
TEAM Rajasthan Royals PAID Rs 30 lakh HIGHEST PRICED TEAMMATE Brad Hodge

Steve Smith,22
TEAM Pune Warriors PAID Rs 1 crore HIGHEST PRICED TEAMMATE Sourav

BOWLING AVG

Shahbaz Nadeem, 22
TEAM Delhi Daredevils PAID Rs 30 lakh HIGHEST PRICED TEAMMATE Mahela

21.88
BEST STRIKE RATE

4/34 16.59 vs
KKR*

Rs 2.4 crore With 1,089 runs, the top-order batsman helped BATTING AVG Mumbai 40 clinch its BEST STRIKE RATE 38th Ranji title in 129.33 103 vs 2009. RCB*

Ganguly Rs 2 crore His spin matches Shane Warne.The BATTING AVG young 40.42 Australian BEST STRIKE RATE is equally brilliant with 47 135.58 vs the bat.
DC*

Jayawardene Rs 7 crore The Bokaro-born bowler is a former Under-19 World Cupper.
BOWLING AVG

Parvinder Awana, 25
TEAM Kings XI Punjab PAID

Rs 20 lakh

HIGHEST PRICED TEAMMATE

Azhar Mahmood Rs 1 crore The UP pacer has been picked for India A squad to West Indies.

39.75
BEST STRIKE RATE

3/16 33.75 vs
DC*

Tale Spin
Teddy Fear
Troubled by the team's late arrival for training, Deccan Chargers coach Darren Lehmann's punishment was almost sweet--the offenders had to take three rounds of the field with a huge, pink teddy bear.

Shilpa Shetty missing, it was left to the genial Rahul Dravid to provide some off-ground tamasha for Rajasthan Royals. Team meetings with the coach and captain were held in the hotel swimming pool.
AP PHOTO

Vaastu Time
Superstitious Chennai Super Kings (CSK) did all they could to ensure their place in the finals, even off the field. Mirrors were added to the CSK dressing room in accordance with Vaastu requirements. It worked, but not in the finals.

and checked blazers. Tired of the complaints, Adam Gilchrist came up with an innovative idea-- no uniform if the boys won. The team won the next three games in quick succession.

Help the Doctor
Everything worked for the Kolkata Knight Riders in IPL-5. What didn't was their mind coach Dr Rudi Webster. The 73-year-old had difficulties keeping pace with the hurri-

cane travel schedule of
IPL players. But BCCI has

given him a reprieve. He will now work with young Indian players at the National Cricket Academy. That, even Dr Webster agrees, is a better choice.

BEST
& WO RST

Highest run-scorer Royal Challengers batsman Chris Gayle with 733 runs.

IPL
TWEET20

Check Mate
No one in the Kings XI Punjab team liked their travel gear--red trousers, blue shirts

Highest wicket-taker Delhi Daredevils bowler Morne Morkel took 25 wickets. Highest number of sixes Royal Challengers batsman Chris Gayle hit 57 sixes. Most expensive bowling spell Delhi Daredevils bowler Varun Aaron gave away 63 runs in 4 overs.
Royal Challengers Bangalore, KKR: Kolkata Knight Riders

Water Wars
With Shane Warne, Elizabeth Hurley and

Now Shah Rukh Khan will just fly in into the Wankhede stadium in his G.One suit. Mumbai Indians slogan--If you can't win over them, ban them!

* CSK: Chennai Super Kings, DC: Deccan Chargers, RR: Rajasthan Royals, MI: Mumbai Indians, RCB:

boundary and chipped in 15 runs to turn the game," says Wasim Akram, the team's bowling coach since 2011. On the day of the finals, an injured Lakshmipathy Balaji thanked Brett Lee who replaced him. Gambhir pushed Bisla, wicketkeeper and batsman, to replace Brendon McCullum to ensure balance in the side. There was not a single murmur from the seasoned New Zealander. Hours later, a gleaming Volvo 9400 inter-city coach carrying Kolkata Knight Riders drove into Chennai's MA Chidambaram Stadium. A KKR fan walked up to Bisla, the 27-year-old wicketkeeper from Himachal Pradesh, and told him that the ground staff had trimmed grass, apparently to suit the heavy batting line-up of Chennai Super Kings. KKR officials were intrigued when told that a Rs 1 crore yagna had started in Madurai. Both Khan and Gambhir had a great laugh. Bisla was not amused. This was to be his seventh match in IPL-5. Watched by anxious teammates in the dugout and an equally nervous girlfriend, Arpita, in the stands, Bisla took charge and won the night for KKR. The first-ever win of the IPL also helped KKR shed its underachievers' tag and pocket Rs 10 crore in prize money. "The champions' purse puts us in the black," Mehta told INDIA TODAY. Though no official figures are available, it is estimated the side spent about Rs 100 crore this season, including Rs 50 crore on hiring players. KKR earned Rs 35 crore from 18 sponsors, the highest among all teams. Eight matches were played at the Eden Gardens where revenue from 40,000 tickets-a-match sales was bolstered by a Rs 35 lakh entertainment tax waiver from the West Bengal government. Ten corporate boxes costing Rs 10 lakh each were sold per game. Hours after the victory, Khan held an impromptu meeting with Mehta and key members of the side, emphasising the need for increase in sponsorship rates next year. "We could even get new sponsors," says Mehta. Khan is confident that his team's brand value, currently pegged at $57.57 million (Rs 28.8 crore), will increase in 2013. For now, the Men in Purple have hit a purple patch. I

64

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 11, 2012

JUNE 11, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

65

