AN ImPACT PRESENTATION

r1

Tamil Nadu

AN

CT FUTURE

paving the way
for the I

FUTURE OF

ViATiON
N

Hindustan Group of Institutions has pioneered education in the field of Aviation. The Founder Dr.K.C.G Verghese, envisioned this University in 1968 to meet the demands of trained Aeronautical and Aviation professionals for the upcoming growth in the Aviation sector.

CT

FEATURE

The Hindustan Group of Institutions have been pioneers in the field of Aviation Studies in India, The group's sojourn from the year 1968 has created many milestones and it has grown to be the top notch aviation education facility in Asia. Aspirants for the course include students from all across the world, such as Africa, Arabian countries, Malaysia, Sri Lanka Bhutan, Singapore etc. The institution's growth can be capsuled in its belief that is firmly rooted in not only providing quality education, but providing a platform for potential think-tanks to ideate and envisage a future that belongs to the open skies. More than 50,000 engineers and technicians from Hindustan institutions are employed in various airlines and organizations. In these high flying years, the institution has carved a niche and

is known as the hallmark of quality, innovation and research in aviation studies. Hindustan University is a modern, outward looking institution committed to engage the young minds with dynamic thought and a comprehensive view of the challenges that the present world puts forth. A leading multi-disciplinary University of India, it thrives on innovations, the academic powerhouse of students and faculty and the legacy of the untiring efforts of the Founder Chairman, Late Dr. K.C.G Verghese, who believed in a world where success was for all. The year 1985 saw a new perspective and dimension being given to the higher education sector of India as the Hindustan College of Engineering was established to cater to the needs of a nation on the fast track of development and progress.

CTfHTOHI

In recognition of its excellence in education, research, world class infrastructure, lab and academia and its contribution to the nation, the flagship institution Hindustan college of Engineering was raised to the status of Hindustan UniversityfDeemed University). The Ministry of Human Resource Development has ranked Hindustan University as one of the top Institutions in the country. Dr. K.C.G. Verghese with a passion for Wheels and Wings had the foresight to understand the challenges that the areas of technology and engineering would pose, as early as the 1970s. Dr. Verghese vividly imagined the growth of the aviation sector at the dawn of the new century and the demands in human resource, expertise and skill that the aviation

boom will create. He was one of the pioneers of the Aviation Industry who started a private Airline operation, Air Asiatic in 1990 with a Boeing - 737 which connected more than 5 cities across the country. This was much before others even envisaged such a concept. The year 1994 saw Hindustan Group of Institutions adding another milestone in the timeline of providing advanced and specialized and education in the Aviation arena. Orient Flight School was established at Puducherry with a Fleet of 14 aircraft and was one of the first schools to provide Commercial Pilot training. Its mission was to provide aspiring pilot trainees with a fleet of modern training aircraft environment that caters to international standards. This was one of the first flying schools in the country to offer Commercial Pilottrainingand

The group offers specialized courses tailored for the industry in:  Design  Manufacture  Maintenance  Flying  Technical  Research B.Tech(4Years) ;ngmeenn Aerospace Engineering

MBA (2 Years) nagement

Post Graduate Diploma (Under TIFAC CORE)

Commercial Pilot Training ommercial Pilot Licence (CPL-200Hrs)  Multi Engine Rating (MER) on Piper Seneca/King Air C90A
Ph.D

Diploma in Aircraft Maintenance-3yrs (AME)  Mechanical and Avionics

6,Sc-3yr  Aviation  Aeronautical Engineering

M.Tech (2 Years) Aeronautical Engineering Aircraft Maintenance Engineering Avionics

achieved a predominant position in the Aviatoin Industry. OFS has trained over 300 pilots who fly with leading airlines across the world. A red letter in the history of Hindustan University came in the year 2011 when the Center for Defence Technology Studies (CDTS) was setup in collaboration with the Cranfield University, the Defence University of UK. CDTS will offer Cranfield certified courses that will provide knowledge in cutting edge defence machines and state-ofthe art defence technology. Hindustan University and Dongguk University, South Korea along with Uppasala University and KTH, Sweden has set up CENCON - The Centre for Clean Energy and Nano Convergence. This was inaugurated by Dr. A.PJ Abdul Kalam, former President of India at Hindustan University's campus. Hindustan University has signed an MOU with Korean Aerospace University to provide summer internship for Aviation Management students at Incheon International Airport and Korean Air MRO providing world class exposure. India is experiencing a boom in the aviation sector both internationally and domestically. This exponential growth has created myriad job opportunities. Hindustan Group of Institutions has integrated the demands of the industry to design specialized courses. The institutions offer Undergraduate, Post Graduate, MBA, Diploma courses, Commercial Pilot Training and PhD in Aviation. As India leaps into becoming one of the hottest destinations for international aviation companies, the fundamental need to provide hands on training and education has been the focus of the insitution. The fabric of education weaves in industry stalwarts and academia who facilitate the students by providing them knowledge with an edge and urge for research with the strong support of a world class infrastructure making the students a cut above the rest.

REGD. & ADMIN. OFFICE:

No. 40, G.S.T. Road, St. Thomas Mount, Chennai - 600 016

TEL: 044-22342155/0980/1389/2508 FAX: 044-2234 2170
EMAIL: info@hindustanuniv.ac.in

www.hindustanuniv.ac.in

TOLL FREE # isoo 425 44 38

Dr. M.G.R. Educational and Research Institute, Univeristy
. The Procreation Ground for Job creators
T h o m a s L. F r i e d m a n , an internationally renowned author and columnist told his children 'finish your homework, people in China and India are starving for your jobs'. Dr. M.G.R. Educational and Research Institute, University has been keen to change this attitude that the world has of us and ensure that the best talent are nurtured as Job Creators and not job seekers. With more than 27 Er. A.C.S. Arun Kumar years of experience in education, President this University has made higher learning a pleasurable experience by being the only private institution providing higher education within Chennai city limits. The institution is a high quality centre of learning in the fields of Engineering & Technology, Dentistry, Humanities and pure Sciences. The campuses are on par with global standards - world class facilities with an eco friendly infrastructure to create the perfect ambience. The constituent colleges, Dr. M.G.R. Engineering College and Thai Moogambigai Dental College and Hospital were founded in 1988 and 1991 respectively were upgraded to a Deemed University status in the name and style of Dr. M.G.R. Educational and Research Institute, University in 2003. The courses of the University are accredited by NAAC and the courses of the Thai Moogambigai Dental College and Hospital are recognized by The Dental Council of India. The BDS degree is also recognized by the Medical Council of Sri Lanka. According to a survey by the Sunday Indian, the University is ranked third in India and has also been accorded a B+ rating by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC), an autonomous body under the UGC, with a score of 78.55%, it's the second highest ranked Deemed University. The faculty are highly competent with Doctoral qualifications and have several achievements to their name. Thefaculty also participate in several intensive and advanced programs like Mission 10X of Wipro Technologies. Seasoned and experience hands are in charge of academic affairs, until now fourformer vice-chancellors have been in charge of the academics and administration. The University offers variety of courses in B.Tech. and M.Tech. where as the latter is geared towards industry professionals. Also the post-graduation courses in Thai Moogambigai Dental College and Hospital involve scientific research study colloboration and consultancy in various fields of Dental Surgery. The students receive support from the University in the form of campus placements, mini projects, industrial visits and career guidance. Training facilities such as the IBM Software Centre of Excellence and Oracle Workforce Development Program were established to create industry ready professionals. The University makes sure that the course curriculum is constantly updated and students are provided with high speed connectivity through a university wi-fi access. The university has signed MoUs with several reputed Universities and has several exchange programs for faculty and students. Dr. M.G.R. Educational and Research Institute University through its Dr. MGR Centre for International Studies has signed many MoUs with several internationally renowned Universities. Some of the successful MoUs are as follows: University of Sunderland (UK) for conducting postgraduate program in Computer Science and IT. University of South Australia, Adelaide in the area of water research management with one semester credit transfer in the undergraduate level. University of Wolver Hampton of UK for postgraduate and twinning courses. Perth College, Perth-Scotland for twinning courses and research in Catering Technology and Hotel Management. University of Farleigh Dickenson, USAfortwinningand postgraduate courses. ABK-AOTS DOSOKAI - Hiyoshi Corporation, Japan in Biotechnology, Environmental Sciences and Chemical Engineering. Sailcon, China which admits students in the undergraduate level.

Dr. M.G.R. Educational and Research Institute, University has signed several MOUs with various Indian companies to give hands-on experience to its students. Some of the MoUs are as follows: Moll with M/s. Nl Systems (India) Pvt. Ltd., to commence the LAB VIEW Certification courses with technical support and training by Nl and to pursue training activities related to user education and training in areas mutually agreed to by this University and Nl. MoLI with Vijay Enviro-Environmental Consultancy to promote academic collaboration and offer consultancy services. Advanced Diploma and PG Diploma Course in Robotics / Embedded System along with placement assurance and to offer Robotics based curriculum for development of Mathematics and Science. The university is in the process of signing MoU for a twinning programme in Dental Sciences with Selangor University, Malaysia and also with Putra International, Maleka, Malaysia. MOUs are in the offing with University of Birmingham, University of Dundee, University of Brunei, University of Sussex etc., When the University provides such a vibrant atmosphere to young creative minds, it is bound to result in the students excelling and achieving top honours. Dr. M.G.R. Educational and Research Institute, University students have made their Alma Matter proud by obtaining the top position IBM TGMC2010 - "Top 30 Colleges Award". Veer Vikram and team won the QualComm Innovator's Challenge Award at Techiest'08,11T Bombay.

Vikram Saha qualified for USA Imagine Cup Microsoft 2011 with World Ranking of 11. Nineteen students have been recognized as IBM BLUE Scholars. A team of students participated in'LETS SPARK FLY' organized by IET360o and won First Prize in the event 'Innovative Ideas'. IET MGR Student Chennai Chapter received Best Student Chapter award from IET. The Young Professional Chapter is the leading Student Chapter having more student members around the world and receives Rs. 1.00 Lakh cash sponsorship from IET-UK every academic year. Students have won several IET sponsored Awards and Medals namely Edison Medal for Innovation, Ramanujam Medal for Creativity, SirC.V. Raman Medal, A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Medal, Best Outgoing Student Award and several other awards. NSS Units (7 Units) conducted Awareness programmes about ill-effects of tobacco products, prevention of TB and "Green Walk"to control and manage Environmental Pollution. The University has honoured social change makers Dr. Shantha, Dr.Shenbagavalli, Dr.Rajalakshmi Pathasarathy and Dr. Sunita Solmon with Life Time Achievement Awards for their dedicated services rendered to the Nation. Being part of a reputed University has been a source of pride for students. More than 8000 students (UG and PG) have graduated from this prestigious University and the trade mark is always the same, confident positive ambitious and well shaped individuals.

Salient Features
 27 years of Excellence in Education  Only Private University with in City Limits  Credit based updated Curriculum  Centers of Excellence in Core Disciplines  More than hundred Doctorates as Faculty Members  Ultra Modern facilities with eco friendly structure and designs  Cosmetic Smile Design / Laser Dentistry / Sedation Dentistry  State-of-the Art Laboratories  Only University with in city having its own hospital for Nursing & Physiotherapy Courses  MoUs with reputed forcing University for exchange of Students and Faculty Members  More than 7000 UG & PG students have been graduated !<=>,
V>**

EDUCATIONAL AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE

Dr.M.G.R.
(Docl. U/S 3 gl Bin UGC Act 1956}

UNIVERSITY
Maduravoyal, Chennai - 600 095. www.drmgrdu,

University Office Periyar E.V.R. High Road, (NH 4 Highway) Maduravoyal, Chennai - 600 095 Ph : 044-6452 2216 / 17 / 18 / 6460 6081 / 82 Corporate Office 22 (Old No. 121), G.N. Chetty Road, T. Nagar, Chennai -600 017 Phone : 044-6455 2777 / 6455 3777

www.drmgrdu.ac.in

|f

:.."'

J6& ftfi

r.
ii

략

I

I J

