Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
KAUSHIK ROY/www.indiatodayimages.com

BABA RAMDEV (LEFT) AND ANNA HAZARE

FAST SAFELY
Begin with moderate fasting and work your way up to a stricter regimen and longer duration.Your fast should last for 12-14 hours in the evening and while you sleep. A week or two before you start a long fast,cut down on alcohol,nicotine,caffeine, sweets,red meats and poultry to condition your body for fasting.If on medication, consult your doctor. To avoid getting headaches, have juices,tea,fresh fruits or soup to cleanse your system, once a day.

FAST LIKE ANNA
L
ast year, when Anna Hazare started his 11th hunger strike on August 16, the question was political: How long will he go without food? This year, as he and Baba Ramdev gave up food on June 3 and threatened to do so again, the question was personal: Should we, too? New research shows that hunger, the ultimate metaphor for protest, may just be the ultimate elixir for good health and longevity. Scientists are saying it's good to eat lighter than usual every now and then. In an era when a lot of Indians are overweight--many trying a thousand contradictory techniques to lose weight, others shelling out big money to thinning experts or succumbing to risky surgeries--fasting may turn out be a panacea against the tsunami of obesity, heart disease, diabetes and other chronic conditions flooding the nation. In the US, researchers at the National Institute on Ageing have found that short regular bursts of fasting can protect against Alzheimer's disease. Scientists at the University of Adelaide, Australia, have shown intermittent fasting

HOW FASTING HELPS
It can add years to yourlife. It can delayage-related illnesses--diabetes,heart disease, Alzheimer's. Skipping meals once a month removes toxins from your body. It enables you to have control over your appetite. It helps in weight loss.

New research shows fasting is good for health. It's a timely reminder, in the age of Anna Hazare and Baba Ramdev.
lowers levels of bad cholesterol and fatty triglycerides. Studies at Sydney's Garvin Institute of Medical Research shows it can shore up your resistance against heart disease and diabetes. What's more, restricted eating might just prove to be better than fad diets in the long term. That's because fasting has been part of the diet norm throughout human history. Our Paleolithic hunter-gatherer ancestors ate large quantities of meat and then fasted between hunts. How long can one withstand hunger? A well-nourished man has fuel reserves for about a month, say scientists. Buddha attained nirvana in seven weeks. A frail Mahatma Gandhi went up to 21 days in one of his 15 fasts. Chipko leader Sunderlal Bahuguna withstood 74 days in 1997. Hazare, who has high blood pressure and chronic hyperacidity that demands timely meals, fasted for 12 days at age 74 last year. Think small, to begin with. Apart from a touch of grumpiness there's not much else you stand to lose. by Damayanti Datta

GO PALEOLITHIC
Fasting was the diet template for our cavemen ancestors. Paleolithic men feasted and fasted between hunts. Even if you cannot fast,try the new Paleo Diet that mimics the eating habits of our ancestors. Cut down on grains and starches,including bread,chapattis,pasta and rice,as well as refined sugars--foods not available before agriculture was invented--for a few days. Have more of fish, chicken, eggs,salad,vegetables,fruit, nuts and seeds instead.

JUNE 18, 2012  INDIA TODAY

123

