COLLEGES THE INDIA TODAY-NIELSEN SURVEY

Best

INDIA'S

METHODOLOGY

The Mark of Merit

The Nielsen Company unravels the basis on which the rankings were arrived at

NARSEE MONJEE COLLEGE OF COMMERCE AND ECONOMICS, MUMBAI
MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

n its 16th annual survey of best colleges in the country, INDIA TODAY partnered with The Nielsen Company to expand its scope to 11 disciplines--arts, science, commerce, engineering, medical, law, BBA, BCA, mass communication & journalism, fashion and fine arts. For arts, science and commerce colleges in 13 major cities (Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Kochi, Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai and Pune) were considered for the survey. For engineering, medicine, law, BBA, BCA, mass communication & journalism, fashion and fine arts, colleges from all over India were considered.

I

The process began in March this year when secondary research was done to generate the list of colleges for the survey using data sources such as the Internet, published reports and the Association of Indian Universities Handbook. A comprehensive list was of more than 1,500 colleges was drawn up. This exercise was called Step 1. After comprehensive lists in each of the streams were compiled, experts in each city were administered a structured questionnaire. They were asked to distribute 100 points across five parameters--reputation of colleges, quality of academic input, student care, infrastructure and job prospects. After collating their indi-

vidual responses, weightage of each of these parameters was arrived at. The experts were then asked to rate the colleges in their city for arts, science, commerce and in their respective zones (North, South, East and West) for engineering, medicine, law, BBA, BCA, mass communication & journalism, fashion and fine arts. To eliminate bias, they were not allowed to rate their own college. The overall perceptual score of a college was calculated on the basis of the rating given by experts on the above mentioned five criteria weighted by their importance. This concluded Step 2 of the study. On the basis of the output from Step 2, the list of colleges to be evalu-

36

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

COLLEGES THE INDIA TODAY-NIELSEN SURVEY

Best

INDIA'S

METHODOLOGY

Five Steps to Final Rank
STEP 1
Preparation of list of colleges to be included in the study Alist of more than 1,500 colleges in arts,science, commerce,engineering,medicine and law streams was prepared using lists of colleges from past studies.This was supplemented with secondary data from the Internet,published reports and the Association of Indian Universities Handbook.

STEP 3
Calculation of parameter-wise and overall perceptual ranks at national level
 All colleges to be evaluated at the national level were tabulated.Another 257 experts in arts, science and commerce streams rated the colleges both at national and city levels. Colleges in engineering, medicine and law streams were rated by 165 experts. The same process was then used to arrive at the overall perceptual ranking of colleges at the national and city levels.

STEP 2
Calculation of parameter-wise ranks and overall perceptual ranks at city and zone level
 Experts were asked to distribute 100 points across

STEP 4
Calculation of factual ranks
 The perceptual scores at the national level formed

five parameters--reputation of college, quality of academic input, student care, infrastructure and job prospects. For arts, science and commerce, 255 experts were consulted; 167 experts rated engineering, medical and law colleges; and 254 experts rated BBA, BCA, mass communication & journalism, fashion and fine arts colleges.
 The experts were then asked to rate colleges on a five-

the basis for colleges to be rated for factual ranking.
 On the basis of responses from the previous survey,

weightage for each parameter for factual ranking was decided.The weighted response to each parameter was then added to arrive at the overall factual score.
 These factual scores thus formed the basis of

point scale on these five parameters based on their perception but were not allowed to rank their own colleges.
 The perceptual scores for colleges were calculated

arriving at the factual ranking.

STEP 5
Calculation of the final rank
 The perceptual and factual scores were added

based on the ratings by experts, by assigning weights to the levels of performance and multiplying them by frequency of response.The performance score for each parameter was then multiplied with the importance of that parameter to get a perceptual score for it.
 All the parameter scores were then added to arrive at the overall perceptual score of a college,on the basis of which the perceptual ranking of the colleges was decided.

in the ratio of 50:50 to arrive at the final scores for arts, science, commerce, engineering, medical, law, BBA, BCA and mass communication & journalism. For fashion and fine arts, only perceptual scores were taken.
 The maximum overall score was then assigned 100

and scores of all other colleges were indexed to 100.

ated on a national level was obtained. A different panel of experts was asked to rate the colleges in their respective streams, this time with a national perspective. This was Step 3 of the study, the output of which was perceptual scores of colleges in each of the 11 streams on a national level. To determine the overall rankings, colleges that figured in the top 50 in arts, science and commerce streams and top 25 in engineering, medicine and law streams and top 10 in BBA, BCA, mass communication & journalism,

fashion, fine arts were contacted for factual data. The colleges which declined to provide the factual data were not considered in the final ranking process. Single colleges with accredited status of a deemed university were a part of the study. Capturing factual data was Step 4. The final rankings of nine streams were arrived at by combining perceptual scores (output of Step 3) and factual scores (output of Step 4). A weightage of 50:50 was assigned to the perceptual and factual scores re-

spectively to give the final overall score, which was indexed to 100 and tabulated to arrive at the final rankings. Only perceptual scores were considered for fashion and fine arts. The opinion of nearly 1,000 experts at the level of principals, heads of department and deans was captured for various stages of the study in March, April, May and June this year.
The Nielsen team comprised Soumya Mohanty, Nitin Grover and Sushil Kumar

38

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

