GLASS HOUSE
PTI

by KAVEREE BAMZAI
B K RAMESH

THE SINGLE LIFE
he `eligible bachelor' tag seems to follow Rahul Gandhi every where, even when he is battling the disenchantment of party workers across the country. A lecturer, Teena Patoli, 39, waited for hours to waylay him outside the venue of the Youth Congress executive in Hubli, in the hope of asking him to marry her. Though the police and the SPG prevented her from entering the venue, Patoli told the media: "Rahul is known to breach his security and come to meet people. I will use that opportunity to ask him to marry me." She couldn't, but she claims she met Rahul for five minutes last September in Delhi, to discuss her PhD on parliamentary and presidential forms of democracy. Rahul, however, reportedly put her through to MP and close aide Meenakshi Natarajan then, and that was that. If not his hand, at least it will fetch her an arm and a leg worth of publicity.

T

RAHUL

PATOLI

PRABHJOT GILL

OVER THE TOP

TEMPLE TROUBLE

T

rust M. Karunanidhi to celebrate his 88th birthday in big screen style. On June 3, when he turned 88, he celebrated with garlands of currency notes, an 89-kg cake, 89 pledges of eye donation, and 89 plates of fruits. And this is when his party, DMK, is out of power and buffeted by charges of corruption.

I

t may be too late but actor Chiranjeevi, the former Tirupati MLA, has promised that he will adopt the temple town and spend MPLADS funds on its development. He said this on June 3 at an election rally for the June 12 bypoll in the presence of Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy. Chiranjeevi is yet to spend any money from his MP fund, but the people of Tirupati are not likely to forget that he surrendered his Assembly constituency for a Rajya Sabha seat in April this year, after the merger of his PRP with Congress.

BADAL

NO JOBS FOR BOYS

I

CHIRANJEEVI

t's his fifth term as Punjab Chief Minister, and Parkash Singh Badal doesn't want to waste time. He has issued a diktat to prevent the endless requests for jobs, transfers and tubewell connections. "No sifaarish please" he announced much to the dismay of many hopefuls at his public durbar in Chandigarh on May 29. "This is not how it used to be in earlier Akali governments," an ageing farmer said, shaking his head.

UNCROSSING THE WIRES

T

RAI Chairman Rahul Khullar has spent the first two weeks in his new job hearing a litany of complaints from stakeholders in telecom and broadcast media. Bharti Airtel's Sunil Mittal has called on Khullar twice, as has Anil Ambani of Reliance Communications. Kumar Mangalam Birla of Idea Cellular has also visited Khullar to protest the widely criticised recommendations of his predecessor J.S. Sarma.The News Broadcasters Association met him to protest institutionalisation of carriage fee.A group of CEOs from entertainment channels has complained against the cap on advertising. Everyone is hopeful that Khullar, who has never served in the telecom ministry, will be free of any excess baggage when he finally takes a call.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com GETTYIMAGES

KHULLAR

16

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
MEMORY LANE
ant to raise a monument for a loved one? Give Punjab's Education Minister Sikander Maluka a call. As part of an unusual effort to improve the state's educational institutions, he is offering to rename any government school or college after a dear departed parent, sibling or relative, provided one makes a suitable donation. The rates: Rs 10 lakh for a primary school, Rs 20 lakh for middle school, add another Rs 5 lakh for a senior secondary school and Rs 75 lakh for a college. Maluka's scheme has already found its first taker in Vidya Sagar Aggarwal, an NRI from Canada, who ensured that his high school in Hoshiarpur was named after his late mother Rukmini Devi.
KHER (LEFT) WITH MODI AT THE EVENT

W

TOO HOT TO HANDLE

B

SECOND ACT

N

o one can accuse actor Kirron Kher of being shy. When Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi didn't pay attention to her praise at a function in Mumbai to honour a social activist from Arunachal Pradesh, she repeated her lines, which consisted of considerable praise for his vision for Gujarat and his leadership qualities. As she said: "I stayed awake the whole night to write these lines. What's the point if Modiji doesn't listen?"

ihar Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi insists that RJD chief Lalu Prasad has grown "too old and tired to work in 45 degrees Celsius temperature". Lalu, he said on May 30, no longer has the "strength and capacity" to lead a political battle. Lalu has chosen not to respond. Instead, he flew in four priests from Bangalore to perform maha rudrabhishek puja in his Saran constituency. And since then, Lalu has also travelled to a few districts of Bihar, though mostly during the evening.

S

MALUKA

humsher K. Sheriff, an IAS officer of the 1977 batch and secretary to Vice-President Hamid Ansari, has emerged as an early frontrunner for the post of election commissioner when S.Y. Quraishi relinquishes office on July 11. It is still a matter of speculation whether his boss, the vice-president, will be on his way to Rashtrapati Bhavan by then. Quraishi may be a candidate for the office Ansari vacates, or one of the governorships that fall vacant in the next month.

LALU

JOKES
O F T H E W E E K

"UAE doesn't have democracy. Hands of thieves are chopped there. There is fear of the law. If CBI comes under Lokpal, wrongdoers will have the same fear."
KIRAN BEDI

Nitin Gadkari was able to touch Baba Ramdev's feet only because he didn't have to bend down for it. Baba's foot is always in his mouth. Why did Sachin Tendulkar join Congress in the Rajya Sabha? Because he thought the Congress was similar to Mumbai Indians. Led by a sardar and owned by a woman.

"It was like a thief in the night who strikes at someone's house when occupants are away."
NAVEEN PATNAIK on the failed

"Protesters can fly over Amarnath route in the state chopper to see the extent of snow. But they won't because the truth is inconvenient."
OMAR ABDULLAH, to protesters demand-

rebellion in his party, BJD

ing an early start to Amarnath yatra
ABDULLAH
PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

with DHIRAJ NAYYAR, SOWMYA AJI, AMITABH SRIVASTAVA, AMARNATH K. MENON, KIRAN TARE, ASIT JOLLY, SENTHIL KUMAR

18

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

GETTY IMAGES

BATTLE BEHIND THE BALLOT

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

