viral video

NET FLUX

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI
it's an interactive, online club for our digital world," says Winfrey, AP adding that she will use social networking sites such as Twitter and Facebook to discuss the book.The book that she chose to help revive her club is Cheryl Strayed's memoir Wild.Along with the paper edition featuring the circular Oprah book club logo on the cover, special e-versions will also be available, together with her comments and a reader's guide. According to media reports, Winfrey's reading choices and her promotions have worked well for authors. Her selections increase sales of books to well over one million copies.

Wonder Woman
Laverne Everett's 80th birthday wish in May 2011 was unique--to go skydiving. However, that dream turned horribly nightmarish when Everett slipped out of her harness at 13,000 ft in the air at the Parachute Center in Lodi, California.Thankfully, she clung on to her skydiving instructor and escaped with only a few scrapes and bruises. But the video of her lucky landing has gone viral after her sister posted it online a year after the incident. Despite the accident, Everett, now 81, hasn't lost her daredevil streak. Her next mission is to drive a race car.

Booked Again

OPRAH WINFREY

Oprah Winfrey's wildly popular book club is officially back in business. Rebooted after a year, Oprah's Book Club 2.0 has been updated for her tech-savvy fans."This time

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up will help you keep tabs on loved ones, take videos and entertain your children. Download these apps on your smartphone. Checkon.me sets alarms to send to select friends when one is in trouble. SloPro takes slow motion videos on your iPhone 4S to make them look like a movie. Storypanda will help you read and create new stories for your children through interactive books.

web wow

Power of Search

Benelab is a search engine with good intentions--100 per cent of its revenue from Web searches is donated to charity. Started in February 2012 by Jack Kim, a 17-year-old student from Seattle, his team consists of only teenagers. The website has raised money for a well in Uganda and has donated funds to World Concern, an NGO which supplies hearing aids to children from the developing world. A GEM FROM THE SEA OF THE WORLDWIDEWEB

tumblr tales

Problems Galore
An entrepreneur's life can be difficult.Elucidating those problems is a new Tumblr blog,`Running a startup' . The blog juxtaposes GIFs (graphic interchange formats) or small video clips with text.It features clips ranging from a frowning Clint Eastwood with the text `When I realise I'm the oldest person in the room'to a video of a cat napping for `When I've worked a 14-hour day' . The blog was started in May by an anonymous entrepreneur.

A CLIP FROM THE BLOG

buzz feed

Secure Oldies
The older you get, the more likely you are to have a secure email account, say researchers at Cambridge University.Joseph Bonneau, a computer scientist and researcher at the university, stated that people over the age of 55 were more likely to choose secure passwords than those under 25, after analysing passwords of 70 million Yahoo! users.

weirdonet

Spotted

A Chinese documentary on the country's police force features a cameo from the most unlikely person--Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg. The clip from the documentary went viral when footage of the young billionaire dressed in his trademark hoodie, accompanied by wife Priscilla Chan, walking beside policemen, showed up. Ironically, Facebook, along with Twitter and YouTube, has been blocked in China.

