Nation

GUJARAT

MODI FACES TROUBLE ATHOME
Former chief minister Keshubhai Patel attempts a rebellion and long-time rival Sanjay Joshi's supporters launch a poster campaign to stymie Modi's national ambition
By Uday Mahurkar

osters praising his bête noire Sanjay Joshi in Ahmedabad and Delhi. A renewed attempt at revolt masterminded by long-time rival Keshubhai Patel. Critical articles in BJP-RSS mouthpieces Kamal Sandesh and Panchanjanya, calling him a "man in a hurry" and castigating him for his "vaulting ambition". It has not been a good week for Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi, who finds his national ambition being stymied by a homegrown rebellion within the Sangh Parivar even as BJP prepares for its state national executive on June 9 in Rajkot. On June 5, posters popped up in Ahmedabad and Delhi projecting Joshi as hero and denouncing Modi without naming him:"Chote dilse koi

P

bada nahi hota, tute man se koi khada nahin hota (No one can rise with a narrow mindset, no one can develop without conviction.)" Joshi was made to resign as an invitee from the BJP national executive in May upon Modi's insistence. Modi has long disliked Joshi for colluding with Keshubhai in the mid-1990s in order to sideline him. The poster campaign was an occasion for the Sangh Parivar's Modi-bashers to air their views. Mahagujarat Janata Party president and former BJP leader Gordhan Zadaphia, a close associate of Keshubhai and seen as the brain behind the campaign, denied his involvement. "Our reach is only till Gujarat while the posters have appeared elsewhere too. Eighty per cent of BJP workers are unhappy with Modi's leadership in Gujarat," Zadaphia pointed out.
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Keshubhai, whom Modi replaced as chief minister in 2001, has been trying to organise anti-Modi elements within BJP since April. On May 30, Keshubhai was joined by several disgruntled BJP leaders in Ahmedabad. Prominent among them are former chief minister Suresh Mehta and former Union minister Kashiram Rana, who was denied a ticket at Modi's behest in the last Lok Sabha elections. On the agenda was how to upset Modi's political applecart at the next Assembly elections. Keshubhai claims that Modi's "high-handed tendencies" are aimed at instilling fear. He has also been trying to organise the Patels against Modi by arguing that the Chief Minister has treated the powerful Patel community badly. However, sustained rebellion may not be easy. On June 2, Keshubhai
CHANDERDEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

(FROM LEFT) NARENDRA MODI; KESHUBHAI PATEL; AND A POSTER BLAMING SANJAY JOSHI'S EXIT FROM THE BJP NATIONAL EXECUTIVE ON "ONE LEADER"

22

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

Nation

GUJARAT
ance, not with any negative agenda." This comes at a time when Modi is positioning himself as a national leader. Time magazine did a story on him and put him on the cover of its Asian edition in the March 16 issue titled "Modi Means Business". Powerful business leaders in India have given him their tacit approval. His agricultural policies too have been lauded by agro experts. And international agencies, most recently the leading international brokerage and investment group, the Hong-based CLSA, has praised the Chief Minister for his progrowth governance. Its key strategist Christopher Wood said that the high praise of Gujarat was more than justified by many factors, including brilliant infrastructure. Keshubhai tried to mount a challenge to Modi on the eve of the 2007 Assembly elections as well. But he had to abandon it after BJP and RSS leaders intervened. He might not abandon his campaign this time, but there is a big question mark on how far he will succeed. 
Photographs: REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

tried to rally anti-Modi Patels at a meeting near Ahmedabad, with the support of Congress's Patel leaders such as Dinsha Patel and Narhari Amin. But the meeting turned out to be anti-climax--only around 2,000 people turned up. Clearly, dividing loyalties on the basis of caste won't be easy. Says Agriculture Minister Dilip Sanghani, a Patel, "We respect Keshubhai but we know what he is doing for the past two months and why. We will go to the people only on the basis of our perform-

CORPORATE SOCIALRESPONSIBILITY

(LEFT) THE AWARD WINNERS; MUKHERJEE GIVES AWAYAWARDS AS PURIE LOOKS ON

AAJ TAK SHOWS ITCARES
The country's leading news channel awards CSR initiatives that have transformed lives
icrosoft has trained several youngsters at a centre in Bihar in computer and mobile repair. Standard Chartered has funded blindness cures in Mumbai's biggest slum, Dharavi. Firstsource has set up a rural BPO in a small village in Madhya Pradesh, providing jobs to over 200 people. They were three of the 12 winners at the Aaj Tak Care Awards, organised by TV Today Network (TVTN) in Delhi on June 6. Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee, who gave away the awards, said he saw great hope in the growing

M

trend of corporate philanthropy. "These awards compliment the super achievers, not only for creating wealth but also contributing to society at large," he said. India Today Group Chairman and Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie called the awards inspirational, adding, "They say TV only focuses on what's wrong with the community. These awards are the good news." A jury of eminent citizens made the final cut. It comprised author and consultant Gurcharan Das, sociologist Dipankar Gupta, Executive Director of India Today Group's learning divi-

sion Learn Today Arun Kapur, social activist Sandeep Pandey, environmentalist Rajendra Singh and Fortis Group Chairman Ashok Seth. "We looked at companies that have gone beyond their corporate objectives and laid an emphasis on the improvement of society as their larger objective," said Joy Chakraborthy, CEO of TVTN. Rowdy Rathore Akshay Kumar provided the light touch, making an appearance to the sound of applause. "In my heart, I would love to do something about sports," he said to the audience which had, among others, Congress MP Mohammad Azharuddin, BJP MP Kirti Azad and BJP MP and national spokesman Syed Shahnawaz Hussain. The awards were presented by Amrapali Group.
by Shravya Jain

24

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

NEW

