Na tion KARNATAKA

WHAT'S EATING THE CROCODILES?
Excessive tourism in restricted wildlife areas may cause irreversible ecological damage
adan Nayak, 55, assistant conservator of forests in Karnataka, was beaten to death by tourists on May 7 at an illegal wildlife resort in Dandeli. He was trying to stop them from feeding meat to crocodiles on the banks of river Kali. Nayak tried to explain to the tourists that food habits of crocodiles would change drastically if they did so and they would stray into human habitation.

M

most of which have turned into illegal resorts that make money through various means, including hunting. Over 3,000 animals, including tigers, leopards, chitals and elephant calves have died over the last three years in road accidents at Bandipur National Park and Nagarahole. Animals consume tourist waste such as plastic bags, plates and bottles and choke to death. Elephants make their

gist Sanjay Gubbi, 39, told INDIA TODAY. If Nagarahole has about 60 ecoresorts, Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve has 35 on the periphery. Activists point out that most of these resort owners from Uttar Pradesh and Punjab have worked out clandestine `partnerships' with local politicians to ensure blanket protection. Inspite of these hazards, 11 days after Nayak's death, about 100 forest

A RESORT BUILT IN THE MIDDLE OF AN ELEPHANT CORRIDOR IN CHAMARAJNAGAR

SANJAY GUBBI

"Some years ago, a three-year-old child was killed by crocodiles seeking food. This is the result of greedy, ignorant tourism," Uttar Kannada district's civilian wildlife warden, Balu Hegde, 40, told INDIA TODAY. Nayak's death is an eye-opener to the real problem: The flourishing eco-tourism mafia and its impact on Karnataka's rich wildlife, which includes the country's largest tiger population of over 300. The mafia flourished from 20082011 when G. Janardhan Reddy was the tourism minister. About 331 approvals for `homestays' were given,

way into villages as their corridors have been blocked by resorts. The tourism department claims that on an average 500 people visit each of Karnataka's five wildlife sanctuaries everyday. "The current trend of mushrooming resorts in critical wildlife corridors, disrespect shown while on safaris, disturbance caused within the resort campus due to blaring music and parties, makes me wonder if tourism favours wildlife at all. We need to understand that our protected areas are small and we cannot think of emulating sprawling African tourism models here,'' biolo-

officials braved threats from the resort mafia and demolished an illegal resort in Chamarajnagar district. Activists have also managed to get a stop construction order on another resort built there in the middle of an elephant corridor. But forest officials admit that the clout of the resort mafia can't be easily countered. Karnataka's beleaguered Chief Minister D.V. Sadananda Gowda, 59, told INDIA TODAY, "We are taking the Madan Nayak case very seriously. I will also look into what can be done to streamline eco-tourism.''
by Sowmya Aji

28

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

