APEEJAY UNIVERSITY
Recognised by UGC

India's 1st Liberal Arts and Meta University
India's 1 St 45 + Years ^yeducationai "The value of education in a Liberal Arts Liberal Arts & Meta University of excellence in education strong alumni network institutions across the country institution is not the learning of many facts but the training of the mind to think Quality education over 32,000 More than 85 Excellent something that cannot be learned from students & 2,200 teachers courses to choose from from Pre-nursery to Doctoral level placement record textbooks,"noted Albert Einstein at a time when the concept of Liberal Arts was rarely understood. Over the years, the concept The contribution of industry will depend not on its has established its importance and has machinery, nor capital, nor on its sales, but on the been adopted by the world's leading caliber of its men & women, yy universities which are recognised for their Dr. Stya Paul, Founder Chancellor, Apeejay Stya University rigorous academic input and their October4,1919-June 7,2010 proficient & job-ready output. Drawing from the same philosophy and carrying forth the Apeejay legacy of over 45 years of An engineering student, for instance, can take management excellence in education, Apeejay Stya University classes to rise up the corporate ladder. Similarly, Bio(ASU), strives to extend an interdisciplinary learning Sciences students aspiring to work in the developmental experience to its students that can be transported from sector can take-up courses in Public Policy. A great career is a by-product of an Apeejay campus to the community. ASU, India's 1st Liberal Arts & Meta University, endeavours to enhance education. ASU's strong interface with the industry students' analytical skills by including research from facilitates research projects and placements for its the very first year at the Bachelors level, supported by students. It further leverages on the existing industry state-of-the-art infrastructure. Being India's first Meta academia linkages of other established Apeejay University. ASU extends a true inter-disciplinary institutions of higher learning in all disciplines being learning experience wherein students can explore offered by ASU. ASU strives to develop its students into the leaders of varied domains like management, design, engineering or education. This widens their horizon and inculcates tomorrow, who can infuse the world with the energy of a holistic approach leading to innovation and solutions their ideas and innovations, and advance the frontiers of knowledge and research in ways that translate into to real world problems. Unlike most universities, ASU allows its students to tangible benefits for the community and country. choose their fields of study, customise their schedule and alter their ASU OFFERS A RANGE OF SCHOLARSHIPS TO MERITORIOUS STUDENTS programmes right upto the later semesters, based on their individual APART FROM A HOST OF OTHER FELLOWSHIPS, GRANTS & FINANCIAL AID interests. Each course is carefully selected and vetted, and is further I am an Engineering student but ASU has redefined academic freedom revisited regularly in sync with the Philosophy is my passion. I am for me. Today I am free to design my course, changing market dynamics, with pursuing both together thanks to choose my subjects and pursue a flexible creditASU's "Mark to Market" approach. based system with great academic rigor. With a flexible credit system, ASU's Liberal Arts Approach students can choose to take between Fizza Jaffer 12 and 18 credits per semester and Siddharth Shukla (B.Tech. Electronics have no restriction on taking (B. Design, Digital Media) & Communications) different and more advanced classes.

60,000

AnimPACTreature

APEEJAY STYA UNIVERSITY
Programmes
Recognised by UGC

School of Engineering & Technology / School of Computational Sciences
Bachelors - Duration: 4 yrs Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech) in:  Mechanical Engg. & Product Design  Computer Science & Engg. (CSE)  Electronics & Communication Engg (ECE)  Electronics & Instrumentation Engg (EIE)  Electrical & Electronics Engineering Masters - Duration: 2 yrs Full Time/ 3 yrs Part Time Master of Technology (M.Tech) in:  Mechanical Engg & Product design  Computer Science & Engg (CSE)  Electronics & Communication Engg (ECE)  Instrumentations Control Engg (ICE)

At ASU, we recognize the need to prepare students for the challenges of the 21st century & to provide an atmosphere which will encourage them to become life-long learners.
Mrs. Sushma Berlia
Co-founder & Chancellor Apeejay Stya University

Master in Computer Applications (MCA) - Duration: 3 yrs School of Design & Visual Arts Bachelors - Duration: 4 yrs Bachelor of Design in: Lifestyle Design- Fashion 'Textile -Furniture Space Design (Interior Design)-  Residential  Commercial & Hospitality  Exhibition & Stage Design Digital Media -  Promotional Design (Graphic Design)  Digital Design  Photography & Film Making Masters - Duration: 2 yrs Master of Design in:  Fashion Design  Interior Design  Graphic Design School of Education Ph.D.in Education

I ASU'S GLOBAL EDGE
Apeejay Stya University has signed MoUs with many i n t e r n a t i o n a l Institutions and Universities to provide a global exposure to its students and faculty. Apart from identifying and developing collaborative research projects, the MoUs entail student & faculty exchange programmes and designing of other mutually beneficial academic modules. Some of these global institutions are Georgia College and State University, USA; Ecole Superieure d'Arts Appliques de Troyes, France; Normandy Business School, France; Willem de Kooning Academy, Rotterdam, Netherlands & Rotterdam University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands

School of Journalism & Mass Communication Bachelors - Duration: 4 yrs
- B.A. (Hons.) in Journalism & Mass Communication Masters - Duration: 2 yrs  M.A.in Journalism & Mass Communication Doctoral - Ph.D. in Journalism & Mass Communication

School of Bio-Sciences
Bachelors - Duration: 4 years (5 years for the Integrated Program)  B.Tech. Biotechnology  B.Tech.+ M.Tech. Biotechnology (Integrated Prog.) Masters - Duration: 2 years  M.Tech. Biotechnology  M.Sc. Biotechnology  M.Sc. Clinical Research (Specializations in: Molecular & Immunodiagnostics Oncology Drug designing Pharmacovigilance Medical Writing Pharmacogenomics) Doctoral - M.Phil/Ph.D. in Biosciences, Biotechnology, Bioinformatics, Biomedical Sc.

School of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Post Graduate Diploma - Duration: 1 yr, Full Time  PG Diploma in Novel Drug Delivery Systems Masters - Duration: 2 yrs  M. Pharm. Pharmaceutics Doctoral - Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical Sciences - Pharmaceutics

For admission and other queries, visit the ASU Campus at Sohna, or our City Office at Gurgaon. ASU City Office: Apeejay Stya University Admissions Office, Plot no. 23, Sector 32, Institutional Area, Gurgaon, Haryana -122001 ASU Campus (South of South Delhi) Apeejay Stya University, Sohna-Palwa! Road, Sohna, Gurgaon, Haryana-122103 Email Admission counselors: admissions@asu.apeejay.edu

School of Management Sciences
Bachelors - Duration: 4 yrs  Bachelors of Business Administration (BBA) Hons.  Bachelors of Business Economics (BBE) Hons.  Bachelors of Commerce (B.Com.) Hons.  Integrated MBA in Public Policy (Duration: 5 yrs) Masters - Duration: 2 yrs  Masters of Business Administration Doctoral - Ph.D. in Management (Research areas include Finance, Human Resources. International Business, Information Technology, Marketing, Operations Research)

Toll Free Number: 1800-103-7888 university.apeejay.edu

