AnimPACTreatiire

CHANAKYA IAS ACADEMY

SUCCESS MANTRA FOR CIVII SERVICES
 hanakya IAS academy's past performance has been glorious. The academy is steadfastly committed to quality guidance and holistic training to the civil services aspirants. The academy's extraordinary results over the years, highly encouraging response from the students, parents and teachers and the successful running of its branches in different parts of country are indicators of our success in this field. Over the years the nature of civil services examination has undergone significant changes. The competition has certainly become stiffen Over the past few years, it was realized that the traditional method of coaching no longer fulfils the requirement of the Civil Services Exam in the neo-competitive era. So, while entering its 20 year of successful running, Chanakya IAS Academy has made a significant/remarkable shift from coaching to comprehensive training. Most coaching Institutes normally commit for covering of UPSC subject & GS Syllabus and they stop at that. The first USP of Chanakya is that besides its commitment to cover the given syllabus, it endeavors to shape the personality of aspirants required for administrative jobs. The results of the past 7 years stand a testimony to this IAS Coaching Institute's glorious performance in guiding students in the Civil Services Exam. The Academy imparts its class-room training through six of its study centres - two in Delhi and one each in Ahmedabad, Chandigarh, Ranch! and Jaipur. In addition to imparting knowledge of the concerned subjects, Chanakya IAS Academy lays great emphasis on leadership development, ethics and social responsibility, and mind-power development so as to ensure that tomorrow's bureaucrats do not suffer from moral and ethical bankruptcy. Chanakya has decoded and demystified the CSAT exam by developing ten customised modules with the help of top professionals.

A.K.Mishra W3ING DIRECT .

JECRC UNIVERSITY

J

aipur has emerged as the most vibrant education hub in the region and is a second home to students from far and wide - even the farthest corners of India. One of the names that have been in the forefront of driving this transformation of Jaipur from a lovely tourist destination to a centre of higher and technical education is JECRC Foundation. JECRC started its journey 12 years ago with the setting up of Jaipur Engineering College & Research Centre. Replete with modern education infrastructure, these institutions are spread over 500 thousand square feet of constructed area. Currently about 5000 students are enrolled here and over 1000 students reside on the campuses. The JECRC Foundation continues its legacy with the setting up of the JECRC University at Sitapura, Jaipur. JECRC University aims at becoming a valuable resource for industry and society through its interventions in creation of research and innovation culture, academic and professional enhancement, cultural enrichment and character building. The university will start its session in July 2012 with undergraduate and post-graduate courses in multiple streams engineering, applied sciences, management,

humanities, etc. The university also offers diplomas as well as doctoral programmes. The merit-based scholarship programme announced by JECRC University offers up to 100% scholarship on tuition fee of undergraduate and postgraduate courses based on marks obtained at 10+2 or graduation level. "Students from different parts of the country come to JECRC. Apart from higher standards of education, we have established excellent residential facilities on the campus and taken care of every student's personality development The recently launched scholarship programme for rewarding exceptional academic merit is our endeavour in that direction." as told by Mr. Arpit Agrawal, director of the foundation. Students of JECRC University will also tremendously benefit from its international collaborations. JECRC has already signed an MoU with the prestigious University of Alabama (UA), USA. "We have always been guided by the ideals of excellence, innovation and respect for the Indian culture. And reflecting these ideals through JECRC, we aim to take higher education to a much larger and universal level.", says Mr. Amit Agrawa!, Director of foundation.

AnimPACTleature
K.R. MANGALAM INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION

T

he K.R. Mangalam Institutions of Higher Education is based on the idea that a changing corporate milieu is what is witnessed around nationally and globally. The change generates challenges as well as opportunities. It is meeting the challenges and grabbing the opportunities assertively and optimally in an ever-changing corporate scenario that matters. This is where imparting of knowledge comes into play, a platform where corporate challengers, management leaders, and visionaries leadingfuture organizations are given shape.The Institute imparts courses of IGNOU, Roehrnpton University, Mysore University, Madras University. Eight independent educational identities constitute the K.R. Mangalam Group with presence in Greater Kailash!,Greater Kailash II, Kailash Colony, Vikaspuri, Paschim Vihar and Gurgaon. The courses offered here are three year courses namely- DBA with BBM, BBM and two year courses like PGPM, MBA, PGCM and MBA International. It also offers a five year B. Architecture course. The institute boasts of a lot of facilities like Industry

ready course content designed by experienced faculty, 4123 management related books, 32 national and international journals accommodated in library, 172 computers with configurations of P2 and above, active and honored in inter-college extracurricular activities, Tie up with companies for guest lectures, industry visits, foreign exposure et al. The institute also provides a cent per cent placement record witnessed over the years with companies like NUT, Fidelity, ICICI, Infosys, NTPC, Bosch, HT Media, India Bulls, Bajaj Allianz, Airtel, Kotak, HCL, Lenovo, Convergys, L&T Finance, HDFC Standard Life etc. "Our course structure is designed keeping in view today's diverse dynamic business environment blending academic excellence with business relevance. We have the best faculty who follow interactive teaching methodologies to make teaching-learning fun and to exploit the potential of every student so that goals are effectively fulfilled. Our teaching pedagogy is second to none," declares a dynamic Mr. Yashdev Gupta, Chairman.

HIERANK BUSINESS SCHOOL

Renowned for excellence in professional learning
ierank Business School, Noida runs under the umbrella of ABR education foundation, which is a non-profit making body, constituted by a group of leading academicians and industrialists. It is located inside National Capital Region, Sector 62 of Noida, adjoining south Deihi. Hierank lays emphasis on innovative learning & teaching methodology, which is the mantra of the great Indian temples of learning (IITs, IIMs & ISB). The institute provides a very conducive environment to all our students to emulate the success story of seniors passing out from these great institutions. The changed scenario created by free economy, globalization and technological innovations since 1995 especially in the field of biotechnology, IT and management have made India's education pattern outdated and below the expectation of the corporate world. To fulfill this gap Hierank is developed as a premier institution of learning. Strict discipline, state-of- the-art infrastructure, dedicated and devoted faculty has further contributed to the reputation of the college. Hierank is set-up to disseminate quality education for professional

H

programmes to under graduate and post graduate students. Through innovative teaching methodology, Hierank claims to not only infuse leadership quality with global outlook but also lay emphasis on holistic development of its students. It is based on skill building of a Hieranker than on textual literacy. Programs run by Hierank Business School are benchmarked against best Business Schools & Institutes in the world. It is 'A++' ranked B-School for Intellectual Capital (highly qualified faculty members) with a solid infrastructure of 2 acres wireless campus. Knowledge Exchange Centre is working Round the Clock for the placement of Hierank Students. First Batch has got 100% placement offers. A dedicated team with a Director & Manager placement workingfor Industry Interaction Cell. It acts as an intellectual interface between students and the corporate world. KEC is interacting with IITJIM Alumni every day and most of them are working at a very senior position in industry & government. With this, placements of the students have become very easy.

Learning through practice and teaching beyond syllabus is our success mantra,
^^ ^^ - Rajesh Sahay, CHAIRMAN

ftnimPACTfeature

INDIA SHIKSHA MISSION

A NOBLE INITIATIVE
India Shiksha Mission is our commitment to transform into employable technical work force, young men and women belonging to marginalized segments of our population including students from SCs/STs, minority communities, other backward segments of society and woman. In the days to come our country will need large number of technically trained workforce and to ensure inclusive development, these segments of society need special dispensation. VISION It is our commitment to an inclusive India of the future. India's success and growth is linked to the potential of its knowledge economy, but this growth can be meaningful only if it is inclusive. Thus, ensuring access and equity in the field of vocational, professional and technical education is the key. In order to ensure an equitable development of our polity, the hopes of the country's marginalized groups must be fulfilled and they should become part of the rising enterprise of India, We believe that Idea India' will not be complete without allowing these groups to be on board. The unfolding future of India will throw up huge opportunities for our young people and will require millions of technically trained individuals to achieve the targets which the nation will set for itself. Our endeavor will be to transform young people into employable technical workforce. Those who are not in a position afford finances for higher vocational, professional and technical education will b< provided with opportunities without funds t a stumbling block. To achieve the above noble mission, we hai approached educational institutes of excelli which impart technical and professional education to admit students from these groups on merit-cum-means criterion, and in this partnership with the institutions, ISM will provide sponsorships and scholarships.We extend an invitation to all well meani members of the Indian society to joir noble cause at ISM.

Dr. Hamidullah Bhat
CHAIRMAN

DEV BHOOMI GROUP OF INSTITUTIONS

Commited to provide the highest level of professional education
Sonjay Bansal
CHAIRMAN ocated in a serene environment, in the picturesque location of the lower Himalayas with a salubrious climate, about 15 Km from Dehradun city, the sprawling main campus of the Dev Bhoomi group of Institutions is spread over 42 acres of land. The Dev Bhoomi Group of Institutions has excellent modern infrastructural facilities. In addition to classrooms, there are several labs to impart the course curriculum, housed with latest lab equipments, measuring instruments and scientific modern gadgets and computers, for conducting experiments. Six Professional Institutions (each having individual premises / buildings) are operated under Uttarakhand Uthan Samiti, a nonprofit Society, professionally managed by the eminent academicians, industrialists and scientists.

L

Keeping in tune with the upsurge in technical developments, the Samiti being committed to the cause of quality education, has established six institutes under its aegis as under:  Dev Bhoomi Institute of Technology, Dehradun (DBIT)  Dev Bhoomi Institute of Management Studies, Dehradun (DBIMS)  Dev Bhoomi Institute of Pharmacy & Research, Dehradun (DBIPR)  Dev Bhoomi Institute of Technology for Women, Dehradun (DBITW)  Uttrakhand Utthan Samiti Group of Institutions, Saharanpur (UUSGI)  TechWords Wall Gram Udyog Group of Institutions, Roorkee (TWWGGI) Equipped with a huge central library in addition to respective course libraries, as per the norms at Dev Bhoomi all Infrastructural requirements are fulfilled as per AICTE guidelines. The classroom sessions are undertaken by the faculty members through PowerPoint presentations operated from their respective laptops with the help of LCD / OHD projectors. Each student and faculty member is provided with a modern laptop. The whole campus is Wi-Fi enabled.

