GLOSSARY

VANISHING ACT
Sushmita Sen started the strategically placed pallu that gave the sari a whole new sex appeal in Main Hoon Na. The trend has lived on, though stylists are getting a bit too carried away.
There has been a lot more of Bipasha Basu's cleavage on display lately than we are comfortable with.Anyone remember her promoting Jodi Breakers? She goes for the in-your-face look again in a Shivan & Narresh sari.

Q& "Female actors over 40 need to A be careful while choosing roles"
FOTOCORP

From June 16, Madhuri Dixit will begin her second stint as a judge on the reality dance show, Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa Season 5. With two film projects in her kitty, the dancing queen is gearing up for her big-screen comeback. Dixit speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. How do you feel about being the judge for Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa with Karan Johar? A. Karan is an excellent person and we talk about a lot of things. It feels great. Q. You play a gangster in Gulab Gang and a begum in Dedh Ishqiya. How did you decide on these roles? A. I don't play a gangster, but a leader of a group of women's rights vigilantes. Strong characters and interesting scripts made me accept these challenging roles. Q. Is it difficult for 40-plus female actors to get meaty roles? A. It is not difficult, but female actors over 40 should be careful while choosing roles. Q. Will we see you participate in reality shows such as Bigg Boss? A. I don't feel the need to participate in them.

Priyanka Chopra dons the
Why is Kareena Kapoor wearing a sash instead of a pallu in Halkat Jawaani? The song for Heroine is meant to be her raunchiest yet, and if the pallu is going to be reduced to such ridiculous proportions, then there may be no need for it.
KAPOOR
AP PHOTO

most tastefully cropped pallu of the lot in Teri Meri Kahaani.There is a lot to be liked about the '60s retro look in Jab Se Mere Dil Ko Uff, even if it closely resembles a style once popularised by Mumtaz. Did girls really get away with something like that back then?
BASU CHOPRA

PACKING A PUNCH

A Royal Mess
Be it a red carpet or a green one, our stars can be counted on to provide entertainment. Many of them did just that at the recent International Indian Film Academy Awards (IIFA) in Singapore. Gauhar Khan was the evil matron from Victorian novels. She was also inspired by costumes from Harry Potter movies and would definitely glow in the dark with all that shimmer.

KAPOOR

Q. Do you involve your husband Dr Sriram Nene while picking a project? A. I discuss scripts with him at home. The final decision, however, is always mine.

OBITUARY
By Talat Aziz, Ghazal Singer

MEHDI HASSAN

1927-2012

Salman Khan's eagerly awaited Eid release Ek Tha Tiger looks impressive. After the theatrical release of the espionage drama, we were introduced to the leading lady of the film. Katrina Kaif is the girl who tamed the tiger. Kaif, who plays Zoya, looks like she is ready for some serious action. Khan and Kaif's intense romantic thriller is sure to pack a punch this August.

KHAN

Shriya Saran smacked of desperation. There's a lot we would like to say, but we'll just stick to some advice: Cover up.Whatever happened to leaving something for the imagination? Dia Mirza had three different people who put her together. One got her the sari, another the choker and a third styled her hair, without seeing what the others were up to.
AFP YOGEN SHAH

SARAN

MIRZA

Ranbir Kapoor may have looked sweet with that pink parasol, but it's perhaps a tad too late for him to be running around playing with his sister's toys. Remember, you are a big boy now.
YOGEN SHAH

Mehdi Hassan revolutionised the ghazal and gave it a new aura. After Begum Akhtar, ghazals became restricted to small mehfils, but he infused purity into them and gave them a new status. He brought them into the limelight during the '70s and every big Bollywood star wanted to be present at his concerts. He kept the classicism of the ghazal and the beauty of the thumri, but gave it new shape. As a human being, he was a

very simple person and played childish pranks. He was a musician first and concerned about little else. On stage, he was an imperious king. He had such an aura that by the time he finished his aalap, and came to the first note, listeners would be transfixed, whether they understood him or not. He may be gone, but no one can take away his contribution to the field. What he gave to ghazals perhaps no one has, or can. A beautiful heera (diamond) has gone, but his work will live on.

by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege
78 79

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

