AnimPACTpeatnre

RIICO: THE INDUSTRIAL CATALYST
Modern India's Emerging Citadel
Apart from being one of the most exotic tourist destinations in this part of the world, Rajasthan's potential as one of the choicest investment destinations of the country is also steadily growing. With a welcoming political set-up, a responsive administration and a strife-free industrial climate, it has set the pace for some incredible economic and industrial growth.
A n ancient land once known for its exceptionally valorous and /I talented people, as well as it majestic forts and palaces, L^L Rajasthan today is also an emerging industrial citadel of modern / % India. The pace of change in this state has been so swift and 1 mjobust in the past few years that it has become a toast of top manufacturingand service sector companies from within and outside the country. One institution that has undoubtedly changed how Rajasthan does business and how investors perceive the state as an investment destination is the Rajasthan State Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Ltd. (RIICO). Set up on March 28,1969, RIICO has fast emerged as a catalyst for industrial development in the state, spearheadingthe process of change. A CLEAR VISION AT THETOP HAS HELPED IMMENSELY "Our topmost priority is to provide growth and job opportunities for 6.86 crore people of the state," says Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot. "We have therefore designed and implemented the Rajasthan Industrial & Investment Promotion Policy (RIIPP) 2010 with-three specific objectives in mind: To catalyse investments, to accelerate inclusive economic growth and to generate large-scale employment." The new investment climate in the state is nowhere more visible than in the launch of many new and path-breaking initiatives, starting with the Single Window Clearance System. In one go, this system has done away with all unnecessary bureaucratic controls over approvals, while also assuring speedy clearances to projects in an accountable and transparent way. To communicate the urgency and importance of this ground-breaking initiative down the line, and to give it legal teeth, it was decided to enact it into a law, namely, the Rajasthan Enterprises Single Window Enabling and Clearance Act, 2011. "The honorable Chief Minister wanted an industrial policy which was totally transparent and backed by a statutory mechanism that held concerned officials accountable for delays in project clearances," explains Industry Minister Rajendra Pareek. "This has gone a long way in assuring investors that Rajasthan is their friend and wants the process to be hassle free for them," the minister elaborates. The success of this effort can be gauged from the fact that in the short span of one year that this system has been in existence, the committee, which meets every three months, has already processed applications for projects worth over a whopping Rs. 70,000 crore. So, today you will see the citadels of yore to which tourists have been flocking for decades co-existing with those of the modern age. In far flung areas - whether it is the deserts of western Rajasthan, where solar parks of enormous dimensions are

Our topmost priority is to provide growth and job opportunities for 6.86 crore people of the
I ASHOK GEHLOT
Chief Minister, Rajasthan

'IT ' 4

V-'""'-1 쳀 ' ' P

\

:

L

AnimPACTpeature

A textile weaving project in Bhilwara Industrial Area.

At work in the Honda Siel Project in Bhiwadi IA.

coming up, or exotic Neemrana in the northern part of the state, which houses a unique Japanese Manufacturing Zone - one can see the traditional bastions giving way gracefully to citadels of a modern State. "This change which you are seeing has come about with a lot of thought and planning as to how to become people-friendly so that our brothers and sisters accept industrialisation with open arms," says RIICO Managing Director Rajendra Bhanawat. "In other states we have seen that often people do not part with their land for setting up of industries. Even if they do, the process is prone to litigation, which can delay setting up of projects for years. But at RIICO we came up with a policy because of which farmers are giving up their land voluntarily for industrialisation. It has been accepted by the people." RIICO's land acquisition policy is based on ensuring fair compensation to farmers. The compensation offered by RIICO for land is much higher than the market rates. There is also an institutional mechanism in place with senior officers co-opted as members of a committee to decide the rates. Accordingly, for both the buyer and the seller, the process is hassle-free and transparent. One of RIICO's mandates is to provide state-of-the-art infrastructure to potential and existing investors. Another is to provide financial services to assist entrepreneurs set up their units. It is making significant progress on both fronts. In the past few years, it has considerably accelerated the pace of acquiring land for SOME NOTEWORTHY PROJECTS INCLUDE  French major Saint Gobain's float glass venture at Alwar with an investment of Rs. 1,000 crore, slated to be the largest in the world.  Japanese major Honda's car project worth Rs. 2,000 crore, spread over 610 acres of land at Bhiwadi Industrial Area, along with a host of ancillary units. This is expected to create some 4,000 jobs.  A second plant of Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India at the Tapukara Industrial Area.  The World City of Mahindra spread over 750 acres in Jaipur that has attracted big names like Infosys, Deutsche Bank, EXL Services and Nucleus Software.  Three Special Economic Zones: Two at Sitapura in Jaipur - for the gems and jewellery industry, particularly diamond, kundan and meenakari work, for which Rajasthan is justly famous the world over - and the third at Jodhpur for handicraft, another area the state excels in. These three zones contribute over Rs. 750 crore in exports.  RIICO has also now acquired land for central PSUs CONCOR and KRIL for setting up logistic parks and an inland container depot at Khathuwas near Neemrana and Bedabanki near Hindaun. This is likely to facilitate cargo and raw material handling near prominent industrial hubs.

creating and sprucing up high-quality infrastructure in the industrial areas. As a result, 323 industrial areas were established across the state by March 31,2012. These parks are home to some of the biggest corporations of the world. JAPANESE MANUFACTURING ZONE, NEEMRANA It's the first such zone in the country, where some of the best-known Japanese companies -from Nissin and Mitsui to Daikin and Mitsubishi - have invested. A total of 382.51 acres of land has been allotted to 36 units at Neemrana. The zone is being extended by another 500 acres in Ghilot, near Neemrana. The Who's Who of the Indian and global corporate world have a presence here. The list includes Metso India, South Asia Breweries, Tata Bluescop Steel, Kaparo Fastners, Genpact, Texa India and Lafarge India. This apart, many top companies have also invested in the state's industrial areas: From Rosenberg at Khushkhera to LIB Group at Chaupanki, from Infosys at Sitapura to Havell's India at Neemrana, from Shree Cements at Khushkhera to EID Parry at Alwar. PROMOTING KNOWLEDGE-BASED ENTERPRISES Given the fact that information technology is one of the thrust areas, the state government and RIICO have taken initiatives to promote and develop this sector. The requisite infrastructure is being developed through IT parks, earth stations and optical fibre networks for communications and institutional tie-ups for skilled and trained manpower. IT parks have been developed at Sitapura, Jodhpur, Udaipur and Kota. Companies not only get the necessary physical infrastructure and access to a high-speed data and telecom network, they also get to choose from a long list of exemptions and incentives, ranging from rebate on land and exemption from duties, to subsidy on employment. As a result, many small players have set up units in the state. This is in addition to the strong presence of the big established names of the IT industry like e-Genpact, Infosys, Nucleus Software, Teleperformance, Compucom, FJ(L Services, Pratham Softwares, Metacube, VGL Softwares, Cyberfuturistics and Back Office Solutions. The aim is to double software exports from the state over the next two-three years.
FOCUS ON APPAREL

Under the Integrated Skills Development Scheme of the Central government's Ministry of Textiles, 10 SMART (Skill for Manufacturing Apparel through Research and Training) centres are being established by the Apparel Training and Design Centre in state hubs like Bhiwadi, Bhilwara, Pali and Balotra. The centres will provide training to youth, women and the disadvantaged sections and thus create a pool of skilled workers for the sector. Four new textile parks are also being set up in Rajasthan under the Integrated Textile Parks Scheme of the Government of India. RIICO is now all set to organise 'Vastra 2012', an International Textile and Apparel Fair, in association with the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry in Jaipurfrom November 22 to November 25,2012. THRUSTONTERM LENDING Rajasthan inherited a meager industrial base at the time of Independence. In the absence of a large base, RIICO had been providing term loans for traditional sectors of the state economy like marble, oil seed processing, mini cement, textiles, etc. The corporation has made concerted efforts to diversify its portfolio over the last two years. Consequently, term lending has picked up in diverse sectors such as renewable energy, services, steel and aluminum, health care,

I

AnimPACTreature
automobile, real estate, chemicals and plastics, IT sector, etc., registering a significant overall growth. The Indian power sector is witnessing a revolution as the nation is gearing up to harness electricity from various renewable sources of energy. Electricity generation from renewable sources is increasingly being recognised as important for the achievement of a variety of primary and secondary energy policy goals, such as improved diversity and security of energy supply, reduction of local pollutants and global greenhouse gas emissions, regional and rural development and exploitation of opportunities for fostering social cohesion, value addition and employment generation at the local and regional level. India is striving to become the world's next clean energy "hotspot" as it plans to meet its substantial future energyfrom renewable sources. These include wind, solar and bio-mass. As part of its commitment to the cause of promoting renewable energy, RIICO has lent nearly Rs. 100 crore over the last two years to all the three segments of the renewable energy sector, i.e., Solar, Wind and Biomass. DELHI MUMBAI INDUSTRIAL CORRIDOR Almost 40 percent of the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial corridor falls within the districts of Jaipur, Alwar, Kota and Bhilwara in Rajasthan. The DMIC will provide highquality environment with state-of-the-art infrastructure to new investors. This includes creation of a new integrated township with a knowledge city in the Khushkheda-Bhiwadi-Neemrana belt and a greenfield international airport for passengers and cargo with an integrated logistics and warehousing hub. Work on this ambitious project has commenced with RIICO having initiated the process for acquisition of 1,506 hectares of land in Alwar district. It promises to yet again change the way the world perceives Rajasthan. THE HUMAN FACE RIICO's concern for equitable development goes beyond policy pronouncements. The organisation has been vigorously pursuing implementation of various schemes that ensure balanced regional development and optimal skill upgradation forthe people of the state. Accordingly, schemes have been formulated under which investors could avail of concessions if they commence production in the units set up in industriallybackward regions of Karauli, Sawaimadhopur, Dholpur, Baran, Pratapgarh, BanswaraandSirohi. RIICO is also focusing in a big way on skill upgradation and has earmarked financial support in 2012-13 to the tune of Rs. 15 crore for this in line with the emerging industrial needs in the state. Special preference will be given in the disbursal of these funds to the training of members of families whose land has been acquired by RIICO. RIICO has also made a provision to provide land on longterm lease in its industrial areas for setting up skill development institutions. SIMPLIFIED LAND RULES Appreciating the tourism potential of the state, RIICO has granted industry status to the hotels and hospitality sector. The industrial plots in RIICO areas can now be utilised for setting-up hotels without paying any charges for change of land use. Provisions of the rule 3(w), which allows preferential allotment to certain categories of the applicants on an ongoing basis, were earlier applicable only to the industrial land allotments in NCR and Jaipur district. Now these provisions have been made applicable to all the industrial areas, irrespective of their location. For providing low-cost housing facilities to labourers and other people working in the industrial areas, a provision has been made to allot land for the construction of multi-storied residential compounds. Accordingly, sanction has been granted for the construction of 2,500 flats at Neemrana, out of which 1,500 are ready. Special concessions are also being given to women and physically handicapped persons seekingto set up industries in the state. In unsaturated industrial areas, a concession of 25 percent in both land development rates (in plot sizes of up to 2,000 sq. mts) and allotment rates has been made for women candidates. For physically challenged persons, the concession is 50 per cent. In addition, 1 per cent of the plots have been reserved for them in unsaturated industrial areas. THE ROAD AHEAD Rajasthan is a land of rich and varied natural resources, excellent infrastructure, ample electricity and skilled manpower. The pastfew years has seen it marry these manifold advantages with strong leadership at the top and an enabling policy framework. As a result, Rajasthan is making its mark on the global map as an important destination for those looking to invest in emerging markets. As the nodal agency for infrastructure development in the state, RIICO has been at the forefront of this change. The new initiatives are bearing fruit - bringing jobs, growth and prosperity to the people of Rajasthan. With approved investment projects worth over Rs. 70,000 crore in the pipeline, and many more that number on the drawing board, the state is buzzing with a new sense of energy, enterprise and dynamism. For an investor, the bottomline is clear: Put your money to work in Rajasthan. It could be the most rewardingdecisionofyourlife.

nnimpAcT.Feature

INTALKWITH
I RAJENDRA PAREEK
Minister of Industries & Mines, Government of Rajasthan

With excellent infrastructure, some 323 industrial parks and a host of special zones and dusters, Rajasthan is well on its way to becoming one of India's major industrial hubs. Backed by a transparent, fast and hassle-free institutional mechanism for decision-making, such as a Single Window Clearance System, the state is fast emerging as one of the best destinations for investments, says Rajendra Pareek, Minister for Industries & Mines, Government of Rajasthan. Rajasthan welcomes investors, both from within and outside Jndia, to become a part of its progress, says he in an interview. Excerpts:

What is your approach to promoting Rajasthan as an investment destination? Our approach is simple - to let our work do our talking. You can see that quietly, but steadily, we have built up quite a brand name for ourselves with some of the top companies of the world havingalready invested here. And they have become our brand ambassadors in turn, because the world is watching who is investing where. Let me give you an example. The Japanese Manufacturing Zone is a success story that is known the world over. Recently, on a visitto Italy, I was asked by members of industry there whether we would offer a "Italian Zone" to them. I was pleasantly surprised. Then there are so many other manufacturing and service industry companies that have chosen Rajasthan. Of course, we have put in the required enabling structures to make projects viable. Our Hon'ble Chief Minister Shri Ashok Gehlot is very proactive in promoting the state and it percolates down to each and every department. What does Rajasthan have to offer to investors? The first thing about our approach is that we don't take investors or investments for granted. We know only too well that we live in a globalised world where investors are spoilt for choice when it comes to deciding where to put their money to work. Yes, Rajasthan has its own strengths, many of them quite unique. But that is not enough. So, our investment policies and initiatives must be designed to give us an extra competitive edge vis-a-vis others. That is why we have invested so much care and thought into improving our policy framework. Take the case of our unique Single Window System. For us, it wasn't simply enough to have a system like that in place. We wanted to give it legislative teeth for maximum effectivenes and compliance. As a result, we enacted our Single Window System into an act of law. What makes our task easier is the fact that these policy changes are backed by the many significant advantages that Rajasthan naturally possesses. For instance, we have a large pool of trained, Englishspeaking professionals. Over 50,000 engineers graduate from the 122 or so engineering colleges in the state every year. Rajasthan is perhaps the most peaceful of all large states in India and offers a virtually strife-free industrial relations environment. We are one of the few states in the country that is not power deficient, if not power surplus. Finally, the cities of Rajasthan, starting with the state capital Jaipur, provide a congenial and welcoming environment for people from outside to come and work. The hospitality of our people is legendary and our social infrastructure second to none.

What is the status of industrialisation in Rajasthan? Rajasthan is perhaps one of the unsung success stories of the past few years. Quietly, and almost without anyone really noticing it, we have built a huge industrial infrastructure across the state. Today, at RIICO, we are managing, in a very professional way, 323 industrial areas. Almost all the world's top companies today have a presence in Rajasthan. What's more, this presence is not limited to any particular sector. Manufacturing, services, information technology, solar, wind and biomass power generation, exploration, textiles - you name it. Lafarge, Saint Gobain, Infosys, Deutsche Bank, Daikin, Mitsubishi, Mahindra& Mahindra... Our auto zone in Bhiwadi will soon have a full-fledged assembly line for Honda cars. These examples can, of course, be multiplied. And things will only get better in the years to come. The proposed Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor will act as another booster dose for industrial development. This project alone will attract billions of dollars worth of investment into the state. Apart from the companies investing in Rajasthan, what kind of industries would you like to attract? Today, we have the infrastructure to accommodate almost any kind of industry. At the same time, we realise that the needs and requirements of industry do vary from one sector to another. To address these specific demands, we are implementing a sectoral approach. This ensures development of industries in parks and zones - like we have for food processing, gems and jewellery, handicrafts, leatherand biotechnology. We are also focusing on financial services. The people of Rajasthan have a natural aptitude for this sector. We have a large pool of trained chartered accountants who can help us become a financial hub. The information technology and related outsourcing industry are also developing rapidly. You will be surprised to note that north India's largest integrated IT Park the Mahindra World City - is actually located in Jaipur, spread across nearly 3,000 acres! What message do you have for potential investors in the state? My message for potential investors is the same as what our chief minister shared with the global Indian community at the recent annual Pravasi Bhartiya conference, held in Jaipur: Come, visit our state, enjoy our hospitality and see for yourselves the kind of progress we have made, be it in infrastructure or in the institutional support we provide. Compare what we have on offer here with what is being provided elsewhere and see the difference for yourselves. Experience the simplicity and power of our Single Window System of clearances for addressing all investment issues under one roof-from land acquisition to regulatory and statutory clearances. Our administration is responsive, our decision-making process is transparent and our officers at every level are cooperative and accountable.

