Nei ghbours PAKISTAN
IFTIKHAR CHAUDHRY (LEFT) WITH SON ARSALAN

AFather's Duty
Corruption charges againt Iftikhar Chaudhry's son have put Pakistan's crusading chief justice in a tight spot
ew film scripts can rival the real-life family saga that has kept Pakistan transfixed for the last 10 days. The story has all the ingredients of a blockbuster--an upright judge pitted against a powerful business tycoon willing to go to any length to destroy his rival's reputation, including using the judge's son as a pawn. On June 12, Malik Riaz Hussain, 58, the founder of Bahria Town real estate firm, told the media he had spent almost Rs 400 million on cash payment to Arsalan Iftikhar, 34, son of Pakistan's crusading Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry. Although Hussain did not explain why he had shown such largesse, the implication was

F

evident: Hussain, Pakistan's 12th richest man with a net worth of $800 million, had bribed the judge in exchange for favourable judicial verdicts in the apex court. For several years the chief justice has been a thorn in the flesh of the ruling PPP-led government. He has heard corruption charges against President Asif Ali Zardari, convicted Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani for contempt of court, incarcerated ministers on graft charges and suspended members of the national assembly for holding dual nationality. These allegations of corruption against his son have clearly put him in a tight spot. "I'm not responsible for my son's deeds. I don't own a house and car

despite hearing high profile cases for 22 years. I don't know what business Arsalan does," Chaudhry said while hearing the `graft case' against his son in the Supreme Court. On June 5 Chaudhry initiated suo motu proceedings against his son but two days later recused himself from the case. Political rivals of the PPP smell a vendetta, particularly since Hussain is a close friend of President Zardari and has ties with the Pakistan Army and bureaucracy. "It is a conspiracy by the ruling party to malign the judiciary and particularly Chief Justice Chaudhry, whose bold stance had pushed them on the backfoot," cricketr-turned-politician Imran Khan told INDIA TODAY. In a statement to the media, Hussain said that his son-in-law Salman Khan, who is based in London, had made cash payments totalling Rs 327 million to the chief justice's son on various occasions. The expenses for Arsalan's three trips to London between 2010 and 2011, and one to Monte Carlo in 2010 was Rs 15.5 million, and were also taken care of by Salman, the statement said. The tycoon included copies of Arsalan's passport, cheques, wire transfers, bank statements and tenancy agreements to back his claims. Hussain further accused Arsalan of blackmailing him and told journalists that he had met the chief justice on several occasions, in the middle of the night, in the presence of his son. Arsalan, who has interests in construction and telecommunications, denied Hussain's allegations but admitted he had lived in the London apartment in 2010 and 2011. He said the rent was paid by his friend Ahmad Khalil, a Lahore-based businessman. Arsalan said he had ignored requests from Khalil asking him to influence his father and told INDIA TODAY that he was being targeted because of his father's crackdown on corruption. The case, which could have far-reaching ramifications, is currently being heard by a two-judge bench comprising Justices Jawwad Khwaja and Khilji Arif Hussain.
by Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad

64

INDIA TODAY x JUNE 25, 2012

NEW

