Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

A Pakistani novelist explores questions of morality
By Bunny Suraiya

AGAME OFSHAME
n reading Farooqi's luminous first novel, The Story of a Widow, I intuited it might prove a hard act to follow. And so it has. Not that this new work is in any way an inept offering--it simply suffers painfully from comparison with its outstanding precursor. The story gets off to an excruciatingly slow start; setting the scene takes nearly 40 pages with quite a bit of repetition. However, once it gets going, what we have are two parallel tales of pride, ambition, and the inevitable fall from grace of the joint protagonists--a wrestler and a courtesan. Ustad Ramzi, the pahalwan, is the top title-holder in his sport, with many aspiring trainees and a huge fan following. Gohar Jan is a tawaif, a kothawali who is similarly at the top of her game, with a house full of young nayikas or trainees, and a large clientele which faithfully arrives each evening to be bewitched by her singing and dancing skills. Ramzi has a brother, Tamami, far younger than he, who aspires to take over the title of Ustad-e-Zaman, held by his brother. Tamami is the most appealing character in the book, with a doglike devotion to the inflexible diktats and punishing regimens imposed upon him by his elder brother who is driven by a pigheaded adherence to what he claims are the traditions of his forefathers, but which he realises too late are the result of false pride and a reluctance to cede his preeminent position. He refuses to let

NEW RELEASES
THE PRESIDENTS CLUB: INSIDE THE WORLD'S MOST EXCLUSIVE FRATERNITY
ByNancyGibbs and Michael Duffy Simon & Schuster
Two Time editors chronicle the history-making relationships among ex-presidents of the United States. Dramatising their backroom deals, secret alliances and rivalries, the authors profile the unofficial presidential club as a hidden instrument of power.

O

BETWEEN CLAY AND DUST
byMusharraf Ali Farooqi Aleph Price: RS 450 Pages: 213 BETWEEN THE COVERS Various relationships set the scene in the akhara and the kotha for the kind of explorations of motives,actions and causes that Farooqi does so well. The keycharacters are aware of their ethical dilemmas and moral ambiguities vis-à-vis the people theyhave a dutyto protect.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Tamami take part in title bouts, asserting that he is not ready, despite the pleadings of his brother and other pahalwans in the akhara. Similarly, Gohar Jan has adopted Malka--a foundling left on her doorstep, and has inculcated in the girl all the accomplishments and graces required of a tawaif, but is steadfast in her refusal to let her perform in front of audiences. As Ustad Ramzi is coldheartedly aloof from his brother, so is Gohar Jan stonily unloving with Malka, whose whole existence is dedicated to obtaining a word of praise from her adoptive mother. These relationships set the scene in the akhara and the kotha for the kind of explorations of motives, actions and causes that Farooqi does so well. The key characters are aware of their ethical dilemmas and moral ambiguities vis-à-vis the people they have a duty to protect. There are some superbly written set pieces, including a segment on the training regimen of Tamami before a fight, and another which dwells on the cynical manipulation of rising young stars by promoters and managers who flatter only to deceive. Despite the quality of writing, what mars the novel is that its tone is relentlessly glum. There is none of the humour, sometimes gentle and sometimes astringent, that enlivened The Story of a Widow. The tenor of this tale is sombre, unrelieved by lighter sentiment. At one point Farooqi describes Ramzi's life as an "exhausting journey through the pits of humiliation and shame". That phrase could just as well be a summary of this novel. 

TIME TO STARTTHINKING: AMERICAAND THE SPECTRE OF DECLINE
ByEdward Luce Little,Brown
Luce, a Financial Times correspondent in Washington, portrays America as a broken power--economically, politically and socially.

THE MAN WITHOUTA FACE: THE UNLIKELY RISE OFVLADIMIR PUTIN
ByMasha Gessen Granta Books
A chilling narrative of how a "faceless"KGB operative manoeuvred his way into absolute power. Gessen, a Moscow-based journalist, has used previously untapped sources for this horrifying story.

HOWTO THINK MORE ABOUT SEX
ByAlain de Botton Macmillan
Navigating through lust, fetishism, adultery and pornography, this smart little book is a frank exploration of modern sexuality.The book is part of "The School of Life"series which is a bold and radical break with the usual self-help book. Other titles in the series examine money, work, digital age and sanity.

RELIGION FOR ATHEISTS
ByAlain de Botton Hamish Hamilton
In this non-believer's guide to the uses of religion,the author, even while debunking the supernatural claims of religion,argues that religious texts have so much to offer to the secular world on relationships,society, art,architecture and music.

64

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

