Cover Story INDIAN PREMIER LEAGUE

INDIAN PARTY
IPL cricketer who

IPL THE
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Dhiraj Nayyar and Shantanu Guha Ray

League boils over

The thrill-a-minute IPL juggernaut takes a serious hit with the sordid drama around Zohal and Sahil

molested Zohal Hamid
Royal Challengers Bangalore didn't play the Australian the whole IPL season. He has drunk driving and assault cases back home.

K.P. Appanna 23
Pomersbach's
RCB teammate

DIRTY PICTURE
A

Luke Pomersbach 27

He accompanied Pomersbach to Zohal's room after the alleged molestation to calm things down. A left-arm spinner, the label he now goes by is the "skinny Indian guy"who warned Zohal to drop her case.

Sidhartha Mallya 25
Royal Challengers Bangalore director
He threw in his lot with Pomersbach and went on a Twitter rampage against Zohal. His comments earned him monikers ranging from sexist to twit. He got away without an apology as his lawyers reached a compromise with Zohal and Sahil.

Rajiv Shukla 52
IPL commissioner
He says the league is not responsible for untoward incidents off the field. He says it's up to the police to first take action. The league will suspend anyone found guilty of flouting the law.

Black money, white lies, bookies and glamour parties have turned a cricket carnival into a suspect circus

late-night bust-up involving charges of molestation and assault at a hotel suite in Delhi booked in the name of Indian Premier League (IPL) franchise Deccan Chargers on May 18. An early morning Income Tax raid at the offices of Pune Warriors and Royal Challengers Bangalore on May 23 following a TV sting operation in which five fringe players were caught striking deals on spot-fixing and switching teams for more money. A brawl at Wankhede Stadium leading to a five-year ban by the Mumbai Cricket Association on Shah Rukh Khan on May 16. It was a week from hell for IPL. And the week promised to stretch into a long year. Around 6.30 p.m. on May 22, Zohal Hamid, 27, was giving yet another live interview on her now famous charge of molestation by Royal Challengers Bangalore (RCB) player Luke Pomersbach. The incident acquired bizarre momentum, especially after her `fiance' Sahil Peerzada, 33, was hit by Pomersbach and she turned out to be close to a defence agent. INDIA TODAY was present at the plush farmhouse of her "rakhi" brother Abhishek Verma, an accused in the naval war room leak and under investigation for his suspected role in defence deals. Sahil made a dramatic entry while she was on camera. "How dare you speak to the media without my permission?" he asked. Zohal placated him and they then drove off in Verma's Hyundai Sonata. Both she and Sahil then went incommunicado. Clearly, they had received instructions to go quiet. Some deal had been struck to cover up an intoxication-fuelled, unscripted drama that threatened to blow apart the nocturnal mix of sex and money that plays behind the televised scenes of IPL. Sahil and Zohal met their lawyer Rajneesh Chopra who had worked out a compromise with RCB owner Sidhartha Mallya, who had so charmingly described Zohal's allegations against Pomerbasch as a "load of f.....g s..t" in a tweet. On May 22, Zohal agreed to withdraw her case

Delhi businessman, Zohal's `rakhi' brother
He spent two years in Tihar for alleged involvement in the naval war room leak and is being probed for his role in defence deals. His mother Veena was a Congress Rajya Sabha MP.

Zohal Hamid 27
US national who claimed she was molested
She filed an FIR against Pomersbach and threatened to sue Sidhartha Mallya but later opted for an out-of-court settlement. She says she is a sales manager in a leading cosmetic company in New York.

Sahil Peerzada 33
Zohal's `fiance' , Mumbaibased businessman
Took punches from Pomersbach. A former wannabe model with many unsavoury associations. His elder brother Feroze, 44, is politically well-connected.

Abhishek Verma 44

Shah Rukh Khan

Preity Zinta was left
seething on April 18 after onfield umpires upheld the dismissal of Kings XI Punjab's Shaun Marsh by Kolkata Knight Riders' Brett Lee in Mohali and went onto the field to contest the decision. Kings XI captain Adam Gilchrist had to step in to broker peace.

Cover Story INDIAN PREMIER LEAGUE
against Pomersbach and drop the defamation threat against Mallya, who has not even deigned to remove the offending tweets from his account--another said "what this girl is doing is idiotic". On May 23, though, he tweeted, "So glad all charges have been dropped and Luke can return Down Under a free man!", followed by "Oh and btw, I know ppl can be cynical, so just so u know, the settlement wasn't financial in any way!" These shenanigans took TV cameras into the bedroom, the last thing IPL wanted as its oversold carnival becomes a sordid circus. The manufactured silence was designed to avoid some basic questions: Why did Deccan Chargers book a Rs 20,000-a-day suite for Sahil at ITC Maurya? What is Sahil's connection, if any, with cricket and IPL? What is Zohal's real link with Sahil? She claims he is her "fiance". Sahil is a trifle hesitant about the honour. Why was Zohal sleeping in Sahil's suite if she was not booked there? Why were two men, Miraj and Moin, sleeping in Sahil's room? Why was RCB hosting an after-party despite an IPL ban on them in 2010? The mystery became more mysterious with Verma's involvement. His former New York-based business partner and lawyer C. Edmonds Allen claims that Zohal was an employee of Ganton Indian Private Limited, and that he recommended her for a visa to visit India on Verma's request last year. Allen is the president of Ganton, which he claimed he set up to handle $205 million (Rs 1,127 crore) made by Verma through arms deals and lobbying for defence firms. Verma denies any link with Ganton and claims that Zohal too has nothing to do with Ganton. He says "my wife Anca Neacsu is best friends with Zohal'' and recommended her for an Indian visa through Allen. schooling in India, where she picked up conversational though accented Hindi. She went to Rutgers University in New York. After watching her first IPL match on May 17, goes her story, she landed at the RCB party and in the room booked by Deccan Chargers at ITC Maurya. Every answer begs a further question. But Rajiv Shukla, who took over as the IPL commissioner in September 2011 and is also a Union minister, has no answers, except an evasive one. "I am the IPL commissioner, not police commissioner. I have nothing to do with what is happening in the hotel room." The fact that he mentioned "police commissioner" involuntarily speaks for itself. He believes media is exaggerating the problems of the league by highlighting stray off-field incidents. He does not deny knowing Sahil Peerzada. "He is the son of a Congressman," he says. Sahil's father, Peerzada Ghulam Mohammed, who died in 1994 at the age of 52, was a ticketing agent at the Sopore (J&K) bus stand in the 1970s, and went on to become a junior-level Congress leader. The family migrated to Mumbai in 1992.

NON-STOP
controversy
The cash-rich T20 league has seen as much action off the field as onfield since inception

abused and manhandled officials and security at Wankhede Stadium on May 16, prompting Mumbai Cricket Association to ban him for 5 years. He next faces summons from a Rajasthan court for smoking in the stadium.

2012
Shane Warne hit out at Sanjay Dixit, president of Rajasthan Cricket Association, over a poor pitch in Jaipur after Rajasthan Royals lost to Royal Challengers Bangalore on May 9. Warne was fined $50,000 (Rs 25 lakh). Gabriella Pasqualotto,
a South African cheerleader for Mumbai Indians in IPL-4, was sent home in May after she revealed too much about the flirtatious ways of cricketers on her blog The Secret Diary of an IPL Cheerleader. She described cheerleaders as "walking porn" and certain cricketers as "naughty" .

2012
Ashwin, 40, son of BCCI
chief N. Srinivasan, got angry on April 30 when staff at a Bandra pub refused to serve him drinks post the 1.30 a.m. deadline. Things got worse when he was asked to pay the Rs 28,000 bill. He was put behind bars but was released on bail later.

Rahul Sharma and Wayne Parnell from
Pune Warriors were detained on May 20 along with a hundred others from a Mumbai hotel in what the police said was a rave party. Drugs were recovered from the venue.

2011
Kochi Tuskers Kerala
team had a tumultuous start and a tormented end in IPL. After a controversial entry into the league, that also saw Union minister Shashi Tharoor vacate his post, the Kochi team failed to sustain itself. Its contract was terminated in September.

2011
Lalit Modi was sacked as IPL commissioner for alleged misappropriation of funds just before the presentation ceremony of the 2010 IPL final on April 25. A legal case was filed against him. The former IPL boss is currently in self-imposed exile in London.

2012

2012
Ravindra Jadeja was the biggest buy of the season with $2 million (Rs 10 crore). But he was banned from playing in the 2010 IPL for trying to negotiate a contract with another franchise and delaying signing of his contract with Rajasthan Royals.

l THE BOOKIE UNDERBELLY
Born in Afghanistan to an Afghan father and an Iranian mother, Zohal's family migrated to US in the late 1980s. Now an American citizen, she works for a cosmetics company in New York as a sales manager. She did part of her

ahil's brother, Feroze, says he has a real estate business in Mumbai, as well as two Kashmir handicrafts showrooms at the Leela in Bangalore and near Pavilion Mall in Kuala Lumpur. But Sahil's reputation has been made in bedrooms rather than boardrooms. He is a serial dater of semi-famous women such as TV actors Shama Sikander and Gauhar Khan. Deccan Chargers is silent about why they rented such an expensive suite for him. Manjula Harpanahalli, media coordinator for Deccan Chargers, told INDIA TODAY that they had no comments to offer. Repeated calls and text messages to E. Venkatram Reddy, director (operations), Deccan Chargers, went unanswered. Investigating agencies are silent but taking a keen interest in the events. They have been busy. There has long been a suspicion that IPL is a breeding ground for bookies. Days before the start of the tournament, CID officers of Mumbai Police traced a conference of bookies from all over India huddled inside a five-

S

THAROOR AND WIFE SUNANDA

2011
star hotel room in Mumbai to plan their strategy: Essentially, to cooperate in the milking of those who like a flutter. On May 17, when Chennai Super Kings was taking on Kings XI Punjab, Arun Chavan, head of Mumbai Police's Property Cell, arrested two well-known bookies from a Lokhandwala flat. Devendra Kothari, 42, and Sonu Jalan, 30, were taking bets on the crucial match. Both were arrested immediately and 20 mobile handsets, a dozen SIM cards, two laptops, two voice recorders and an LCD T recovered. They led the police to another bookie, Mohammad Feroze Ansari, 38, from Nagpada in Mumbai. On May 19, the police arrested him too. The probe has now moved to Delhi. A team from Mumbai Police left for Delhi on May 21. Their goal: Check the truth in Kothari's claim that he paid Rs 10 crore to a Sri

2010

2010
in Colombo in anticipation of the fourth T20 World Cup which will take place in Sri Lanka. But it was cancelled," says Brijesh Kumar Gupta, Delhi's police commissioner. The police's suspicions about a Colombo meeting were confirmed when a woman they picked up on May 19 from Delhi for possessing cocaine confessed to her involvement in the betting racket and said she was to travel to Colombo. On May 24,

Lankan cricketer to fix a one-day international match in 2006. "We cannot reveal the name of the Sri Lankan player. Investigations are still on," said Mumbai Additional Commissioner of Police Vishwas Nangre-Patil. In Delhi, the police confirmed that Kothari and Jalan were part of a global betting racket and among 170 suspects scheduled to visit Sri Lanka to fix matches. "There was to be a meeting

20

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

JUNE 4, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

Cover Story INDIAN PREMIER LEAGUE
Delhi Police busted a betting racket in west Delhi, unearthing a mini-telephone exchange comprising 113 lines used for transmitting information about rates to over 300 betting syndicates across India. India's betting laws date back to the Public Gambling Act of 1867. Bail, therefore, is guaranteed for a paltry Rs 100 and allows bookies to get free within days of their arrest. No one has bothered to change this. "There's very little time for questioning. And rarely are the big fish netted because the bookie chain is inordinately long," says Gupta. This year alone, Delhi Police conducted more than 75 raids on bookies in Delhi and arrested over 100 people placing bets on IPL, the highest since the tournament started four years ago. The core problem hampering investigations is that there is no complaint, says Gupta.
CHEERLEADERS AT AN IPL GAME IN DHARAMSHALA

sources? The Enforcement Directorate (ED), charged with investigating these violations, said its investigations have not been completed. Even BCCI and IPL are under investigation by ED and Reserve Bank of India for operating bank accounts along with Cricket South Africa during IPL-2 without permission. IPL Commissioner Shukla shrugs aside the allegations of financial irregularities, just as he dismisses anything in convention with his usual bluster.

PTI

PLAYERS DON'T HAVE LEVEL PLAYING FIELD
There are other problems, inbuilt into
IPL, which have created irregular incen-

Loss for

Real?
Team Name

Each of the then eight IPL franchises reported losses in its second edition
Returned Income/Loss 2008-09 2009-10 Loss Rs 6 lakh Loss Rs 35.50 crore Loss Rs 14 lakh Loss Rs 65.68 crore Loss Rs 50 lakh Loss Rs 11.85 crore Nil Loss Rs 42.89 crore Nil Loss Rs 19.30 crore Loss Rs 79 lakh Loss Rs 5.58 crore Nil Loss Rs 87.09 crore Loss Rs 2.92 crore Loss Rs 47.11 crore Not available. Team formed in March, 2010
* Figures not available for 2011-12

l ULTIMATE SECRET SOCIETY
Cricket is hardly the primary activity in IPL. The large, growing and dark circle around the field includes a secret society of franchise owners, pretty party girls and men of unknown means. Presiding over this is the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI), which has ensured lack of transparency. BCCI is a registered society completely autonomous from the Government. It only started paying income tax in 2007 after authorities decided that it wasn't simply a charitable organisation "promoting the sport of cricket". In the effort to become successful, IPL has cut corners. Interpol wanted to investigate the bookie phenomenon and and asked for Rs 90 crore as expenses, just as it had asked FIFA when it set out to investigate football sleaze. FIFA paid. International Cricket Council (ICC) President Sharad Pawar refused. Very conveniently, ICC's Anti Corruption Unit was hired. "If ICC had hired Interpol, cricket's cleansing process would have begun. But that did not happen," says Union Sports Minister Ajay Maken. In 2011, IPL had hit a ratings low. A new model was sought to be created, as highlighted in broadcaster Set Max's ads which encouraged viewers to watch the game on the ground. Rajiv

Rajasthan Royals Kings XI Punjab Kolkata Knight Riders Mumbai Indians Chennai Super Kings Royal Challengers Bangalore Deccan Chargers Delhi Daredevils Pune Warriors India

Shukla says that the average gate receipts for the 2012 season will be Rs 30 crore for each franchise. He also argues that the decline in TAM TRP ratings, from an average of 4.81 in IPL-1 to 3.33 in IPL-5 so far, is misleading because the goalposts have changed. "The ratings of even the most popular entertainment programmes have fallen as a result. IPL is still doing very well on television," he says. Shukla is also buoyant about overseas revenues.

All nine IPL franchises have been under the scanner of the Income Tax Department after a report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee of Finance in July 2011 instructed tax officials to scrutinise the accounts of all IPL teams. What aroused the suspicion of the Standing Committee was a wide dis-

take a penny from it. And we have made a global name for ourselves.

up against the whole world, politicians cutting across party lines.
AJAY MAKEN,
Sports Minister

RAJIV SHUKLA,
IPL Commissioner

22

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

``

``

l EVADING THE TAX NET

crepancy between the annual financial returns statements for the assessment year 2008-09 and the assessment year 2009-10. For the year 2008-09, also the first year of IPL, three of the eight franchises, Mumbai, Chennai and Deccan Chargers, showed nil loss. The remaining five showed minor losses--Rajasthan Rs 6 lakh, Punjab Rs 14 lakh, Kolkata Rs 50 lakh, Bangalore Rs 79 lakh and Delhi Rs 2.92 crore. In 2009-10, each franchise reported huge losses--Rajasthan Rs 35.5 crore, Punjab Rs 65.68 crore, Kolkata Rs 11.85 crore, Mumbai Rs 42.89 crore, Chennai Rs 19.3 crore, Bangalore Rs 5.58 crore, Deccan Rs 87.09 crore and Delhi Rs 47.11 crore. There was no particular reason why losses should have mounted so steeply. The player auctions had been conducted before IPL-1. The cost of

players would be the same for IPL-2. The revenue streams would have been greater--the success of IPL drew more advertisers and spectators to the second edition. The only reason for higher costs was the move to South Africa, but that alone could not explain the wide discrepancies. According to sources at the Income Tax Department, while the assessment is complete, investigation is ongoing and franchises have been asked to furnish details. There are several other issues of apparent financial irregularities redflagged in the report of the Standing Committee. At least four teams--Rajasthan Royals, Kolkata Knight Riders, Kings XI Punjab and Mumbai Indians-- received investments from abroad from tax havens such as Mauritius, Bahamas and British Virgin Islands. BCCI, in its reply to the committee, put all the blame on former IPL commissioner Lalit Modi. Even if true, and that is not proven, how does this exonerate the franchise owners who got the money from questionable unnamed

tives for players. In 2010, all-rounder Ravindra Jadeja was banned from season 3 of IPL for trying to negotiate a contract in violation of league rules. Jadeja, who at the time had not played for the Indian national team, was entitled to a salary of Rs 25 lakh, not more, set by the IPL Governing Council. Already a rising star in his franchise, Rajasthan Royals, Jadeja believed he deserved more money. This perverse rule on pay caps for Indian players who have never represented the country has made them vulnerable to the lure of illegal negotiations with franchises and offers from bookies. Curiously, no such cap is applicable to foreign players who have not represented their countries. A recent TV sting operation on five Indian players who have never represented India revealed the dangerous consequences. The players--T.P. Sudhindra (Deccan Chargers), Shalabh Srivastava (Kings XI Punjab), Mohnish Mishra (Pune Warriors), Amit Yadav

``

There is no need for BCCI to be under the Government. We don't

``

What can I do if no one wants to clean the dirt from cricket? I am

Cover Story INDIAN PREMIER LEAGUE
AZAD (CENTRE) PROTESTS AGAINSTTHE IPL MESS, IN DELHI

l POLITICS OF CRICKET
IPL would not have survived its serious flaws were it not for a strong crossparty political alliance lending its weight. Shukla is a prominent minister. Arun Jaitley, leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, is on IPL's Governing Council and heads its legal and disciplinary committee. The cricket establishment of BCCI and its regional components are packed with powerful politicians. Four are members of the Union Cabinet--Nationalist Congress Party chief Sharad Pawar (ICC president), Congressmen C.P. Joshi (president, Rajasthan Cricket Association) and Vilasrao Deshmukh (president, Mumbai Cricket Association), and Farooq Abdullah (president of the J&K Cricket Association) of the National Conference. The quartet has successfully stalled Maken's attempts to legislate a sports bill that will force BCCI to be more accountable. "What can I do if no one wants to clean the dirt from cricket?" says Maken. Shukla says there is no need for BCCI to be under the Government. "We don't take a penny from the Government. And we have made a global name for ourselves," he says. The cricket establishment can count on some support from outside the Government. Apart from Jaitley, Anurag Thakur, a BJP MP and son of Himachal Pradesh Chief Minister Prem Kumar Dhumal, is president of his state's cricket association which hosts IPL games at its stadium in Dharamshala. His party colleague, Kirti Azad, is however a staunch opponent of IPL and went on dharna demanding the abolishing of the league after its string of recent scandals. Azad said that India's image was being spoilt at an international level because of IPL debauchery and that he has written a letter to Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee to take action against IPL. Politics is a power game, and for now Maken and Azad are weak before a muscular establishment. But a poisonous worm is corroding the IPL apple from within, and all the might of Pawar, Shukla and friends will not stop this disease from spreading, if they do not use a sharp scalpel.

PTI

KIRTI AZAD,
BJP MP, EX-CRICKETER

ers (icons or not), no one knows how much players are being paid, whether by cheque or in cash. Says Modi, "No one should be allowed to be retained. If a player is important for the franchise, let them bid for him." Rajiv Shukla also recognises the opacity of retaining players. "We will consider revising this in our next Governing Council meeting," he says.  There should be an independent regulator for sports. "No one is being able to self-regulate. If not for anything else, let the regulator look into the alleged financial bungling of the state cricket associations," says Ajay Maken. "Put rules in place, things will start moving," says Bishen Singh Bedi. The former Indian captain says it's time BCCI auctions each player every year. "Let there be transparency, let us see who is paying what for whom. Let the juniors get a price for themselves so that they do not take money under the table," adds Bedi.

24

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

``

(Kings XI Punjab) and Abhinav Bali-- were caught on camera either offering to indulge in spot-fixing or ready to negotiate with other franchises or admitting that their franchises paid them significantly more than the official figure, in cash. An underground economy is clearly thriving in IPL. Modi, the creator of IPL and commissioner in its first three editions, admits that not auctioning uncapped players was a mistake. There are several possible reforms that can salvage the situation:  No player should be retained by a franchise without an auction. In 2008, for example, M.S. Dhoni was bought by Chennai Super Kings at the highest bid price of $1.5 million (Rs 7.5 crore). He was not put up for auction for the 2011 and 2012 seasons in which Gautam Gambhir came out on top with a bid price of $2.5 million (Rs 12.5 crore) from Kolkata Knight Riders. It would be unreasonable to expect Dhoni to have commanded anything less in an open auction.  The only players not subject to an auction in IPL-1 were the icon players-- Sachin Tendulkar (Mumbai), Rahul Dravid (Bangalore), Sourav Ganguly (Kolkata), Yuvraj Singh (Punjab) and Virender Sehwag (Delhi). Each was, however, to be paid a 10 per cent premium on the highest bid paid out by their team in the open auction. There was some transparency then. Now, with the icon system being replaced by the system of retaining play-

``

India's image is being spoilt at an international level because

of IPL debauchery. I have written to Pranab Mukherjee to take action against IPL irregularities.

with Kiran Tare and Nishat Bari

