HEALTH special 2012

THE WAYWE EATNOW

FIVE FASHIONABLE FOOD WORDS
These terms are very trendy right now

FOOD DIARY FROM THE RAMP
Super-slim models whose lives are dictated by the weighing scale can teach us a thing or two about healthy eating, or can they?
By Shilpa Mehta

Gluten
Latin for glue, gluten is a protein found in rye, barley and wheat and may be the culprit behind an array of health problems. The jury is still out on how long the trend will last but right now it is being seen as the perfect way to increase energy and lose weight.

LAKSHMI RANA
Height 5'11 Weight 58 kg Vital statistics 34-25-36

B

etween early-morning shoots and afternoon ad campaigns, evening catwalks and midnight fittings, the buzz is about clothes, designers, ramps, fittings, glamour, other girls, pecking order, makeup, travel, parties. Is there any room for food in the crazy schedule of elite fashion models? Yes and no. For many, there is hunger instead of food, filling up one's stomach with water or juice, boosting energy with vitamins, supplements and, perhaps, the occasional stress tablets. But those who reach the top take meals seriously, eat sensibly and choose food nutritiously. Here's how four icons of ultimate glamour work out their diet:

Daily diet Having fruits or fresh juices early in the morning and drinking water every two to three hours not only keeps me hydrated, but also accelerates the fat-burning process. 7 a.m. Jasmine tea and fruits with three-four glasses of water. 9 a.m. A glass of vegetable juice (carrot, aloe vera,
beetroot, ginger, amla, lauki and cucumber) or egg whites or oat cereals with a couple of toasts.

Omega-3
A fatty acid that makes the brain sharper, soothes the nervous system and also protects the heart. The best source of Omega-3 is oily fish, such as fresh tuna, mackerel or salmon.

SONALIKA SAHAY
Height 5'10 Weight 56 kg Vital statistics 33-27-36

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

1-1.30 p.m. Whole grain pasta with a bowl of salad (rocket leaves, pine nuts, cherry tomatoes, grilled zucchini and pimentos with balsamic vinegar dressing) or two missi rotis with dal. 5 p.m. A sandwich with a cup of green tea
or a bowl of yoghurt with cranberries.

2 p.m. Rice with dal or vegetables, a bowl of salad and curd. 4 p.m. Bowl of fruits or banana milk shake. 7-7.30 p.m. Grilled salmon, chicken or shrimp with a plate
of salad and chicken and broccoli soup.

Multivitamins One Wellwoman tablet daily. Fitness mantra I used to go to the gym a lot earlier which
used to wear out my knees and ankle joints. For the last couple of years, I have started running or cycling for 45 minutes every day. Now I feel fitter and healthier.

Daily diet It's very important to have three
substantial meals per day. I like my food baked, grilled, but never fried. Also, I ensure all breads are well-roasted as dry breads tend to accumulate as fat.

7.30-8 p.m. Grilled vegetables or
tomato-spinach curry with salad and soup.

FOTOCORP

7.30 a.m. A glass of warm water, honey
and lemon juice followed by cereals in skimmed milk or upma or fresh fruits and sprouts salad.

Multivitamins Health supplements such
as Vitamin D and Omega-3 supplements, only when my daily routine goes haywire.

AANCHAL KUMAR
Height 5'8 Weight 52 kg Vital statistics 34-25-36

Non-GM Food
While the debate is on whether genetically modified (GM) foods are just as safe as traditional crops, consumers are increasingly saying "no" to GM.

Fitness mantra I try and work out at least
five times a week for around 90 minutes every day. I prefer an evening workout, preferably a swim or a jog during summers.

10.30-11 a.m. A glass of fresh vegetable
juice or cold coffee or a yoghurt drink with a dash of pepper and salt.

Daily diet Every meal or snack of the day should have some source of protein. I try to avoid refined carbs as they lack nutrients. Instead I go for complex carbohydrates such as brown rice and whole grain bread. 8-8.30 a.m. Boiled eggs or homemade upma or a bowl of cereal in skimmed milk. 11 a.m. A bowl of papaya, apples and grapes or a small pack of unsalted nuts or oat biscuits. 2 p.m. Brown rice and vegetables or two rotis with
vegetables or dal and a bowl of low-fat yoghurt.
HEMANT CHAWLA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

SAPNA KUMAR
Height 5'9 Weight 54 kg Vital statistics 33-25-36

rotis and a bowl of Caesar salad or rice with chicken curry.

Low GI Food
Glycemic Index (GI) is a ranking of carbohydrates based on the extent to which they raise blood sugar levels after eating. Low GI foods can reduce the risk of obesity, diabetes and heart disease.

5 p.m. Digestive biscuits or oat cakes or
muffins with a cup of coffee or tea.

8.30-9 p.m. Chicken or prawn curry with Daily diet I try and eat home-cooked food
and when I am travelling, I prefer chicken and vegetables or prawn curry. I like my fill of cheese pie or muffins with espresso coffee, but that happens during weekends. a big bowl of salad.

Multivitamins No. Fitness mantra Exercise is an important
element of my diet. I feel that consistent workout combined with a jog or run can actually help you drop a dress size or two. I run at least 5-8 km every day. I also do ashtanga yoga three times a week.

4 p.m. A tall glass of milk. 6.30-7 p.m. A tomato and cucumber sandwich or celery
sticks with green tea or coconut water.

Trans Fats
They are fats that raise the LDL bad cholesterol in the blood and increase one's risk of coronary heart disease. Look for non-hydrogenated, zero trans fat oils for both cooking and  frying. OCTOBER 13, 2008 INDIA TODAY 00

1.30-2 p.m. Pulses or vegetables with two

FOTOCORP

8 a.m. A fresh glass of juice and fruits or porridge and sprouts salad.

9 p.m. Grilled chicken or fish with a glass of lemon juice. Multivitamins Vitamin E and calcium tablet daily. Fitness mantra I do cardio exercises four times a week
and shoulder, chest and biceps exercises once a week.

58

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

