NET FLUX
news now

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI
ACTORS SPOOFING STAR WARS AND GOTYE'S SONG

app alert

It's been an exciting week on the World Wide Web Union HRD Minister Kapil Sibal announced that Aakash 2, the upgraded version of the Aakash tablet, will be launched in mid-July. It will be faster and have better features. According to a study by Samsung, people in London use their smartphones to surf the Internet rather than to talk.

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up has something for tennis buffs, shopaholics and photographers. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps.

viral video
This week, a video parodying Belgian-Australian singer Gotye's hit Somebody That I Used to Know, featuring Star Wars characters, an ad from the European Commission encouraging girls to pursue science, and a man in a comical Batman costume running around Cambridge, UK, have gone viral.
Star Wars parodyof Gotye's Somebody That I Used to Know

Wimbledon keeps you updated on the latest tennis action, such as live scores, results and player profiles. Yardsale helps you organise items that you would like to sell, by listing them on social networks. Kicksend helps you send 30 photos from your phone to other phones or computers.
WALKER

tweet tweet

Ruling the Roost
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on July 1: The latest episode of Satyamev Jayate dominated Twitter, with people discussing alcohol abuse and the ill-effects of drinking. Netizens wished their friends Happy Canada Day on July 1. The Euro 2012 football final was a rage on social networks. While some fans lamented Italy's loss, many celebrated Spain's win. People deliberately posted grammatically incorrect tweets under the theme `Killer English' . Poorly constructed sentences made for a good laugh on Twitter. Author Chetan Bhagat was also trending on social networks, when his column--on whether Narendra Modi or Rahul Gandhi was the people's choice for prime minister--went viral online.

2.06 million views
The Dark Knight in real life

4,60,000 views
Science--It's a girl thing

6,91,787 views
*Views from when videos were uploaded

web tributes
The death of American director and writer Nora Ephron, 71, known for her classic rom com When Harry Met Sally, sparked a wave of online EPHRON mourning on June 26. Celebrities tweeted condolences and actor Tom Hanks wrote a blog on the Time magazine website in tribute. Previously written pieces by the former journalist like `What I'll Miss, What I Won't Miss'and `A Few Words About Breasts'went viral, reminding readers there was more to her than that faked orgasm in the restaurant.

Destiny's Child

star of the week

Wonder Woman

web tips
Children now join social networking sites at an early age. Teach them the right way to socialise online: Tell them that addresses, phone numbers and credit card numbers should stay private. Encourage them to be courteous with their friends. If anything makes them feel uncomfortable, they should inform you.

#Alcohol Abuse
10,24,419

#Happy Canada Day
8,12,850

#Euro 2012 Final
5,71,564

#Killer English
2,74,934

*Figures denote number of followers

#Chetan Bhagat
6,837

Laina Walker is popularly known as `Overly Attached Girlfriend' . With her large unblinking eyes and demented smile coupled with terrifying lyrics, the 21-year-old American has become a YouTube sensation. Her remakes of weirdonet Boyfriend by Justin Bieber and LifeProof, a US-based company that Call Me Maybe by Carly Rae makes covers for phones, launched a life Jepsen have over 8 million jacket especially designed for the iPhone views. Her latest one shows on June 30.The sturdy, bright orange her lip-syncing to songs case is buoyant and can float on water. such as Every Breath You Take by A team of Japanese science students has The Police. created a robot that can beat you at the game of Rock, Paper Scissors, by detecting your movements.

