The Big Story

WATER CRISIS

BOILING POINT
By Sowmya Aji

Summer of Discontent
JAMMU & KASHMIR 44.6 mm (-42%)

Only 16 per cent area of the country got normal rainfall in June. The overall rain deficiency stands at an alarming 31 per cent.
HIMACHAL PRADESH 27.9 mm (-76%) UTTARAKHAND 75.3 mm (-62%) UPPER WEST BENGAL 629.9 mm (14%) ASSAM & MEGHALAYA ARUNACHAL PRADESH 560.4 mm (-1%)

PUNJAB (-84%) HARYANA & DELHI
4.5 mm 9.6 mm

The prospect of a lean monsoon is not the only worry. Depletion of groundwater and population pressure spell a grim future for India. Expect water wars ahead.

(-92%)

WESTERN UTTAR PRADESH
6.8 mm

602.1 mm (6%)

WEST RAJASTHAN 6.3 mm (-83%) EAST RAJASTHAN
18.4 mm

(-92%)

(-76%) GUJARAT REGION & DAMAN
36.7 mm

EASTERN UTTAR PRADESH 27.6 mm (-78%)

BIHAR

94.2 mm

(-53%)
EASTERN MADHYA PRADESH WESTERN MADHYA PRADESH 52.7 mm (-58%)
66.4 mm

JHARKHAND
135.2 mm

(-77%)

(-59%) CHHATTISGARH

(-40%)

below-par monsoon is likely to set alarm bells ringing in the UPA 2 Government, already reeling under the impact of an economic downturn. Besides affecting the kharif sowing, which is certain to have a bearing on the production of rice, oilseeds and pulses, the delay in rain has the potential of pulling down both the economy and the country's economic sentiment. India's total rice production in 2011-12 was 103 million tonnes. If the monsoon continues to play truant through July, this year's figure could dip by at least 10 million tonnes, predicts former Union agriculture secretary P.K. Basu. It's not just agrarian India that's taking a hit. As of July 1, only 16 per cent area of the country has received normal rain. Urban India is reeling from extreme temperatures and frequent power cuts. Delhi, for instance, recorded its worst summer in 33 years with

167.1 mm 142.8 mm (-27%)

A

VIDARBHA

(-23%) ODISHA
213.1 mm (-12%)

SAURASHTRA, KUTCH AND DIU 26.1 mm (-75%)

GANGETIC WEST BENGAL
148.2 mm

NAGALAND, MANIPUR, MIZORAM, TRIPURA
406.6 mm

MARATHWADA
93.5 mm

(-46%)

(-10%)

(-41%) MADHYA MAHARASHTRA
95.7 mm

TELANGANA

KONKAN & GOA
749.8 mm

(-43%) NORTH INTERIOR KARNATAKA
66.2 mm

126.2 mm (-18%)

(-43%)

(-9%)

COASTALANDHRA PRADESH
103.3 mm

Rainfall figures are based on India Meteorological Department data. Figures indicate actual rainfall in June (in mm); percentage departures of rainfall from the norm are shown in brackets RAINFALL PATTERN IN SUBDIVISIONS June 1 to July 3 Excess Normal Deficient Scanty No Rain 0 11 15 10 0

(-13%) COASTAL KARNATAKA
945.5 mm

SOUTH INTERIOR KARNATAKA
88.4 mm

average maximum temperature in May-June at a dizzying 41.57°C. Everyone blames the monsoon for India's water woes but it isn't as simple as that. As water conservationist and Magsaysay awardee Rajendra Singh told INDIA TODAY TODAY, "There is no shortage of water in terms of rainfall. We, as a country, have failed to make use of it." Groundwater all across the country is depleting. The figures are astounding: Seventy-two per cent of the coun-

try falls under the "crucial zone", where groundwater has been overexploited. And no one has bothered to set up measures for water harvesting and aquifer recharge. Policy paralysis and an appalling lack of management has turned burgeoning India into waterless, despairing India. Eight-year-old Poorni in Karnataka has decaying teeth and limbs that struggle to move due to dangerous fluoride in the groundwater.

Sand contractors like Sanjay Singh Yadav, 40, make money in Bihar as the rivers dry up. Riots have broken out over borewell use, leading to death, imprisonment, deprivation and despair to families like that of Ramkumar Yadav, 60, in Chhattisgarh. Hindu Rao Hospital, one of Delhi's leading municipal hospitals, cancelled 40 surgeries in a week between June 16 and June 23 due to lack of running water. Politicians, including top leaders such as

(-5%)

RAYALASEEMA
73.2 mm

(-46%)

LAKSHADWEEP 348.5 mm (-2%)

(-47%)

KERALA
524.9 mm

TAMIL NADU & PUDUCHERRY 25.7 mm (-49%)

All India Area Weighted Rainfall (mm)
Actual 131 Normal 189.2 % Departure -31

(-29%)

Normal (+19% or -19%) Deficient (-20% to -59%) Scanty (-60% to -99%)
Graphic by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Map not to scale

26

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

Place Greater Hyderabad State ANDHRA PRADESH

The Big Story WATER CRISIS
Union Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar and Science and Technology Minister Vilasrao Deshmukh, are accused of diverting scarce water to their constituencies in Maharashtra, leaving others to fend for themselves (see box). Asit K. Biswas, the president of the Mexico-based Third World Centre for Water Management, says political will to address the water crisis in the country is completely missing. "Politicians provide lip service but nobody is serious about doing anything. Tough decisions are required. People should demand clean water as their right." Be it urban or rural India, water supply and its quality is pathetic. If 8,50,000 people in Lucknow stand in queues for five hours to get water, with 2,50,000 of them waking up at 4 a.m. to do so, Vishwambar Choudhary, who stays in Pune's upscale Prabhat Road area, pays Rs 1,100 every alternate day, which works out to Rs 16,500 a month, for water supply by tankers. Bangalore gets eight hours of water supply every alternate day in one-third of its total area; the rest fend for themselves with depleting groundwater and tankers that charge Rs 5 per pot even in the slum areas. Hyderabad is even worse. Shyam Kumar Chaparala, 34, a software industry employee residing in Engineers Colony, Yellareddyguda, in the heart of Hyderabad, gets piped water every other day for about two hours from 4 a.m. All residents in the 12-apartment block pool in money to buy a 5,000-litre tanker for Rs 600 every week. But others in outlying areas, even the bustling and towering apartment blocks of techies in Madhapur and Kondapur, aren't as lucky. More than 3,00,000 families residing in the newer localities of metropolitan Hyderabad are fortunate if water is supplied once in four or five days. They end up spending huge sums on tanker supply. Over-reliance on underground water has led to decline in water levels in some areas of Jaipur by five times in 15 years, from 100 ft to 500 ft. The state government, meanwhile, continues to give the go-ahead to apartments and malls in areas where there is no water supply at all. Still, urbanites at least get their water or are in a position to arm-twist and raise a ruckus against the powersthat-be. On an average, according to Water Resources Ministry statistics, an individual uses 150-200 litres of water per day in urban areas against a minuscule 20 litres a day in villages. The Union Government, however, has failed to formulate a Central water policy for more than a decade. The only debate is whether water supply should be privatised or not, with those opposing it raising the bogey of corporate interests in grabbing a large share of the water economy. Ramkumar Yadav, a widow with no income at Singhanpuri village, Mungeli district, Chhattisgarh, has seen water shortage reach such levels of desperation that it resulted in riots in her village on June 3. "It was a fight to the death over the use of a borewell, in which three people were killed, and 13 people arrested. My son is now in prison, his wife in hospital and I am left to care for their three children," she says. Other villages in the area faced acute water shortages in 2006, with five-member families surviving on less than 40 litres per week. Over 500 wells and public taps have dried up since. Entire lakes have been drained out due to unplanned quarry work. "We have always had a lack of adequate surface water in Mungeli. There have been days when my wife has had to use muckfilled water to cook. Many times we have had to store water in emptied-out gas lanterns. Till two years ago, my eight-year-old daughter had to walk 2 km a day with 13 litres of water balanced on her head," says Raja Thakur, 38, of Pauni village. Borewells changed that and their

New localities in Hyderabad get water only once in four-five days.

A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

K M KISHAN

Village Anjani State MAHARASHTRA
The lake, in Tasgaon taluk of Sangli district, dried up in February this year.

Village Bisiyat State BIHAR
The scarcity of water in the village has forced many to leave for the district headquarters.
life. With government subsidies up to Rs 20,000, villagers were able to install borewells for Rs 10,000 each. But borewells have only become sites of conflict. "Conflicts over water are only going to increase in the near future. The rural and urban divide is stark as far as distribution of water is concerned," says Anil Dave, Rajya Sabha MP and member of the parliamentary committee on water resources. The one exception to water conflicts, perhaps, are the people of Madakshira in Andhra Pradesh, who say they don't mind sharing the drinking water they are getting from a 200 km pipeline with their neighbouring taluk of Pavagada in Karnataka, though the political class in both states do not seem to agree. At Chittanadaku village, the first beneficiary of the drinking water tap from the pipeline, Gurumurthy, 35, points to an already existing tubewell that supplies water from a natural tank

28

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

The Big Story

WATER CRISIS
their waist, knees and ankles have huge deposits of fluoride, making any movement impossible. And everyone, be it age 25 or 50, complains of pain in the joints. But more than the pain, it's the travails of day-to-day life that are disconcerting. Villagers laugh, shrug or shake their heads when asked about water for bathing, washing clothes and utensils. "I haven't had a bath for months now," says Anjamma, 28. She finds it hard enough to store water for drinking for her husband, three children and herself. If that is the story in the South, at Jalapur village, Narhat block, Nawada district in Bihar, Sanjay Singh Yadav, isn't sure if the drying up of the Tilaiya, a small tributary of the Barakar river, has left him happy or sad. "It's ironic. I am happy, but I am suffering as well," says Yadav, the manager of a contractor who sells sand from the river. With the drying up of the river, the sale of sand has brought him handsome commission; but water for everyday use has become a scarce entity. "Few of the hand pumps in the village still work. Some give no more than a bucket of water after an hour of pumping. The water table has clearly depleted," he says. And no one knows where Jalapur village ends and Jarahiya village begins, as the river used to be the border. Santosh Kumar, 28, should be a rich man if you calculate his acres of land in Bisiyat village against the skyrocketing real-estate prices in Nawada. Kumar, however, can earn only Rs 3,000 a month working as a private medical compounder at the Nawada district headquarters, 40 km from his native village. That's because there is no water in Bisiyat. He stays with his wife Kaushalya and their three children in a room at his maternal uncle's house in Nawada. "We have a real drought in Bisiyat," said Sadhu Yadav, 42, a villager. "Our agriculture has died, our

nearby. "We need piped drinking water, but we can do with less. The people of Pavagada should also get it," he says. This is probably because the situation at Pavagada, part of the second largest arid region in the country after the Thar desert, is similar to what Madakshira faced till it got the pipeline. Groundwater at Pavagada is available only at a depth of 1,500 ft, and this is what the entire population is drinking. All children at Palavalli village in Pavagada, part of the worst-affected Nagalamadike hobli, have lines of decay on their teeth. They are losing hair, while eminent eye hospitals like Narayana Nethralaya from Bangalore have drawn up several lists of school children going blind. Older people are unable to bend, as

District Mungeli State CHHATTISGARH
Three persons were killed in riots over water in Singhanpuri village on June 3.
PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Sugar Farmers Divert Water in MAHARASHTRA
Ministers ensure water meant for parched regions makes its way to their constituencies
ast swathes of Maharashtra are parched with thirst as powerful politicians divert water for their own purposes. The state's second biggest dam Ujani, in Union Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar's Lok Sabha constituency Madha, has been providing water for the area since its inception in 1980. But of its 117 TMC (thousand million cubic metre) of water, 60 TMC is being illegally diverted to sugarcane fields, creating acute water shortage in hundreds of villages in eight taluks--Madha, Pandharpur, Mohol, Mangalvedha, Malshiras, North Solapur, South Solapur, Akkalkot--of Solapur district. INDIA TODAY has access to a confidential report prepared by officials at the Ujani dam in January this year which explains how the water was to be divided. According to the report, Ujani's water supply is reserved for crops like chilli, jowar, bajra, groundnut, maize, sunflower, tur, wheat, gram and vegetables. However, 51 per cent of its supply goes to six lakh hectares of sugarcane fields spread across three districts. These districts have as many as 50 sugar factories,

V

most of them run on a cooperative basis under which farmers are the biggest shareholders and Congress and Nationalist Congress Party politicians have controlling shares. Dam officials have repeatedly pointed out to the Maharashtra Water Resources Department about sugarcane fields owned by Rajendra Tambele, a close aide of Sharad Pawar, on more than 100 acres of the dam land at Hingangaon. These get a disproportionate share of water. On May 29, Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan admitted in his presentation before Planning Commission Deputy Chairman Montek Singh Ahluwalia that water-intensive cropping pattern (read sugarcane) is the reason behind the state's failure in achieving its irrigation targets. "Out of 358 taluks in the state, 148 are drought-prone," he said while submitting the state's annual plan of Rs 55,000 crore for 2012-13. The Nira-Deoghar dam, completed in 2007 at a cost of Rs 910 crore and with a capacity of 32 TMC water, was meant to bail out Satara farmers. Instead, it services farmers in

Baramati, the stronghold of Pawar and his nephew Ajit Pawar, the deputy chief minister. "I have never faced water shortage thanks to the canal on Nira river," says Baramati farmer Shahaji Jamdar, 35, who sells his sugarcane crop to Chhatrapati Cooperative Sugar Factory, in which Ajit Pawar holds 300 shares and Sharad Pawar 100 shares out of more than 10,000 shares. Around 120 km from Phaltan, Vishal Mali, 23, a villager of Bamni in Khanapur taluk of Sangli district, does not get water to irrigate his less-thanone-acre farm. A canal runs on the outskirts of his village. The canal, which originates from Takari, around 50 km from Bamni, was built to carry water from Krishna river. When water is discharged in the canal around 500 villages get water for farms. However, at Bamni, a sub-canal has been dug to divert much of the water towards the Udgiri Sugar Factory and Power Plant, still under construction and owned by Mohan Kadam, younger brother of Forest Minister Patangrao Kadam. Mali, who works on the construction site, says, "The villages to the right of

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

the canal get water but not the villages on the left." A site inspection carried out by INDIA TODAY bore this out. The lake in Home Minister R.R. Patil's village Anjani, in Tasgaon taluka of Sangli district, ran dry in February. Grape is a major crop in this area. The government discharges 2 TMC water for this lake from a water scheme at Mhaisal, around 30 km from Anjani. However, farmers allege that the water does not reach the lake because Patil's older brother Suresh diverts it to his

FARMERS SIT ON WHAT WAS A LAKE IN MALAD, MAHARASHTRA

farms. The diversion has affected grape fields spread over 500 hectares in Tasgaon. "The water flow is controlled by a valve which is coincidentally fixed near Suresh's farms. He turns the valve off so that water supply terminates at his farms," says Subhash Mali, 45, a farmer from Savlaj, 3 km from Anjani. The previous Shiv Sena-BJP government had planned a project under which water from the Panchganga

river in Kolhapur was expected to discharge into the Nira river in Satara and supply it to the drought-prone areas. As soon as he became chief minister in October 1999, Congress's Vilasrao Deshmukh announced a scheme to take 29 TMC of 70 TMC water from the Nira river to his constituency Latur through a canal. The result: The drought-prone taluks of Satara--Khatav, Man, Phaltan and Khandala--are woefully in need of water. Former Shiv Sena MP Hindurao Nimbalkar had led an agitation against the decision. He is now in political hibernation after the Shiv Sena disowned him for opposing Deshmukh. Even Water Resources Minister Sunil Tatkare's home town Roha, in Raigad district, reels under water scarcity. A dam built at Sutarwadi to fulfil the water needs of Roha taluk has not helped, with water from it mostly servicing farms owned by the minister's son Aniket. "I cannot be blamed if my farms are near the dam," says Tatkare. His department had announced 76 water schemes under Bharat Nirman Yojana to supply potable water. Around 41 out of these 76 schemes are still incomplete. "The drought in Maharashtra is not a natural calamity but a result of the government's bad policies," says water expert Bharat Patankar.
by Kiran Tare

30

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

The Big Story WATER CRISIS

Taluk Pavagada State KARNATAKA
Groundwater is available only at a depth of 1,500 ft. Fluorosis is rife among villagers here.
SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

bodies have wilted, and the administration has turned a deaf ear." Basant Das, 45, put off the marriage of his daughter because of fears that the acute water crisis would make it impossible for him to host guests at the wedding. The Meskaur police station in Nawada district is a telling case study of how the ongoing water crisis has spared none in this part of Bihar. The five hand pumps installed in the police campus have gone dry. Policemen posted at this outpost, including the Special Auxiliary Police, have to cross a rocky undulating terrain and then walk nearly 1 km everyday to fetch water from a hand pump installed in a school. The outpost is located on the Nawada-Gaya border, a hotbed of Naxalite activity, hence the cops move in groups and carry arms on them. "Our movements have become predictable, making us sitting ducks for the Maoists. But we have to take the risk for water," says a policeman. In Rajasthan, the urban situation is

itself horrendous. As per official claims, of the total 17 million urban population, seven million people don't get official water supply even once in 24 hours. Rajasthan has 220 towns of which Barmer, Balotra and Sojat get government water supply once in four days. Seventeen towns and cities in the state get water supply once in 72 hours, 60 towns once in two days and 136 towns and cities once in 24 hours. Half of the rural population relies on hand pumps as the only source of drinking water. On an average, the water table has gone down an alarming 1.5 m every year since 1990 and 199 of the 237 blocks in the state are in zones where groundwater has been declared as being "over exploited". Yet, just 10 per cent of the groundwater pumped out is used for drinking. "The last three decades have seen the state's farmers drifting away from cattle rearing and growing fodder to highly water-intensive agriculture through drip irrigation.

This has taken a toll on water for drinking," says Purushottam Aggarwal, principal secretary, public health and engineering department, Rajasthan. Nitesh Priyadarshi, a geologist at Ranchi University, maintains that the problem with government schemes for both public water pipes and borewell construction is the lack of geological research and insight. "Why aren't geological specialists consulted? You can't sit in office, visit a site five times and then draft a plan. You must study the region. Is it in the rain shadow? Is the groundwater fit for drinking? Can wells and lakes be regenerated? These are questions that must be interrogated and answered by experts in the field. Only then can we plan water consumption in a judicious manner that will sustain the area's resources," he says.
with Devesh Kumar, Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Rohit Parihar, Amarnath K. Menon, Dinesh C. Sharma, Kiran Tare, Piyush Srivastava, Sonali Acharjee and Amitabh Srivastava

32

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

