SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

RESTAURANT

IN THE CITY
BAKERY

Of baguettes and escargots
Tucked away in a crowded market, in a cosy nook lies a quaint little French bistro that takes its food rather seriously. Simple, comfortable interiors, a charming terrace which is perfect for breezy evenings and an open kitchen immediately draw your attention to the food. The menu is exotic, filled with the mention of escargots, duck, morels, champagne sauce, crepes and baguettes--all French as French can be.Start your meal with the escargots (snails) in lemon butter garlic sauce--once you get over the initial apprehension of eating snails, you'll begin to appreciate the faint metallic taste of the snail, offset perfectly by the acidity of the sauce and balance of the baguette. For main course, we insist you skip the Duck with Orange Sauce, and order the Filet de Beouf instead. Not only is this one of the few restaurants in Delhi that uses real beef steak (not buffalo); they also know how to cook it to pink perfection. Though perfectly acceptable, the desserts just don't live up to the rest of the meal. They are recommended only for the insatiable sweet tooth. Meal for two Rs 2,000 (without alcohol) At M-27, 2nd Floor, M Block Market, Greater Kailash Part 2 Tel 41085544
 by

Alternative indulgence
This tiny bakery, named after the Palestinian sweetmeat, Kunafa, offers alternative choices for Delhiites with a sweet tooth. Their smiling staff will offer you a complimentary flaky sweetmeat the moment you enter this three-month old bakery. With a wall covered with a painting of Kunafa's outlet in Jordan, this quaint little set up is pleasant and welcoming. You
CHANDRA DEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Insiyah Vahanvaty

WHAT'S UP
ALL THROUGH THIS MONTH
Record your appetite
might be spoilt for choice since Kunafa houses over 50 varieties of sweets and dry fruits from Palestine, Lebanon and Syria. Choose from a range of kunafas (a pastry made with fine, sweet vermicelli and cream), baklavas (a pastry made of minced dry fruits including pistachios and walnuts that are drenched in sugar syrup or honey and baked in sheets of filo pastry), stuffed dates, Turkish figs and organic honey. While you enjoy the sweet bites, make sure you also try their bitter Arabic coffees. Price Starting from Rs 1,500 per kg At Where 70 Mehar Chand Market Tel 49050644; kunafa.in
 by

Rewati Rau

Get ready for the Bagels and Brownies championship, which will require participants to either finish one one of their 100 degrees bagel sandwich or their CBI Sundae, as fast as they can. For those not in the know, the 100 degrees sandwich is a fiery Peri Peri bagel sandwich with cottage cheese or chicken while the CBI sundae consists of chocolate brownies and vanilla ice-cream topped up with large amounts of chocolate sauce. The winner will be provided a free lifetime supply of any one goodie from the store till their record is beaten by a better man,

ONGOING TILL AUGUST 26
MasterChef's delights
Recreating the MasterChef Australia Season 4 magic, Shiro presents eight non vegetarian Asian-inspired dishes that we have all seen being prepared on the show, handpicked by their chef as additions to their already scrumptious brunch menu. Price Rs 1,750 plus taxes At Shiro, Hotel Samrat, Kautilya Marg, Chanakyapuri Tel 26876310

or in this case, a better eater. The first runner up is provided a supply of free goodies once a week and the second runner up gets the same once in a month. At R-278, GK 1, Pamposh Enclave; 14/185, Main Shivalik Road, Malviya Nagar Tel 49332222

ALL THROUGH THIS MONTH
Tofu treats
Asia Kitchen presents Asian Delights, a specially crafted tofu based menu. Tuck into dishes such as tofu on sizzlers and tofu lemon with beancurd. Meal for two Rs 1,500 plus taxes At 15 Basant Lok, Vasant Vihar Tel 26143333

s-28

SIMPLY DELHI  JULY 2012

