SomakRaychaudhury
GUEST COLUMN
The writer is an astrophysicist at University of Birmingham, UK, soon to join Presidency University, Kolkata, as head of physics

The Hunt for God Particle
The longest and most expensive search in the history of science has a deep Indian connect. The origin of Higgs boson goes back to physicist Satyendranath Bose.
hanks, Nature." Two little words marked the end higher speeds. The only exception is the photon, the of the speech of Fabiola Gianotti, the spokesper- particles that make up light. Even in the Higgs field, the son of the ATLAS experiment, indicating the photon acquires no mass, and thus can travel at the collective sigh of relief at what is believed to be the maximum possible speed allowed by nature, which is... beginning of the end of the longest, and most expensive, you've guessed it... the speed of light. Inside the Large Hadron Collider, particles like protons search in the history of science. The discovery of the Higgs particle will lead to a new were being accelerated to near-light speeds, and hurled at understanding of the origin of matter in the Universe, which each other in the dark underground tunnels, colliding in a occurred in the smallest fraction of a second after its creation flash of energy, as electrons, quarks, and other more mas13.4 billion years ago. Indeed, it is the key to understanding sive particles emerge. If our theories are correct, a few of these particles, including the new particle announced on the existence of diversity and life in the universe. Physicists believe that the Higgs particle has been spot- July 4, will be Higgs particles. It is not clear how many kinds ted at the world's largest and most expensive laboratory-- of particles make up the Higgs field. Various instruments 27 km in circumference, 100 m below ground, straddling that line the walls of the tunnel will help piece together the the border of France and Switzerland. The Large Hadron complicated jigsaw of what actually happened in the colliCollider, a multi-billion-dollar array of machines, is run by sion. The experiment will run till the end of this year, and it a pan-European organisation called CERN in Geneva. This will take a decade for scientists to analyse the data to look is where, among other things, the world-wide web was in- for and confirm the detections of possible Higgs particles. The Higgs boson was named the "God particle" by the vented. Now it is the scene of another ground-breaking event. The world has been waiting for over 40 years since Nobel-winning US physicist, Leon Lederman, since it is allprofessor Peter Higgs, currently at the University of pervading and omnipresent. Scientists often use the word Edinburgh, UK, predicted the existence of Higgs particle. "God" when they borrow one of the divine characteristics In recent years, "HiggsRumors" has been one of the most attributed by various religions. Apart from understanding the nature of matter, such fundamental discoveries open popular hashtags on Twitter. According to the standard theory, at the moment of the up fields of research that are hard to imagine at the time. creation of the Universe, all particles were massless, and For instance, when the electron was discovered at the dawn they all travelled at the speed of light. A trillionth of a of the 20th century, nobody imagined how today our life second after the birth of the Universe, an all-pervading would be dominated by electronic devices. Only time will tell Illustration by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com what the Higgs will lead us to. invisible field switched on, that Of the 6,000 scientists involved caused particles to acquire mass. in the experiments, many are This is known as the "Higgs field", Indians, belonging to, among others, and its only visible manifestation is the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics the Higgs boson. in Kolkata and the Tata Institute of When I run on a track, I am at Fundamental Research in Mumbai. my fastest, but if I try to run on There is a deeper connection sand, or in water, I won't be able to with India. All elementary particles get up to the same speed, even are divided into two kinds, fermions though I might exert the same and bosons. The Higgs particle is energy. It is the medium, like air, a boson, named after the Indian sand or water, that holds me back. physicist Satyendranath Bose, If a bunch of particles is given the who, along with Albert Einstein, same amount of energy, the more first described their nature, almost massive particles travel sluggishly, a century ago. and the lighter particles travel at 

T

46

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

