GLOSSARY

TOUGH GIRLS WALK THE TALK
Girls toughen up and skip the makeup for the big screen. Nothing like flying kicks without cosmetics to get a true picture of the talent beneath.

Q& "Take the challenge, rise to it. A Grab the bull by the horns."
In its third and final instalment, The Dark Knight is looking slicker than ever. With a host of new characters, not to mention Anne Hathaway in a catsuit, Christopher Nolan's epic drama will finally have a conclusion in The Dark Night Rises. Actor Christian Bale speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. This is your third instalment as Batman. Have you grown attached to the costume? A. I always was. I have an incredible fondness for it, despite the discomfort, the heat and the headaches. Q. The Dark Knight Rises being the final film in the trilogy, how do you feel about it? A. Take the challenge, rise to it. Don't be timid. Grab the bull by the horns and let's take those odds and go out and defeat them. Q. How do you pick your roles? A. You never consider what you have to do until you know that there is something about that story that really fascinates you. There has to be something that intrigues you in the script. Q. Why was India chosen as a location for filming? A. There was a sequence that needed to be in the middle of nowhere and an interesting foreign locale. The place we were shooting is beautiful and remote.

Katrina Kaif skips the pancake for
Ek Tha Tiger.While she looks lean and toned in the film's poster and is even said to have done some very impressive stunts alongside Salman Khan, she is training even harder to play a combat assassin in Dhoom 3, to match the film's villain Aamir Khan.Thrilling.

>>>

Sonam Kapoor's fashion statements
are her claim to fame. But she has let go of those designer clothes to play Farhan Akhtar's wife in the biopic on Milkha Singh called Bhaag Milkha Bhaag. She had taken the dressing down route earlier in Mausam and Delhi-6, but her wardrobe has undergone yet another makeover, to suit the role of a village girl.

YOGEN SHAH

BENDRE

STUFF OF DREAMS
Sonali Bendre, 37, has joined the league of actors making a comeback to films. She is part of the ensemble cast of Ekta Kapoor's Once Upon A Time Again, playing Mumtaz, Akshay Kumar's wife in the film. She abandoned Bollywood years ago, after her marriage to Goldie Behl, in favour of home and hearth. Since then, she has ventured out occasionally in a handful of Telugu films, as a judge on Indian Idol and multiple seasons of India's Got Talent. Did judging all those talent shows push her into re-testing her own skills in front of the camera? Um, we hope they have improved.

SHAMITA SHETTY

TIME TO GROW UP
Buy one, get one free. This appears to be the case of the Shetty sisters.Where Shilpa, 37, goes, Shamita, 33, shows up.Just like she does in a new shampoo commercial on TV. She followed her into Bollywood, became the third member of an odd trio with Raj Kundra and remained glued to his side, while the elder sibling took a maternity break. Even a link-up with Harman Baweja and an interior designing course in London has been approved by Shilpa. About time the kid sister grew up.

OF THE

WEEK
"What a wonderful day! Interacting with a new generation of actors. So much talent, confidence, completely free and unselfconscious. Wish I was younger to be able to get an opportunity to act with this new generation of actors, and directors..!" --Amitabh Bachchan

ANGER MANAGEMENT
Actor Esha Deol and her husband Bharat Takhtani have got a unique memento--popular online videos of Dharmendra getting angry at their reception. Brothers Sunny and Bobby could not make it to the event, and daddy lost his cool when asked why. At first he threw up his hands and walked away uttering gibberish, but the second time he got furious, and said, "Aap bakwaas mat kijiye." Ouch.
by Nishat Bari and Olina Banerjee

62

FOTOCORP

FOTOCORP

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

>>>
Esha Gupta has traded her
glam doll look to play a police officer from Bhopal in Prakash Jha's political thriller Chakravyuh, alongside Arjun Rampal and Abhay Deol. She even did her own stunts, some of which involved dangling from a helicopter. Good.Anything that distracts us from her bland expression.
JOKE
OF THE

WEEK
God Particle found: Scientists... Its duplicate is already available in Heera Panna, Mumbai, and Gaffar market in Delhi.

THE DC COMICS COVER

BLAZING TRIUMPH
India has got its own superheroine Rakshasi on a DC Comics cover, titled `The Fury of Firestorm: The Nuclear Men' , in its tenth issue. The blue-bodied character is described as India's nuclear woman and sports golden headgear straight from Indian mythology. India's officially sanctioned `Firestorm' also triumphs over her opponent in true Indian style--with one foot on his chest, as she stands blazing over him on the cover.

DHARMENDRA

--Jaspal Bhatti

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

