Na tion

HARYANA DIPLOMACY

HARYANA'S HOUSE OFHORRORS
The state government drags its feet on probing the accused in a heinous sex racket
Photographs by MANOJ KUMAR

Standing on Ceremony
Salman Bashir, Jaimini Bhagwati wait to officially take over as Pakistan and India's envoys in Delhi and London

P

By Asit Jolly

umein nanga karke, murga bana ke, baans ke dande se marte the (They stripped us, made us bend over and beat us with bamboo sticks)," two terrorstricken five-year-old boys haltingly told members of a probe committee appointed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court on June 6. The toddlers, who narrated horrifying stories of extreme abuse including forced acts of oral sex, are among the 103 severely tormented young women and children rescued from Apna Ghar, a privately-run shelter home in Haryana's Rohtak city. "Sickening and shocking," is how National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) member Vinod Kumar Tikoo, 58, described what he saw when he raided the shelter home on May 9. Testimonies recorded by Tikoo, and subsequently by Chandigarh lawyers Anil Malhotra and Sudipti Sharma on June 5 and 6, were even more appalling. Jaswanti Devi and her associates allegedly ran a veritable `house of horrors' barely three km from Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda's family home. Malhotra and Sharma's 28-page report to the high court on June 12 states, "Children were physically

H

abused, brutally beaten, often kept naked, forced to consume liquor and regularly made to work as farm and construction labourers." They further detail how "some children, aged between five and 10 years, complained of abuse in the form of oral sex". All this and more, the report says, was forced upon the inmates by Devi's son-in-law Jai Bhagwan and driver Satish. Older girls and young women were routinely drugged, forced to engage in lesbian acts and sleep with "policemen and outsiders". Many victims also reported sexual encounters with "foreigners" in local guesthouses and hotels. "Whenever girls were sent out of the home with Jai Bhagwan and Satish, she (Devi) simply said, `Gehun katne gayin hain (they're out harvesting wheat)'," a young woman, now relocated to Mother Teresa's Missionaries of Charity at Panipat, told the lawyers. She added that sexual acts, including those involving

(LEFT) APNA GHAR, THE SHELTER HOME; JASWANTI OUTSIDE THE ROHTAK COURT

SOME CHILDREN, AGED BETWEEN FIVE AND 10, COMPLAINED OF SEXUALABUSE IN THE FORM OF ORAL SEX.

children, were almost always recorded. NCPCR's report, released on June 30, says at least four of the young women rescued from Apna Ghar were found to be HIV positive. Children born to women in the shelter home were illegally sold. The NCPCR estimates that 41 inmates have gone missing from Apna Ghar over the past three years. Twenty-nine are yet to be traced. Oblivious to the goings-on at the shelter home, the Haryana government `honoured' Devi with the Indira Gandhi Mahila Shakti Puraskar on March 23; she was awarded a citation and cash prize of Rs 1 lakh. Shockingly, it took Women and Child Development Minister Geeta Bhukkal a month after the sleaze was exposed to revoke the award on June 11. "Koi mera kuch nahi bigaad sakta. Main kisi se nahi darti (Nobody can harm me. I am scared of no one)," Devi bragged while being escorted to the Rohtak District Court on June 16. She dared the state police to prove the charges against her. Perhaps more appalling than the horrors inside Apna Ghar is the Haryana government's lackadaisical approach. Besides arresting Devi, Jai Bhagwan, Satish and four others, the

initial investigation team constituted under Rohtak DSP Tula Ram was dragging its feet amid reports that local policemen were involved in sexually abusing inmates. On June 6, Director-General of Police (DGP) R.S. Dalal constituted a special investigation team (SIT) under additional DGP M.S. Mann promising "exemplary punishment" for any policeman found involved. The SIT too proved a dud with investigators failing to recover mobile phones used by the accused or seize computers or any recording devices from Apna Ghar. Adding to this, the Haryana administration went out of its way to flout NCPCR directions in shifting the 103 rescued victims to 12 alternate shelter homes in seven towns across Haryana. "This is evidently a ploy to scuttle the investigation," insists a lawyer. The state government then decided to transfer the investigation to CBI on June 15. But a fortnight on, the transfer is still stuck in bureaucratic procedures. The shocking revelations exemplify all that can go wrong in privately run shelter homes. Rising instances of abuse in childcare institutions across the country indicate a systemic rot. Just 14 states and Union territories have legislated State Commissions for protection of child rights. Haryana does not figure on the list. 

akistan's new envoy Salman Bashir was hoping to get a fasttrack route to credentials so he could participate in the June 4-5 India-Pakistan foreign secretary talks. But the Ministry of External Affairs politely declined, citing convention that a minimum of five envoys is required for a credentials ceremony. Outgoing President Pratibha Patil has been so busy winding up that she hasn't been able to allot time for the ceremony. India has, however, made a departure from protocol by allowing him to sit in the bilateral talks as an observer. The soft-spoken former Pakistani foreign secretary arrived in Delhi to take over as envoy from Shahid Malik. After a five-year stint in Delhi, Malik returned to Islamabad in June. Syed Zabiuddin Ansari alias Abu Jundal's arrest, and his confirmation of Pakistan's hand in the 26/11 Mumbai attack, greeted Bashir, who had earlier described India's evidence on the attack as a "piece of mere literature". Without credentials, Bashir is merely high commissioner-designate and cannot host public functions, interact with the media or play the role of envoy in official talks. A similar fate has befallen India's top man in London, Jaimini Bhagwati. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh appointed Bhagwati as high commissioner in March, but Queen Elizabeth hasn't found time to accept his credentials. India and the UK have a close relationship and diplomatic ties rarely witness any strain but the grapevine is abuzz that Buckingham Palace was not amused that the Prime Minister turned down an invitation to be at the Queen's diamond jubilee celebrations in

June, citing prior commitments. A spokesperson of the British High Commission told INDIA TODAY: "The new Indian high commissioner's arrival has coincided with an exceptionally busy period for Her
AP PHOTO

BASHIR AT THE WAGAH BORDER IN JULY 2011

Majesty. As Buckingham Palace has said, Mr Bhagwati will be able to present his credentials at the first available opportunity. In the meantime, he is free to operate as India's most senior diplomat in the UK, across the range of political, economic and cultural activity that is required of this prestigious role." Till then, he, like Bashir, will be standing on ceremony. by Saurabh Shukla

44

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

NEW

NEW

