GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

NO TIME FOR HOME
anmohan Singh represents Assam in the Rajya Sabha but only a flood or a calamity persuades him to visit the state which gave him a chance to be Prime Minister. On July 2, he, along with UPA Chairperson Sonia Gandhi, went for 140 minutes, 90 of which were spent mid-air, scanning Jorhat, Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, and Kaziranga National Park. They did not meet a single flood-affected person. The media was luckier. The Prime Minister spent five whole minutes with them as he read out an official statement at Guwahati airport, promising assistance of Rs 500 crore.

WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?
.A. Sangma may be fighting a losing battle in 2012, but according to an NCP leader, he is positioning himself as the consensus candidate for 2017. What happens to his daughter in the interim? NCP chief Sharad Pawar has made it clear to Agatha that the party will take disciplinary action against her if she campaigns for her father, who is not the Government candidate. Perhaps that is why she was missing from the official delegation that accompanied Sangma to file his nomination, though she has been actively canvassing for him at "social events" .

LOST AND FOUND
JP President Nitin Gadkari has lost 27 kg and was looking almost svelte at the wedding of son Sarang on July 2. He has, however, gained friends going by the turnout of the smartest in the city for the reception at Ashoka Hotel. Wags thought that this was the first sign of a change in government after the next polls. Delhi's sycophants can smell the air.

M

P

B

"After saying he was ready to swear in Italian Sonia Gandhi as PM, Kalam has become a laughing stock. He is now a hypocrite."
BAL THACKERAY Shiv Sena Chief

SHEKHAR YADAV

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

AGATHA SANGMA

LANGUAGE OF POWER

YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

SONG SUNG BLUE

TWEET SON
A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

P

ut Immediately" was the remark on the file by then Maharashtra chief minister Vilasrao Deshmukh to expedite the proposal of Adarsh Society. The lawyer for the prosecution thought this was enough to implicate Deshmukh, when he grilled him on June 28. But he hadn't accounted for Deshmukh's linguistic dexterity. Deshmukh said "put immediately" for him meant "not before at least six months". Wonder what delay indefinitely means in the Deshmukh dictionary.

O

BADAL

n the last day of the Budget session on June 29, Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal mocked the Congress as a party of singers. "Congress ought to have requisitioned a full band with crooners," Badal remarked a trifle uncharitably after the Congress MLA and popular folk singer Mohammad Sadique responded with great enthusiasm to the Chief Minister's request for a song during zero hour. Poor Sadique, who had poured his heart into the song Bharat ik mundri, vich nag hai Punjab da (India is the ring in which Punjab is the diamond), said he felt like a schoolboy surrounded by bullies. "They were mocking me and used me to embarrass my party," he moaned.

"I don't regret not becoming the PM. I'm repeating that Manmohan Singh is one of the finest persons to be the PM."
PRANAB MUKHERJEE Former Finance Minister

GADKARI WITH WIFE

NAIDU (LEFT) WITH LOKESH

NAME TROUBLE
ith the accused in 26/11 Mumbai attack Zabiuddin Ansari alias Abu Jundal being much in news, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) received a peculiar request from the wellknown Jindal family. MHA was requested to tell the Delhi Police and Intelligence Bureau to emphasise the difference between Jundal and Jindal. The police, however, wouldn't reveal which Jindal called.

W

MODI

SOFT TARGET

I

DESHMUKH
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

f you're a chief minister in trouble, how do you hope to impress Congress chief Sonia Gandhi? Simple. Attack Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi. That's what Rajasthan Chief Minister

Ashok Gehlot did on June 26 in Jaipur, while speaking on the sidelines of a function on drug abuse. "If BJP has GEHLOT guts, it should bring Narendra Modi forward as its prime ministerial candidate," he said to the media. Perhaps Gehlot's grasp of national politics will ensure a place for him in the Union Cabinet if he is removed before Assembly elections next year.

hat do young politicians do to make an impact? Write a stirring speech for Parliament? No. Adopt a village? No. They just get on to Twitter. And hope for the best. Nara Lokesh, 29, who is doing an MBA from Stanford and is the only child of TDP chief N. Chandrababu Naidu, 62, has begun using Twitter to communicate with party workers and young voters. He uses his iPhone4 to tweet at least twice a day. His questions range from asking tweeple what the TDP stand on the presidential race should be to defending his father as pro-farmer. Hope lies eternal in a tweet.

W

OF THE

WEEK

Glad to see Geelani's imagination and ability to create fiction has not dulled with age.

"The poor boy (Vishnu Vardhan) is 307 in the world and I don't even know if he has grasscourt shoes. So it is a bit of a tough one."
LEANDER PAES, on his Olympics doubles partner

J&K Chief Minister Omar Abdullah after Syed Ali Shah Geelani claimed he had information that "India was conspiring to create a state within a state in Kashmir" .

HOODA

TENNIS TROUBLE
PAES
AP PHOTO

H

aryana Chief Minister Bhupinder Hooda loves his tennis. An avid player, Hooda had kept aside time for two visits to England this summer, one to witness the ongoing Wimbledon, and the other later, to attend the Olympics. The presidential elections have ensured that he can do neither. "Hooda sahib is likely to cancel his trips," a senior aide said. Bad news for officials too: They can't accompany the Chief Minister.

with KAUSHIK DEKA, ROHIT PARIHAR, KIRAN TARE, AMARNATH K. MENON, PRIYA SAHGAL, BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

14

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

15

