Nat ion KARNATAKA
Former chief minister wants his successor replaced. BJP has no choice but to agree.
By Sowmya Aji

2G SPECTRUM

PAWAR HANGS UP
NCP chief resigns as chairman of EGoM on 2G

allocation to avoid `unnecessary controversy'
n July 3, a few hours before he was scheduled to chair his first meeting of the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) on 2G allocation, Union Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar opted out. In a letter to the Prime Minister, the NCP president wrote that "attempts have been made to unnecessary drag me into the controversy surrounding the allocation of 2G spectrum". According to NCP General Secretary D.P. Tripathi, Pawar was merely trying to avoid unnecessary controversy. "My association in the decision-making process as the chairman of the EGoM may motivate the vested elements to try to drag me into the controversy," Pawar wrote. Pawar had earlier been dragged into the 2G controversy when corporate lobbyist Niira Radia had alleged that he had vested interests in the DB Group, the company that owns Swan Telecom. Shahid Balwa and Vinod Goenka are co-owners of DB Realty. Pawar was said to be close to both. Pawar was appointed chairman of the EGoM on June 29 to replace Pranab Mukherjee, who resigned to contest the presidential polls. A meeting was scheduled for June 21 to decide on spectrum pricing but it was deferred as Mukherjee did not want to preside over this decision. Like Mukherjee, perhaps Pawar also has ambitions that go beyond being a Union minister. "And why not? The prime ministership will be up for grabs in 2014. It is going to be a hung House, and who has more crossparty friends than Sharad Pawar? Given a choice, even Jayalalithaa would support Pawar rather than Narendra Modi," says an NCP MP. The Supreme Court has asked the EGoM to auction 2G spectrum by August 31. In its February 2 order, the court cancelled the licences

ormer Karnataka chief minister B. S. Yeddyurappa is arm-twisting the BJP national leadership yet again, by demanding the replacement of his hand-picked successor, D.V. Sadananda Gowda, with yet another hand-picked successor, Jagadish Shettar. The national leadership will take a final call before July 16. Yeddyurappa is unhappy that Gowda has taken a strict "anti-corruption" line and has put a full stop to many of his former mentor's activities. Gowda removed all of Yeddyurappa's trusted staff from the chief minister's office and ensured there was no interference from his predecessor. BJP patriarch Lal Krishna Advani has opposed the move to remove Gowda on the ground that a sitting chief minister cannot be displaced without reason. But the rest of the party national leadership seems inclined to accept Yeddyurappa's new choice. "The national leadership has decided to accede to his wishes for multiple reasons, the main one being that we want to retain the Lingayat community,'' says a senior party ideologue. Yeddyurappa is still considered the undisputed leader of Karnataka's single largest community, which is said to comprise between 18 and 21 per cent of the state's 65 million population. Yeddyurappa is furious with Gowda for not being the rubber stamp he was supposed to be. Gowda has made his own mark as a comparatively `clean' chief minister. He has not interfered in the criminal cases of land grabbing and bribery filed against Yeddyurappa and his family in various courts and not shielded him in any manner. Instead, Gowda has attempted to run the administration with as little corruption as possible, even in departments controlled by

F

O

SHETTAR
PTI SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

YEDDYURAPPA

GOWDA
MAIL TODAY

Yeddyurappa Pulls the Plug
ministers close to Yeddyurappa. A party source pointed out: "The result is that the money flow to the Yeddyurappa camp has been cut off. Naturally, they are all angry with Gowda." Sources indicate that Yeddyurappa has now worked out a compromise with Shettar in the hope that he will be more compliant. The BJP national leadership has had to accept every wish and every whim expressed by Yeddyurappa, right from 2008, when the `Southern Gateway' of Karnataka pushed them to power. But this time, they are backing Shettar for a different reason. The party hopes that if Shettar is made chief minister, it will help them neutralise Yeddyurappa's effect. "Shettar is also a Lingayat, who belongs to our primary vote bank of north Karnataka. Even if he changes his mind again, like he did about Gowda,Yeddyurappa cannot ask for Shettar's replacement without alienating his own support base,'' the party source told INDIA TODAY. The Lingayats abandoned the Congress from 1990, when the then national party president Rajiv Gandhi summarily replaced Karnataka's ailing chief minister Veerendra Patil, a Lingayat, with S. Bangarappa. Rajiv made the announcement of the change of chief minister to mediapersons at the Bangalore airport, leaving the community furious. Since then, the Congress has made several attempts to win them back, but by and large, the Lingayats supported Patil's old friend Ramakrishna Hegde despite him being a Brahmin, as he was always identified with their community. Once Hegde died and the Janata parivar disintegrated, the Lingayats shifted their loyalties to Yeddyurappa, founder member and then state president of the BJP. The community's steady support pushed the BJP to power in 2008, with Yeddyurappa becoming one of the state's most powerful chief ministers. Sensing a subtle shift in the community's thinking following Yeddyurappa's ouster from power, Congress President Sonia Gandhi attempted to woo them on April 29. She flew down to visit the most influential Lingayat pontiff, Shivakumara Swami of Siddaganga mutt in Tumkur, praised his charity work and gave the mutt a donation of Rs 1.05 crore to mark his 105th birthday. But Shettar, considered the second-most influential Lingayat leader after Yeddyurappa, brushes it off. He told INDIA TODAY: "It was a clear attempt by the Congress to dent our vote bank and woo the community, but it will not work. Just one visit by a national leader to a mutt for one function cannot change the entire atmosphere.'' The anti-Yeddyurappa camp is happy about the development. "It is a political blunder by Yeddyurappa to seek replacement of Gowda with Shettar. He is so angry with Gowda for not being a rubber stamp that he has opted for who he thinks is the lesser evil. It will be a really interesting political game, as many ministers supporting Yeddyurappa cannot stand Shettar,'' a Cabinet minister said. 

of 122 telecom operators which had bagged the 2G spectrum and directed that the airwaves be auctioned to fresh bidders. The EGoM had initially been tasked to look into three issues--to decide on the rollout obligations, to finalise the reserve price and the method of payment (whether one-time or deferred), and the amount of spectrum to be allotted to each bidder. The EGoM was also to decide on any issue

PAWAR
PTI

YEDDYURAPPA IS UNHAPPYTHAT GOWDA HAS TAKEN A STRICT "ANTI-CORRUPTION"LINE AND HAS PUTA FULL STOP TO MANY OF HIS FORMER MENTOR'S ACTIVITIES.

that may arise out of telecom regulator TRAIs' recommendations including the fee payable to the auctioneer. The Government had earlier sought 400 days to complete the auction process, but later sought more time. Now there will be a further delay as the Government looks for a new person to head it.
by Priya Sahgal and Devesh Kumar

38

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

