NET FLUX
news now

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video

app alert

It's been an interesting week on the World Wide Web West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee published her first post on Facebook, endorsing APJ Abdul Kalam for president. The Association of American Publishers said revenue from sale of e-books in the US has exceeded that of hardbound books, raking in $282.3 million (Rs 1,500 crore).
ACTORS SPOOFING STEVE JOBS AND BILL GATES

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up has something for videographers, movie buffs and amateur filmmakers. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. Condition One will help iPad users change the perspective and vantage points of videos and zoom in. vjay integrates music with personal video footage for an interactive audiovisual experience. Flickd Movies helps you create a list of movies to watch and gives you reminders.

This week, videos of a rap song featuring caricatures of Steve Jobs and Bill Gates, a Coca-Cola advertisement promoting good values and a skit where US comedian Jimmy Kimmel interrogates a child with a fake lie detector, have gone viral.
Steve Jobs vs Bill Gates epic rap battle

tweet tweet

Winning Formula
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on June 18: The top trend was of netizens sending their daddies some virtual love on Father's Day. People used tweets to flirt with each other by listing the top 10 attractive people they follow. The Pepsi T20 football grand finale in Delhi, featuring Ivory Coast footballer Didier Drogba and cricketers Suresh Raina and Virat Kohli, lit up social networks. Congratulatory messages for favourite candidate for president, Pranab Mukherjee, poured in, along with some brickbats, accusing him of corruption. Argentine tennis player David Nalbandian made news after his disqualification from the AEGON Tennis Championships in London for kicking an advertising hoarding.
#Happy Father's Day
6,87,462

5.5 million views
Coca-Cola advertisement

3.2 million views
Jimmy Kimmel lie detector

2.7 million views
* Views from when videos were uploaded

star of the week

Skin-deep
Chester Lee Ridens, 44, has given ugliness a new twist. Ridens, who works at a food plant in Iowa, US, and is handicapped because of an accident, has made 70 YouTube videos.With no hair, several chins and a wide mouth, Ridens is not really a pretty sight, but he wanted to show that beauty is skin-deep and that ugly people are productive as well.

tumblr tales
WILL SMITH IN BROSATTHEBAR BLOG

Legal Rights

#10 Attractive People I Follow
4,92,208

#Pepsi Footy Finale
3,53,753

#Pranab
1,84,575

#David Nalbandian
1,57,393
*Figures denote number of followers

If you are an aspiring lawyer set to take the bar exam, the Tumblr blog `Brosatthebar'is for you.The blog sarcastically portrays law students as caffeinated and overworked.With the caption `When I study for the bar exam'accompanying a clip of weirdonet a kitten slipping off a slide, to To encourage more men to drink milk, the irate actor Will Smith the Swiss government has introduced screaming below the caption Tito Milk, packaged in a bio-degradable `When the professor promcarton resembling a woman's breast. ises the class a break but Tito was trending on Twitter on June 15. keeps talking...,' the 12, an online magazine, faced ire for blog has exploded publishing a beauty editorial featuring models on social netwith black eyes, slit throats and torn flesh. works.

web tips
Starting a Facebook page is the key to market products for all entrepreneurs. Here are some pointers: Find out what content your fans want and in what form they want it. Be as brief as possible with your posts and use simple words. Engage your fans directly and reply to their posts and comments.

