Spe cial Report

ANDHRAPRADESH

HOWTHE CONGRESS LOSTITS BASTION
The Congress misread Jagan's resolve, didn't deliver on its Telangana promise and planted weak local leaders. It faces a stark future in its former political fortress.
By Devesh Kumar and

CHANGING CONTOURS
Congress turned Jagan into an implacable foe
Party veteran K. Rosaiah was made chief minister after YSR's death. The move was aimed to mollify both the pro- and anti-Jagan factions, but ended up antagonising the Kadapa MP.

SONIA GANDHI

1

Amarnath K. Menon hen Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, accompanied by his mother Vijayalakshmi and sister Sharmila, stepped out of Sonia Gandhi's 10, Janpath home on a sultry afternoon in June two years ago, his face said it all. The 40-minutelong meeting, according to the people close to the son of Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy (YSR), did not follow the script he had envisioned. Sonia made him wait for two hours, and was curt, they said, to the point of being rude. "She asked him to call off his Odarpu Yatra and not to be impatient to become chief minister as he was too young and inexperienced," says a senior Congress leader who is close to Jagan. "He was treated like a churlish boy, reprimanded by his teacher for indiscipline,'' he says, adding, "It was the turning point in Jagan's relations with the Congress. It was on that day that he realised that there was no future for him in the party.'' Jagan continued with the yatra, launched ostensibly to pay obeisance to the families of followers who gave up their lives after the sudden death of YSR in a chopper crash in the Nallamala forests on September 2, 2009. Its real aim was to establish the son as the true inheritor of YSR's

W

Odarpu Yatra 2 The undertaken by Jagan across Andhra Pradesh helped him gauge his strength. He realised he could cash in on his father's popularity even a year since his death. by his 3 Accompanied mother and sister, Jagan met Sonia Gandhi at her 10, Janpath home on June 29, 2010. He was livid at the cold reception he got from the Congress president. Kumar Reddy, 4 Kiran who not only hails from the same region as Jagan but is also from the same community, was appointed chief minister on November 24, 2010. It was a clear snub. Jagan on 5 thearrested Andhra Pradesh
CBI

JAGAN MOHAN REDDY (LEFT) WITH MOTHER VIJAYALAKSHMI

High Court's directive in connection with a disproportionate assets case, days before bypolls. He is still in Chanchalguda jail.
P ANIL KUMAR REUTERS

30

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

NEW

NEW

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

Spe cial Report

ANDHRAPRADESH
(FAR LEFT) CHIEF MINISTER KIRAN REDDY; K. CHANDRASEKHAR RAO, WHO IS SPEARHEADING THE DEMAND FOR A TELANGANA STATE

legacy. It set in motion a chain of events culminating in his decision to part ways with the Congress on November 29, 2010, and float his own party on March 11, 2011. As the results of the June 12 byelections to 18 Assembly constituencies and the Lok Sabha seat of Nellore showed, the YSR Congress has eaten voraciously into the Congress's base across the state--not just in Jagan's stronghold of Rayalaseema. In the 2009 General Elections, Andhra MPs formed the largest bloc, of 33, in the Congress group of 207. In the Assembly elections held simultaneously, the party, fighting under YSR's leadership, returned to power in the state. This was attributed to his astute leadership, and the deliberate cultivation of a distinctive pro-poor image during his first stint in power (200409). "During this period, he kicked off a series of welfare projects, such as Rajiv Arogyasri, Indira Jala Prabha, Indira Housing Scheme, fast and easy access to medical help, cashless health cover to the poor, rice at Rs 2 per kg and easy term-loans to women's selfhelp groups, which endeared him to the masses,'' points out Sabbam Hari, Congress MP from Anakapalli. YSR also used the Sakshi daily and TV channel, family-owned ventures, to propagate his achievements. A series of goof-ups by the Congress high command has wiped out the gains. After the rebuff to Jagan came the disastrous mismanagement of Telangana. At midnight on December 9, 2009, Home Minister P. Chidambaram conceded the demand for a separate Telangana state, an ill-conceived surprise that no one had thought through. The leadership in Delhi was neither consistent nor connected. During the decade spanning 2002-12, the Congress president appointed as many as four leaders to oversee the affairs of the party's Andhra Pradesh unit--Vayalar Ravi, Ghulam Nabi Azad, Digvijaya Singh and Veerappa Moily. "Each had his own set of ideas. While Ravi and Moily were said to be indulgent towards YSR and, later, his son, Singh and Azad gave a long rope

"The problem with Telangana was the unwillingness of the Congress high command to take a decision."
G.K. PILLAI, Former Union Home Secretary

AFP PHOTO / NOAH SEELAM

RAVI S SAHANI/www.indiatodayimages.com

to dissidents against Jagan. There was no continuity in their approach towards the happenings in the Andhra Congress,'' says the Congress leader close to the YSR Congress chief.

T

elangana was the epitome of mishandling. "Had YSR been alive, the Centre would not have made any concessions on Telangana,'' says a Union minister well versed with the party's functioning in the state. The decision, according to then Union home secretary G.K. Pillai, was prompted by the near-unanimity among political stakeholders over granting statehood to Telangana. "There was an all-party meeting held in Hyderabad two days earlier to discuss the demand. With the exception of CPI(M), all other parties backed the proposal for a separate state,'' says Pillai. The Congress calculated that it would be able to grab power in both Telangana and the rest of Andhra

Pradesh, and have two chief ministers. They had not bargained for the backlash against the announcement. "All parties, particularly the Congress and Telugu Desam Party (TDP), had underestimated the concerns of the farmers and the economic interests of the people in Hyderabad and neighbouring Ranga Reddy district. When the backlash began, the Congress had to change its strategy,'' says Pillai. Most rivers flowing into Andhra Pradesh pass through the Telangana Region. "There was apprehension among the people of Andhra Pradesh that their need for water would be controlled by Telangana,'' the former home secretary adds. The other real problem, Pillai says, was "the unwillingness of the Congress high command to take a decision. There were also fears of a cascading effect on similar demands for the creation of Gorkhaland, Vidarbha and Harit Pradesh". Telangana was compounded by

abysmal local leadership. When 76-year-old K. Rosaiah was named to replace YSR as chief minister, Jagan was pacified by Ghulam Nabi Azad, the AICC general secretary in-charge of the state, with the explanation that it would be an interim arrangement, and he would eventually be replaced, says a Congress MP close to Jagan. Jagan, according to an associate, initially agreed to accept Rosaiah's leadership, but a confrontation soon developed over the Odarpu Yatra. "After initially agreeing to the yatra, the Congress leadership was alarmed by the tone of Jagan's speeches at the meetings. There was no mention of either the Prime Minister, or the Congress president or Rahul Gandhi. He would talk only about his father's role as the chief minister, and the propeople schemes started by him,'' says another MP, a Jagan detractor. As reports of a positive response by people to the Odarpu Yatra reached the state leadership, the anti-

Jagan camp led by Rajya Sabha member V. Hanumantha Rao persuaded Delhi to order him to call off his yatra. As a way out, Azad is said to have asked Jagan to call the families in each district at one place, and give them Rs 1 lakh each. He was also assured that YSR's statues would be put up in each district. Nothing happened. Jagan's doubts about Delhi's intentions deepened when N. Kiran Kumar Reddy was selected to replace Rosaiah as the chief minister on November 24, 2010. Not only was Kiran completely inexperienced (he was never a minister), but he is also from the same community and the same region as Jagan--Chittoor, a district adjacent to Kadapa. Kiran was also young, so youth was not a negative in his case. Jagan saw this as a hostile act, meant only to undercut his authority, says a source close to him. Five days later, he quit the Congress. The move to appoint Botsa Satyanarayana, a Thoorpu Kapu

leader from the Vizianagaram district, as the APCC chief in June 2011 has also come back to haunt the Congress brass. In April this year, raids on liquor vends by the state police's anti-corruption bureau revealed that his family either possesses directly or has a stake in more than 50 per cent of the liquor shops in Vizianagaram. The Jagan camp believes that the Congress will do everything in its power to keep him in prison till the 2014 General Elections. "A free Jagan will mean the collapse of the Kiran Kumar Reddy government. But the government will not go, as it will be rescued by TDP's N. Chandrababu Naidu, who too does not want early elections. In the long run, however, both the Congress and Naidu will be wiped out,'' says a source close to Jagan. Even Valayar Ravi, once the Congress high command's pointman for Andhra Pradesh, echoes the doomsday scenario: "The task before the Congress is enormous.'' 

32

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

