GLOSSARY

NEW HALL OF FAME
Lakme Fashion Week's glamour girls are fresh from beauty pageants. They are all set to walk the ramp in Mumbai in August.

FOTOCORP

SOOD

Parul Duggal, 24, was studying
fashion at the Pearl Academy in Delhi, when a choreographer suggested that she take to the ramp instead. Winner of I Am She 2011, she also became the first runner-up at Miss Globe International in Cyprus. She will head to Milan next year to do her postgraduation in fashion design.

Natasha Ramchandran,
22, started by winning the May Queen title in Hyderabad in 2007. She then had stints at fashion weeks in Chennai, Kolkata and Bangalore, before coming to Mumbai. She has studied at NIFD Hyderabad, but it's the ramp that beckons.

DUGGAL

RAMCHANDRAN

THE BONG CONNECTION
Parambrata Chatterjee, 32, started on a high note this year with the success of Kahaani. The grandson of the legendary Bengali filmmaker Ritwik Ghatak will now be seen in newbie director Srijit Mukherji's film Hemlock Society. Inspired by the Santa Monicabased Hemlock Society, which teaches people how to commit suicide, the film explores the lives of people who want to end their lives. Chatterjee, who plays Ananda in the film, has been cast opposite actor Koel Mullick.
CHATTERJEE

L O S T

I N

T R A N S L A T I O N

Sridevi's much-awaited comeback, English Vinglish, which will release this October, is out with its first look and we love every bit of it. Dressed in an orange cotton sari and reading English sentences from a film certificate, with a hint of that southern accent and coy giggles, the reigning lady of the '80s looks ever so charming. She plays a housewife who enrols for an English speaking course to please her family. Produced by R. Balki, it also marks the debut of his wife Gauri Shinde as a director.
SRIDEVI IN ENGLISH VINGLISH

OF THE

WEEK

Juggling with changes in technology the entire day.You need a lifetime to understand merely one aspect. Existence is really tough! --Amitabh Bachchan
"BEING FAT IS NOT SEXY! ANYONE WHO SAYS THAT, IS TALKING CRAP.VOLUPTUOUS IS SEXY, BUT FAT IS OUT.ANYWOMAN WHO SAYS THAT SHE DOESN'T WANTTO BE THIN, IS TALKING NONSENSE."
KAREENA KAPOOR

FANTASYWORLD
Saif Ali Khan and Milan Luthria have reunited after a gap of 13 years for a film with a `fantasy element' . The two had last worked together in 1999 in Kachche Dhaage, Luthria's debut film as a director. Khan was expected to play a superhero in the untitled film, but Luthria maintains that "it's an entertaining film with a twist."
KHAN

YOGEN SHAH

QUOTE
OF THE

AFP PHOTO

WEEK

>>

Jyotpriya Sood, 24, did her bachelor's in
dental surgery, after which she took up modelling. Sood tried for Miss India, did a show for L'Oreal in Paris and then ended up on the runway in Mumbai.

BODY BEAUTIFUL
Diana Hayden, 39, is treading a different path. The former Miss World has penned a book, A Beautiful Truth: The Art of Grooming for Women. It gives tips on how to take care of everything--from hair to health. It took Hayden almost three years to complete her 250-page book, which has been published by Random House. While Hayden's films didn't click with the audience, we hope this stint as a writer will be impressive.

HAYDEN

Shweta Dolli 22, got into the top 10 at Miss India 2011 after winning Miss India South. Since then, the Pune girl has walked for Colombo Fashion Week, Bridal Fashion Week, for fashion store Kimaya, besides Lakme Fashion Week. Meanwhile, a maths honours from Delhi University is gathering dust. DOLLI

>>

>>

>>

Q& "I play characters from a A society which is not perfect"
Manoj Bajpayee, 43, is on a high, following the appreciation that Gangs of Wasseypur has received even before its release. The brief lull of the previous year has been replaced by a flurry of activity, as he readies for four new ventures this year. Bajpayee speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. What is your role in Gangs of Wasseypur? A. I play Sardar Khan, who lost his father as a child. He is out to take revenge when he grows up. He has no sense of morality and is a cold-blooded killer. Q. Why are you so drawn to intense and dark roles? A. The international media doesn't ask me this question. I play characters from a society which is far from perfect. It has various shades of grey. Q. What kind of reception did you receive at Cannes? A. We got a standing ovation. It amazes me how people from different parts of the world follow nuances of a world they have absolutely no idea of. Q. Has fatherhood changed you? A. I am standing at the airport talking to you, but I am always following my daughter, Ava Nayla, who is a year old. The world has gone crazy and there are messages and calls every second, but she still takes up all my time. Q. Which film are you looking forward to? A. Chittagong is a small film by Bedabrata Pain, which I am supporting. It's a great film about the Chittagong Uprising in the 1930s. I play Masterda Surya Sen.

EXPERT OPINION
SINGH

Shebby Singh's expert opinion on football may soon come in handy in reviving the fortunes of Venky's-owned English Premier League club Blackburn Rovers. A former footballer for Malaysia, Singh has been appointed director of football for the club. He has also been an analyst for the sport on ESPN. Now, he can finally put his mouth where his foot is.
by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege

NEW

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

