Privately, Congressmen admit that despite her mercurial ways, Mamata is still a much more reliable ally than Mulayam. This is not the first U-turn by the Samajwadi Party (SP) chief. As his former colleague, Amar Singh,told INDIA TODAY during the 2002 presidential poll, Mulayam had first agreed to support the then president K.R. Narayanan for a second term. He had assured Left leaders Sitaram Yechury and the late Jyoti Basu and H.S. Surjeet of his support. "But that very evening, he (Mulayam) was called

on June 18, stated that "Digvijaya Singh is not officially authorised to speak on behalf of the party". The Congress knows that the socialist leader is as wary of reforms as Mamata. For instance, the SP chief has opposed FDI in multi-brand retail. "The only way out would be to try and bridge a consensus on every issue, just as we did for the presidential election," says a Congress MP. Time is running out for UPA 2 and the Congress is aware of it. According to a Congress Union minister, Sonia

(LEFT) NDA PARTNERS IN DELHI ON JUNE 15; MULAYAM AND MAMATA AT A PRESS CONFERENCE ON JUNE 13

Na tion PRESIDENTIALPOLL

CHARANDEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE COUNTDOWN BEGINS
Political parties have moved on from the presidential election. They are all now in the hunt for allies for 2014.
By Priya Sahgal
PRAVEEN NEGI

THE CONGRESS KNOWS BOTH MULAYAM AND MAMATAARE UNSTABLE ALLIES AS THEY WANTAN EARLY ELECTION.

hen Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar invited APJ Abdul Kalam for lunch at his official home in Patna on June 15, he advised the former president against contesting the presidential election, since the numbers were against him. This was contrary to the stand of his ally, BJP, which had been wooing Kalam from as early as April this year. Soon after, Nitish made his second move. On June 19, right in the middle of the presidential election debate, he turned the focus to the NDA candidate for prime minister and asked for a "secular and liberal" face. This was a direct attack on Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi. RSS Chief Mohan Bhagwat countered Nitish, arguing for a prime ministerial candidate who believed in the "Hindutva ideology". Congress Cabinet minister Salman Khurshid used this disagreement to intervene in the debate, and increase

W

the divide. He supported Nitish. Suddenly, it was clear that the game had moved away from the presidential election to the next round of General Elections. It's not just Nitish who is expanding his options beyond the saffron camp. The realignment is taking place across the political spectrum, whether it is Mulayam Singh Yadav's deal with the Congress; the Congress party's attempts to win back Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee after she thumbed her nose at their presidential candidates; or BJP's attempts to reach out to other regional satraps such as Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister J. Jayalalithaa and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata. The JD(U) will vote for Pranab Mukherjee and against BJP's second choice, former NCP leader P.A. Sangma. Another NDA ally, Shiv Sena, has also indicated that it prefers Mukherjee to Sangma. "This does not mean a split in the NDA," says a

senior BJP leader. "Even in 2007, the Shiv Sena voted for Pratibha Patil. Yet they stayed with us." The BJP strategy is to expand the NDA by supporting Sangma, who is Jayalalithaa and Patnaik's first choice for president. The duo warned BJP leaders that in case Sangma withdraws from the race, they would opt for Mukherjee. "Both Patnaik and Jayalalithaa are former NDA allies. We would prefer they come with us than go to the UPA," says a BJP leader, admitting that they are using the presidential poll to expand NDA. Moreover, both Jayalalithaa and Patnaik have a good equation with Modi. The three formed a power bloc to take on Home Minister P. Chidambaram in May by opposing his pet project--the National Counter Terrorism Centre. Before quitting the NCP on June 20, Sangma asked L.K. Advani if he had BJP's support. Advani said yes and the next day BJP announced support for the former Lok Sabha speaker. It is also hoping that Nitish and the

Shiv Sena will come around. While the Congress is confident that its candidate Mukherjee will win the presidential election, its concerns go beyond. It still has to run a coalition government for the next two years. "This is the ninth year of our Government, it is not unnatural to be frayed around the edges, but we need to reinvent," says a Congress MP. He admitted that the Government needed to make some bold moves to shake itself out of its stupor.

by BJP leaders Pramod Mahajan, L.K. Advani and A.B. Vajpayee. After that meeting, he changed his mind and supported Kalam," says Singh. This is one reason why the Congress is not snapping its ties with Mamata, despite her rather public snub. As a gesture of goodwill towards her, the party leadership ticked off General Secretary Digvijaya Singh for calling Mamata "erratic and immature". A press release, issued by the party's media cell

Gandhi's political adviser Ahmed Patel told him on the night of June 13 that both Mulayam and Mamata (M&M) want an early election. The M&M alliance may have cracked but that fact remains. Manmohan Singh's Government has been put on notice as both UPA and NDA are busy scurrying around for new alliances. The posturing for the next General Elections has begun in the run-up to the presidential poll.
with Amitabh Srivastava

To gauge popular perception,the India Today Group has launched the PickYour President campaign. We invite readers to pick their choice for the next president.
ONLINE POLL RESULT SMS POLL RESULT

SMS PREZAFOR APJ Kalam 73.46 63.75

SMS PREZB FOR SMS PREZC FOR Pranab Mukherjee Anna Hazare 14.02 18.40 8.28 12.51

SMS PREZD FOR SMS PREZE FOR Hamid Ansari Manmohan Singh 2.55 2.37 1.69 2.97

Or to pick your president, log on to www.indiatoday.in/prez<http://www.indiatoday.in/prez>

For the week ending June 20, 2012; figures in percentage

34

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

NEW

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

NEW

