The Big Story UNDERAGE DRINKING

IS YOUNG INDIA DRUNK?
By Damayanti Datta

100%
rise in drinking among teenagers, aged 15-19,in the last 10 years across metros in India.

Urban youngsters are raising a toast on all occasions, at all hours, in the most unexpected of places. Problem drinking is on an upsurge.

45%
of Class XII students in metro cities consume alcohol at least 5-6 times a month.

hen is the last time you got drunk? "i am drinking right now and u have no clue how much trouble I'm having to get all the spellings right." Imagine a pretty 22-year-old Mumbai girl sitting in front of her computer and peering at a digital audition form for music channel MTV's ongoing reality show, The Real World, meant for youngsters with "one big dream to be famous". "I am not a party animal," she insists. "I drink just to have a good time. I am a good girl." She is not the only one with a glass in her hand. Youngistan is talking bottles, pegs, pints and shots with the ease of seasoned drinkers, raising a toast to everything: Birthdays to cricket matches, before and after exams, to stave off boredom or the blues. And if opportunity knocks, an unusually high percentage are drinking until they land in trouble. In a country known for abstinence, the age-old notions of who drinks what, where, when and why are changing dramatically. And the adult world is on the warpath: Alcohol products are not to be sold to minors, held the Himachal Pradesh High Court on June 13. In April, a study presented at the World Congress of Cardiology in Dubai revealed that alcohol consumption was three times higher among Indian youngsters watching movies where protagonists drank freely. On cue came a directive from the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC), that movies needed to display a statutory warning scroll against drinking and smoking during every scene that showed it. On June 17, however, Leela Samson, chairperson

W

of CBFC, announced that a warning should be displayed at the beginning and after the intermission of the movie. It hardly matters to young tipplers. A Nagpur boy posts with glee on the MTV site, "I slapped one friend, puked all over the bedroom, climbed on the roof, shouted at the top of my lungs and pissed in the neighbour's water tank at a friend's birthday". "Got heavily drunked, went for an exam and then puked on the question paper," says a Delhi boy. A young Hyderabadi recalls getting smashed on the day India won the cricket World Cup and waking up with a broken leg. A Kolkata girl gets her first taste of sex on a trip with her boyfriend. "After I got drunk we had sex," she posts. There's early experimentation, more binge drinking (bouts of heavy drinking in very short time), high levels of fiesta drinking and a greater acceptance of social drinking, explains Dr G. Gururaj of NIMHANS, Bangalore, an epidemiologist who has been charting alcohol's impact through the decade. A 2009 survey on 2,000 teenagers by apex trade body Assocham shows there has been a 60 per cent rise in alcohol consumption among the 19-26 age group in the last five years. Over 45 per cent of metro teenagers drink five to six times a month, while 70 per cent drink on social occasions. In November 2011, yet another Assocham survey found a 100 per cent rise in drinking among the 15-18 age group in the last 10 years. "The greater problem these days is not alcoholism but problem drinking, which affects 20 per cent of users and makes them aggressive," says psychiatrist Dr Harish Shetty of Hiranandani Hospital, Mumbai. That's exactly why students of IIT-Delhi hit the headlines in 2011. They were expelled from

VIVAN MEHRA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

The Big Story

UNDERAGE DRINKING

COVERT
DRINKING
Some go to extremes to get drunk. Here's how.

HOOKAH BASE
The haze of shisha smoke in trendy hookah bars across Indian metros doesn't always come from water in the base but whiskey, vodka, rum or gin.

FRUITY FUN
Youngsters start with easy-on-the-pocket pop wines, where the alcoholic content is about twice as much as beer but disguised by fruity flavours, and move on to stronger drinks.

GOTA HOSTEL BUDDY? HIP FLASKS TO KEY CHAINS
Creative ways of sneaking in alcohol, from rum in fruit juice cartons to hip flask key chains, are quite trendy among the youth. There has been a 60 per cent rise in alcohol intake among metro youth between age 19 and 26, especially in college hostels. Eight out of 10 hostel students in metro India are problem drinkers.

CRICKET CHEER
Live cricket on giant screen at pubs and bars, with kebabs, cocktails, beer, tattoos, face painting and team merchandise. It's yet another new teen drinking ritual in metros.

IN THE WATER BOTTLE
Hiding vodka in water bottles and carrying them to school, rock concerts or playgrounds is in.

the IIT-Kanpur fest for disorderly behaviour due to excessive drinking. There has been a legitimisation of alcohol at the dinner table, explains Shetty: "Young people see their dads offering drinks to guests, moms drinking at kitty parties. Children as young as 12 or 13 have Bacardi Breezers at stay-over nights." The latest World Health Organisation Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health shows that India is facing an alcoholic tide, pushed up by the sliding age of drinking. From 28 in the 1980s, it has come down to age 15 now. In some metro pockets, it's believed to have come down to 13. Dr Samir Parikh, chief psychiatrist at Max Healthcare, Delhi, and his team were taken aback by the results of a survey they carried out among 1,000 boys and girls from top public schools across the capital two years back. While 22 per cent thought having one drink at parties is something everyone does, for 16 per cent being "cool" meant having three to four drinks. "Drinking seems to be quite the normal thing among the 1317 age group," he says.

girls and young women.  Most schools are reluctant to admit it, but classroom drinking is in. This June, three schoolgirls were suspended from KB Patel Gujarati Vidhyalaya in Indore for swigging vodka on the sly from water bottles in class. They were caught after one girl vomited in class.  College students in Lucknow sneak off for a nip or two of "angrezi sharab" with fried paneer in the air-conditioned cool of model shops, or governmentconsecrated watering holes dotted along the highways. Drinking starts at noon till late at night, with daily brawls, and even murders.  Drunken driving has become a menace off the dark lanes of Prenderghast Road in Secunderabad, with students and techies binging out on cheap alcohol at the `car-o-bars'. As the police barely monitor these areas, they have a couple of quick drinks in their cars before stepping in to shake a leg during the weekends.

 Coming out of the woodwork are Happy Hour Kids in metros. more consumption With cafes and fast-food restof alcohol among aurants serving beer, pubs and youngsters who watched bars slating early evenings as movies that glorify cheaper Happy Hour, alcohol is within easy reach, after school drinking, compared or before tuition. to those who  A disturbing nationwide probdid not. lem visible now is the marked increase in alcohol consumption among

3 times

 Live cricket on giant screen at pubs and bars, with kebabs, cocktails, beer, tattoos, face painting and team merchandise has spawned yet another new drinking ritual in metros. The 2011 Assocham survey showed even teenagers double their alcohol intake during cricket matches.  Creative ways of sneaking in alcohol are already trendy among the youth. There's also the hookah lounge in metros. The flavoured hookah often has alcohol as base, especially vodka or wine. "We know which bars serve underage people," says Rahul Kapoor, 19, of Delhi who has been drinking since 15. "A rapport with bouncers or managers often works." Underage drinkers start with fast-selling, easy-on-the-pocket pop wines, where alcoholic content is about twice as much as beer but disguised by fruity flavours. They then move on to much stronger drinks, vodka being the top choice. According to a 2010 survey by the Community Against Drunken Driving on 1,000 youngsters in Delhi, a third of 16-18-year-olds drink at pubs and bars. Maharashtra has upped the drinking age bar for hard liquor to 25, setting off a storm of protests in Bollywood, led by young actor Imran Khan. Sachin Ahir, minister of state for social justice, insists the measure is not to "question anyone's maturity, only to protect them". The minischoolgirls surveyed mum legal drinking age in report tasting their first Haryana and Meghalaya is alcoholic drink between 25, while in Andhra Pradesh,

40%
age 15 and17.

Delhi, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu, one can buy alcohol once they are 21. Kerala, Goa, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh consider 18-year-olds good enough to handle alcohol. "Drinking is not going to come down that way," says Sukesh Shetty, secretary of AHAR, the umbrella body of over 7,500 bars, restaurants and permit rooms in Mumbai. Ever since the state increased excise duty on liquor in March, youngsters have started taking a swig before hitting pubs to save on money, he says. The owner of Trupti Wine Shop at Khar in Mumbai says sales shoot up on weekends when youngsters drive around and drink. Actor Mouli Ganguly, 27, has seen enough teenagers hiding vodka in transparent water bottles to rock concerts or cricket matches to feel such rules lend themselves to misuse: "People rebel. It will just drive the demand for covert drinking." Progressive schools have started to come up with innovative ideas to combat the menace of drinking in school. In 2009, a few students were caught drinking in the dorm at the RiverDale International Residential School near Pune. The school initially suspended them but soon revoked the punishment and took to imaginative counselling that showed almost 95 per cent results. "It doesn't help to merely enforce rules and expect people to live by dos and don'ts," says Principal Payam Shoghi. The school has also started a three-tier programme with dorm parents, teachers and mentors. A disturbing trend is early drinking

MERRY ZONES

They sneak out of college to the air-conditioned cool of liquor shops dotting the highways. They binge on cheap booze at `car-o-bars' in dark lanes. They fill up pubs with noisy chatter after school. And swig breezers at pajama parties.

VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

HAPPY HOUR KIDS
With popular cafes and fast-food restaurants serving beer, pubs and bars slating early evenings as cheaper Happy Hour, alcohol is within easy reach, after school or before tuition. Personal rapport with managers helps.
REUBEN SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

MODEL SHOP MENACE
Model shops, or governmentconsecrated watering holes, dot Uttar Pradesh highways for those who want to catch a nip or two of aangrezi sharab. Drinking starts at 12 noon till late at night, with daily brawls and even murders.
A PRABHAKAR RAO/ www.indiatodayimages.com

BARS IN CARS
Drunken driving has become a menace off the dark lanes of Prenderghast Road in Secunderabad, with youngstgers binging on impromptu drinking sessions.

54

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

55

The Big Story

UNDERAGE DRINKING
VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Drunks
DROP IN AGE OF DRINKING

70% youngsters surveyed reported
drinking alcohol on social occasions, to unwind before and after exams or simply on a night on the town.
1 in 10 admitted to binge drinking, consuming five or more drinks in a row.

1997

report drinking alcohol while 45% said they had tried out fruit-flavoured alcoholic beverages.

1980

2012

50%

Age 28

Age 19

Age 13

TOPTIPPLERS
Delhi-NCR Mumbai Chandigarh Hyderabad

WHO DRINKS WHAT AND WHY
46% drink to get high 32% drink when upset 18% drink alone 15% drink when bored

45%

of teens said their parents did not know what they did in their spare time.

Source for all statistics: Assocham survey 2011 and 2009; Alcohol and Drugs Information Centre India; Health Related Information Dissemination Amongst Youth Student Health Action Network (HRIDAY); WHO Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health 2011; Max Healthcare, Delhi, survey, 2008-10; Community Against Drunken Driving 2010-11.

among girls and young women. "There has been a marked increase in alcohol consumption among them," says Dr Achal Bhagat, senior consultant of psychiatry at the Apollo Indraprastha Hospital in Delhi. Most are strongly influenced by males in the family, she says. "It's one of the outcomes of being encouraged to do the things that boys do," says Samita Sen, director of the School of Women's Studies at Jadavpur University in Kolkata. "Girls like to make a statement, just like boys." Young working women typically start to drink due to peer pressure, say experts. A 23-year-old BPO executive, who went to Dr Samir Parikh, for instance, started with night outs. It became a regular pattern and she started drinking at work as well. "She was sacked and came to us for help," he says. "Young people do not realise that even an occasional use can result in regular use, as the biological effect of alcohol has its own role to play." Mukta Puntambekar, deputy director of Muktangan Rehabilitation Centre, Pune, is not surprised: "Even a breezer with 4 per cent alcohol is enough to pull a person into problem drinking or alcoholism," she says. "It used to take 10 years for a social drinker to become an addict earlier. Today it takes just two," says Fr Joe Pereira, founder of the Mumbai-based Kripa Foundation, one of the first deaddiction centres in India. He would know. He sees enough young alcohol users and abusers: Boys, girls and young adults from privileged backgrounds and globalised tastes. A new study in May 2012 by the Public Health Foundation of India measured alcohol occurrence in 59 Bollywood movies and the impact on almost 4,000 teenagers. When asked if they had seen these movies, those who did were found to be nearly three times more likely to have tried alcohol compared to those who did not. It's a new landscape that's staring India in the face. One that's likely to unleash a flood of suffering in the near future. Will someone wake up and smell the liquor?
with Gunjeet Sra, Aditi Pai and Amarnath K. Menon

56

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

new

