UP FRONT

BHARAT DABHOLKAR

UTTERLYBUTTERLYPOLITICIOUS
mul wasn't an advertising campaign, it was Sharad ritu all year round--with Amul' or on Rajiv a drooly, mouth-watering, once-in-a-lifetime, Gandhi, one of the few good-looking leaders in India never-before, never-again dream come true. This and his party symbol in `Hand some winner--Amul'. Or little girl created by Sylvester daCunha and drawn after a harsh Budget by the then finance minister, sayby Eustace Fernandes has, today, at the age of 50, ing `Stop V P ing and SING--Amul butter costs less'. Or the timeless beauty and youth that would put welcoming then French president Mitterrand (pronounced mitterron) by saying `Hamare French mitmany a socialite to shame. Although many of us helped her grow through the teron ke liye--Amul Butter'. Or gloating over the fate of struggling political pardecades, her real father was this inimitable doodhwala named Verghese Kurien. If it wasn't for him, and his faith ties by saying `It has majority in every house--Amul'. Or and confidence in letting us groom her as we deemed fit, in a country driven by regional strife, showing how the little girl would have been stunted like so many other scattered slices of bread can stand together if buttered: brilliant advertising ideas do. Creative people you find `United we stand--Amul the bond that unites'. Or penny a dozen, a client who says don't show me what `Amul's Rajya in every Sabha'. When Maggie Thatcher and her Tory party won you do, you don't need my approval, just do it, is as we say in Sanskrit, na bhuto, na bhavishyati. The Amul girl the British election, the Amul girl saluted her with `HisTORYic choice--utTORYly, butTORYly Amul'. She owes her existence and her ever growing fame to him. She was born like that, and once she got going, she even welcomed Zia-ul-Haq, the president of our friendly changed faster than a woman changes her mind or a neighbourhood country, by saying `Pyaar se Zia bhar politician his party. She was funny, witty, innocently bru- aaye--jab Amul Butter khaye'. Even the NAM conference tal but never taking sides, and never hurting. She was didn't escape her attention: What's in a NAM?--lots of Gujarati, Bengali, Madrasi, Marathi and whoever else goodness if it's Amul. Or when she demanded basic needs the region and topic needed her to be. There is a saying for the common man with `roti, kapada aur makhhan-- in Hindi: Paani re paani tera rang Amul makhhan'. When the Central kaisa, jisme mila do lagey uss jaisa. Government announced a five-day She personified that in her many working week, the Amul girl asked, avatars. She was faster than your `What do government employees still daily newspaper, and she had more do seven days a week? Eat Amul.' And fans than most Bollywood superstars. in that hoarding, the Amul baby, She didn't promote butter, she spread dressed as a government employee, smiles and happiness. And that made was shown eating Amul the mind-bogglingly undisAmul with both her puted market leader. A whole generfeet on the table and ation grew up looking forward to the words `eat Amul' what she would say and in that, she written under the table. was second to only one man, the comSome saw a whole new mon man of R.K. Laxman. hidden meaning in that. She dabbled in sports, in festivals, That the words `eat Amul' were in fashion, in films but she was best written under the table signified a when she dabbled in politics. Both nawhole new meaning to them. (This extional and international. She made tra bit of cheekiness was not intended mundane, murky political happenings but never denied either. Till now.) bearable by looking at their lighter And her saga has continued for 50 side. Whether punning on the names years. A new comment every week. of contestants for the chief minister's Week after week. The list is endless. chair in Haryana (Devi ke Bhajan ki So many to remember and too many to Bansi bajey--toh Hari ana Amul include. The utterly butterly Amul SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com laike) or showing MGR, as the filmstar girl was one of the best political comin his film Onnai Vida Maten (I won't She was faster than your mentators we have ever had. And by leave you), which she changed to venfar, the prettiest. daily newspaper and nai vida maten (I won't leave butter). had more fans than most Or commenting on the continuation of Bharat Dabholkar is the adman behind Sharad Pawar's domination in `It's the Amul Butter advertisements Bollywood superstars.

A

12

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

