HEALTH

by DAMAYANTI DATTA

OLD JUICE IN NEWBOTTLE
1 2 3 4 5

As Indians pitch in for fizzy drinks, the West embraces bottled coconut water. Time to remember grandma's words and bring the `miracle drink' back into your life.

GOODNESS IN EVERY SIP
Coconut water can help you lose fat. It is low in calories, with only 19-24 calories per 100ml, compared to 43 calories per 100ml of orange juice. It's a natural isotonic beverage, with the same level of electrolytic balance as we have in our blood. It serves the same purpose as sports drinks that are expected to replace minerals lost through sweat. It is low in sugar and can even prevent the onset of diabetes. It's also much more hydrating than water, and helps absorb food nutrients better. Coconut water has anti-viral and anti-fungal properties that can help you help fight viruses better. It's rich in potassium, magnesium and vitamin C, all of which have health benefits, and can even lower high blood pressure.

DREAMSTIME

What is it? THINK LOCAL, ACT GLOBAL
The humblest of Indian fruit drinks lost out to fizzy pops as urban Indians decided to go global. But now, coconut water has suddenly been rediscovered as a "miracle drink" by the swish set in US and Europe. The market for coconut water beverages grew by 100 per cent in 2011, taking the retail sale value of US and European markets to over $265 million (Rs 1,457 crore). The market is slated to grow another 50 per cent this year. Bottled in exotic flavours and in stylish cartons, it's expensive: About $4 (Rs 220) a can. But it's still available at Rs 10-30 in Indian bazaars. So thank your lucky stars and grab one every day. Ayurveda calls it the `water of life' . Coconut water is full of nutrients, vitamins and minerals, including potassium, phosphorus and selenium.

95% 5%
Water--that's not just isotonic, but sterile as well. Can be substituted for serum during emergency blood loss.

sugar protein fats minerals

(730mg of potassium per 100g of tender coconut water.)

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

