The Big Story

GOVERNMENT

O MANMOHAN SINGH
A CONGRESS SUPPORTER HOLDS A BILLBOARD OF PRIME MINISTER MANMOHAN SINGH AT A RALLY IN MOGA, PUNJAB

Men Who Failed

The Prime Minister with a diminishing halo is saddled with a team that has given governance a go by

By Devesh Kumar, Priya Sahgal and Bhavna Vij-Aurora

n July 4, the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet headed by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh approved an extension for E.K. Bharat Bhushan as Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) till November 30, 2012. Armed with the renewed mandate to clean up the mess in civil aviation, Bhushan wrote to the Union Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh recommending that Kingfisher Airlines' licence be cancelled if it did not pay dues to its staff. A demotivated staff, according to DGCA, could have an adverse effect on passenger safety. Only July 10, Bhushan got his answer. Ajit Singh showed him the door. Bhushan remains in civil aviation, but as an additional secretary. Ajit Singh termed the removal "routine" but his colleague, former civil aviation minister Vayalar Ravi expressed shock, calling Bhushan one
of the "finest officers". It was yet another example of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh watching silently as a minister delivered a public rebuff to his authority, It has become a pattern in UPA 2. Manmohan has been snubbed by his Cabinet, insulted by ministers in public speeches: But most of all, the Prime Minister of India has failed himself. The senior most Cabinet ministers have been preoccupied with their personal agenda, rather than collective responsibility or national policy. They are the UPA's Non-Productive Assets (NPA). Much, for instance, was expected of this year's Budget, since it was an opportunity to resurrect a moribund economy and depressed spirits through bold reforms. Instead, the highlights of the Budget were such retrograde steps as General Anti-Avoidance Rules (GAAR) and the retrospective tax proposal. As finance minister, Pranab Mukherjee failed to push through tax reform measures such as Goods and Services Tax (GST), Direct Taxes Code (DTC) and Insurance Laws (Amendment) Bill. Home Minister P. Chidambaram, who is anxious to return to finance, is under fire from civil society activists and his own Cabinet colleague, Kishore Chandra Deo, for the killings of innocent villagers by CRPF in Chhattisgarh on June 28. He also seems to have picked up the foot-in-the-mouth disease from Planning Commission Deputy Chairman Montek Singh Ahluwalia, a favourite of the Prime Minister, who thought Rs 32 a day was adequate as a daily income for the poor. Chidambaram, in a phrase which recalled Marie Antoinette's advice to the poor to eat cake if they could not find bread, wondered why the middle class complained about rising prices when it bought ice-cream for Rs 20 and bottled water for Rs 15. At a press conference in Bangalore on July 10, he had said, "We are prepared to pay rupees 20 for an ice cream cone, but won't pay one rupee more for a kilo of wheat or rice." The Opposition claimed he was mocking the middle class. The home ministry issued a statement that the "home minister made a matter-of-fact statement. He did not `mock' or `chide' anyone". The record of the big boys in Cabinet is dismal, to say the least. Defence Minister A.K. Antony mismanaged relations with the former Army chief, General V.K. Singh, in particular over the row on retirement age. Sharad Pawar, who has promoted himself to the Number Two spot in the Cabinet, is a savvy politician, so you will not catch him in a misstatement that alienates voters. But as a minister, he has clearly

REUTERS

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

The Big Story GOVERNMENT
fallen short. Farmers continue to commit suicides in Vidarbha. He has often been accused of pandering to various lobbies, such as sugar producers and dairy owners. When he can, he plays to his vote bank, even if it means taking on Cabinet colleagues. On April 10, he complained to the Prime Minister about the "anti-farmer'' stand adopted by his ministerial colleagues Anand Sharma, who holds additional charge of textile ministry, and K. V. Thomas, the minister for food and civil supplies. Pawar criticised them for advocating a ban on cotton and sugar export, which was eventually reversed. Besides the erosion of the Prime Minister's authority, UPA 2 has witnessed the collapse of the principle of collective responsibility, the essence of the Cabinet system. "As many as 183 GoMs and EGoMs have been formed till now, which are symptomatic of the Government not functioning. The Prime Minister does not control, does not talk. The only time he tried to push his way through was during the Indo-US nuclear deal," argues economist Bibek Debroy. Other ministers are locked in their own battles, slowly unravelling the Government's infrastructure agenda. In terms of damage done by neglect, the most glaring failure surely is Power Minister Sushilkumar Shinde. He has been holding charge of the ministry since 2006, but has been unable to bridge the growing demand-supply gap in the power sector, leading to acute electricity shortages across the country. "The country has been facing growing shortages over the past five years," admits the Central Electricity Authority in its document on National Electricity Plan, brought out in January: "During 2009-10, the peak deficit was 15,157 MW (12.7 per cent) and the average energy shortage was 84 billion kWh (10.1 per cent)." Demand for power this summer peaked at 2,17,000 MW. Power generation, at 1,99,877 MW, was much less. The power ministry blames it on the poor supply of coal and pitiable condition of state distribution companies, which have gone bankrupt. But as the Cabinet minister, it was Shinde's job to persuade the states to usher in reforms. Some key ministers have been inwith Trinamool Congress (TMC) and has already seen a rotation of three ministers since 2009. When Mamata Banerjee left for West Bengal, she installed the pro-reforms Dinesh Trivedi but when he refused to do her populist bidding, she replaced him with the pliant Mukul Roy. After a train derailed in Assam in July 2011 following a bomb blast, Manmohan asked Roy, then a minister of state, to visit the site. But according to PMO sources, Roy told the PM that since the track had been cleared, there was no reason for him to visit the site. Later, in March 2012, when Banerjee sacked Trivedi, the Prime Minister had no choice but to upgrade Roy to Cabinet status. From all accounts, Roy is continuing the same policy of indifference towards his ministry and obsequiousness towards his political leader Banerjee. The PMO seems to shrug when confronted with facts about railways, giving the impression that it can do little to control coalition partners. The nation pays the price for such irresponsibility. Even ministers such as Kapil Sibal,

AZAD (LEFT) WITH ANAND SHARMA
SHIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

UPA'S NPAS

Cabinet stars who have not fulfilled expectations

ducted purely on political considerations, rather than merit. Beni Prasad Verma, the Kurmi leader from Uttar Pradesh who defected from Samajwadi Party, was rewarded with the key steel portfolio in the hope that he would swing his caste votes towards the Congress. He is better known at Udyog Bhavan as the minister for Uttar Pradesh than for the steel ministry. His Cabinet colleague from Uttar Pradesh, Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal, is another NPA handling a key ministry since 2009. His ministry is facing a CBI investigation into coal block allocations to private players on an arbitrary first-come-first-served

basis between 2004 and 2009. The Comptroller and Auditor General estimated a loss to the exchequer of Rs 1.86 lakh crore. Since the controversy broke out in March 2012, Jaiswal first admitted that an auction would have been a more transparent method compared to allocating coal blocks at throwaway prices. Later, on June 5, he changed his mind and termed the auction process "anti-poor and anti-consumer". He said that bidding would lead to a situation where power companies would sell electricity at exorbitant rates. Railways has become synonymous with neglect. This portfolio has been

FINANCE
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
Spent more time trouble-shooting for UPA than at the finance ministry

ITAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
KAPIL SIBAL
His schemes look good on the launchpad but usually end up misfiring

COMMERCE
ANAND SHARMA
Loves the attention he gets at Commere but would ideally like to be at Finance

1 Mukherjee failed to contain the fiscal deficit,which is expected to touch 5.9 per cent of GDP in the current fiscal year.
IMPACT This leaves the Government with limited resources to invest in bigticket projects. It will also result in a higher level of inflation.

1 He claimed that "there was zero loss from the 2G spectrum scam".
IMPACT The Supreme Court's cancellation of all the 122 licences issued by former telecom minister A. Raja was a blow to him and the UPA.

1 He did not time the approval of FDI in retail correctly, pushing it through while Parliament was still in session in 2011.
IMPACT The Government was forced to retreat on a well-conceived policy.

2 He could not deliver as chairman of the empowered group of ministers dealing with all major economic decisions.
IMPACT No decision was taken to rationalise prices of petroleum products. Decision on allocating coal for power projects was also delayed. The 2G auction delay caused uncertainty.

2 Delay in formulation of the National
Telecom Policy 2012.
IMPACT The policy, finally announced in June, reads like a Planning Commission document and is a badly missed opportunity to fix the sector.

2 He announced the Rs 10,500-crore IKEA investment in single-brand retail without sorting out issues.
IMPACT The Government is in a quandary, as IKEA is asking for more than the Government can give under the existing policy.

3 Was unable to usher in tax reforms.
IMPACT The Government's revenues did not go up at the desired pace.
30
INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

3 Sibal's move to seek pre-screening Facebook and Google content outraged civil society, once UPA's constituency.
IMPACT The measure showcased the Government as intolerant, especially in the critical youth demographic.

3 On Statistics Day, the ministry ironically got its figures wrong on core sector growth for May.
IMPACT Such blunders created uncertainty for corporates as major decisions are based on this data.

NEW-NEW

The Big Story GOVERNMENT
SHEKHAR YADAV

(FROM LEFT) MUKHERJEE, PAWAR, ANTONY, CHIDAMBARAM, KRISHNA, SIBALAND ANAND SHARMA

Anand Sharma and Ghulam Nabi Azad who were expected to deliver, have low performance ratings. Sibal is too busy balancing two heavyweight portfolios. He is sound on the drawing board but runs into hurdles at the execution stage. But he would be the last to admit that his in-tray is overflowing. As the IT and Telecommunications Minister, Sibal announced his entry by debunking the CAG's assessment that A. Raja's decision to award 2G spectrum on a first-come-first-served basis had caused a loss of Rs 1.76 lakh crore. There had been no loss to the exchequer, claimed Sibal on January 7, 2011. His assertion caused a huge embarrassment to the UPA, as it was interpreted as a defence of Raja's role in the scam. Sibal's zero-loss bombast was subsequently negated by the Supreme Court in February this year, when it cancelled the 122 2G licences awarded during Raja's tenure as telecom minister. Sibal has subsequently landed the Government in a soup several times through his announcements and decisions. In December 2011, he sought to censor social media by declaring his intention to frame a code of conduct for them. The outrage was deafening. A month later, he was forced to retract his statement. And once again, in July this year, Sibal did another retraction. His proposal to unilaterally amend the Government's licensing agreement with existing telecom companies, forcing them to pay auction determined prices for the spectrum they currently hold, did not go down well either Manmohan

or Ahluwalia. The issue has now been referred to an EGoM. His colleague Anand Sharma is the face of Government failure on FDI in multi-brand retail. This is a reform the Government could have pushed through with an executive order. There is no need for the Government to take recourse to legislation to implement the decision. But the Government got its timing wrong, and tried to propel while Parliament was in session in November 2011. The Opposition and TMC disrupted Parliament, forcing the issue to be put on the backburner. Ghulam Nabi Azad's pleas for a change of ministry have fallen on deaf ears. As a result, the health ministry under him is in a state of neglect. Since he is also a Congress general secretary, most of his time is taken up by party work. The only time he makes news at Nirman Bhavan is when he comes up with strange solutions. Such as when he propagated watching TV at night instead of sex as a population control method. The minister also faces a privilege motion in Parliament moved by BJP MP and member of the Standing Committee on Health, Sanjay Jaiswal. In May this year, Jaiswal cited 14 instances where he claims Azad has misled the House. Azad's mishandling of the Congress bastion of Andhra Pradesh has seen the state slip out of the party grasp. Chidambaram announced on December 9, 2009, that the Government intended to create Telangana, stoking the ambition of pro-Telangana activists. But Azad has done everything to stall its

creation. The Congress not only lost its influence in the region, but also ended up antagonising people from coastal Andhra Pradesh and Rayalseema. Azad also played a key role in precipitating Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy's resignation from the Congress. Not surprisingly, the Prime Minister has been buffeted by criticism for such indecision. Yet his image managers are hoping that by keeping the finance portfolio, Manmohan could work some of his 1991 magic and win back the accolades. Team Manmohan is busy selling his plans for an economic recovery in the media, with Montek Singh Ahluwalia even giving accented interviews to the Hindi media, promising a turnaround by October. Soon after Manmohan took over the finance portfolio on June 26, he drew up a roadmap to reverse the slide in the economy. While the long-term goal focused on giving a thrust to infrastruc-

ture development, the short-term measures included a string of steps aimed at reviving the investment climate and curbing expenditure. The first and foremost priority, PMO sources said, would be to inject taxation reforms by putting DTC in place and rolling out GST by April 1, 2013 (this was supposed to be in place by April 2010). The Prime Minister has also asked for a relook at GAAR and the retrospective tax proposal that were brought up in this year's Budget. "There will be a move to evoke investor sentiment by implementing the decision on FDI in multi-brand retail. We will rework the draft and try to bring in various objections. We will emphasise that this is a voluntary decision and not one that is enforced on state government," explains a PMO source. He cites the case of Value Added Tax, stating that this, too, had met with opposition earlier. But once states like Haryana

and Delhi implemented this tax reform measure, other states soon followed. The Prime Minister is also going to make a pitch for FDI in aviation. According to the PMO official, the note allowing foreign airlines 49 per cent stake in domestic carriers has been drafted by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion and will be placed before the Cabinet soon. Manmohan has also asked Expenditure Secretary Sumit Bose to suggest ways to put a cap on subsidies in fuel and urea. The expenditure secretary has also been told to align domestic prices of fuel with international crude oil prices. Points out the PMO official, "The Prime Minister is very clear that mutual funds have to be revived in a big way. He is also weighing the possibility of raising the FDI cap in the insurance sector from the present level of 26 per cent to a higher ceiling, lower than the 49 per cent recommended by the

Insurance Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2008." The legislation seeks to enhance FDI in Indian insurance companies to 49 per cent but the opposition is against this. Realising this, Team Manmohan is looking for a mutually acceptable cap. But is all this too little, too late? The GDP growth rate in the last quarter has plummeted to 5.3 per cent, the lowest in the last nine years. The rupee's value continues its downward spiral, inflationary pressure is a cause for concern and infrastructural development has taken a severe knock. Clearly, the erstwhile market reformer's stock is at an all-time low. On June 13, Mulayam Singh Yadav and Mamata Banerjee, one a key bailout supporter and another an ally, suggested that he move out of Race Course to Rashtrapati Bhavan. On June 27, Foreign Minister S.M. Krishna pleaded with Rahul Gandhi to join the Government and "solve the problems we are facing". On July 10, senior

Missing in ACTION

Their indifference at the helm of key infrastructure ministries has stalled the India growth story

AGRICULTURE
SHARAD PAWAR
His performance is way short of his experience as a former chief minister

RAILWAYS
MUKUL ROY
Populist schemes are his agenda, not much-needed reforms

FERTILISERS & CHEMICALS
M.K. ALAGIRI
Prefers to handle his ministry by remote control from Chennai

STEEL
BENI PRASAD VERMA
His area of interest is limited to what steel PSUs can do for Uttar Pradesh

1 The NCP leader has failed to formulate a strategy for dryland farming.
IMPACT The Vidarbha Jan Andolan Samiti, a farmers' advocacy group, has estimated that as many as 422 farmers had committed suicide in the region in the first six months of this year.

1 A bankrupt Railways needs to hike passenger fares by at least 20 per cent to be back on track.
IMPACT A steady hike in freight charges to compensate for the freeze in passenger fares has made the situation worse as Railways is losing out to roads on transport of goods.

1 Proposal of world-class investment hubs in the chemicals and petrochemicals sectors remains a non-starter.
IMPACT Hopes of attracting large investments in infrastructure and manufacturing have remained unfulfilled.

1 The desired target for steel production was 124 million tonnes (MT) for 2011-12. India's production was 72 MT.
IMPACT Instead of fast-tracking proposed projects, Verma blames the private sector for complaining about delays in land acquisition.

2 Little impetus to agricultural research
and technological development.
IMPACT Foodgrain production in India is pegged at a record 250 million tonnes in 2011-12 but growth in the green revolution belt has stagnated.

2 Railways desperately needs capacity
augmentation and modernisation.
IMPACT Indian Railway is growing at a dismal 3 per cent and lags behind in passenger amenities.

2 The promised revival of seven units of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd and Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, too, has failed to make any headway.
IMPACT With an absentee minister at the helm, the ministry has suffered for want of proper direction.

2 Delay in SAIL's expansion plans. It has revised its expansion target three times.
IMPACT Since this is a PSU, the additional cost is being borne by the taxpayer. It has added to the sense of economic gloom.
JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

32

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

33

NEW-NEW

The Big Story GOVERNMENT
TURNING POINTS
A spate of incidents eroded the credibility of Manmohan's Government
The arrests of telecom minister A. Raja (February 2011) and DMK MP Kanimozhi (May 2011) in the 2G scam and Congress MP Suresh Kalmadi (April 2011) for the CWG scam dented UPA 2's image. Adding to this was the Supreme Court's order on March 4, 2011, declaring P.J. Thomas's appointment as central vigilance commissioner illegal, for his alleged role in the multicrore palmolein oil scam. This tainted Manmohan's Mr Clean image and gave the impression that the Prime Minister was soft on corruption. Anna Hazare's indefinite hunger strike from April 5, 2011, tapped into the anti-Government mood of the public and unleashed the wrath of the civil society against Team Manmohan. The midnight crackdown on yoga guru Baba Ramdev at Ramlila Maidan on June 4, 2011, further stoked this fire. The Government is yet to deliver on the Lokpal Bill. The Government's high-handed dealing with Anna Hazare alienated the middle-class vote bank. This was Manmohan's natural constituency. In August 2011, Sonia Gandhi went abroad for an undisclosed surgery. Her ailment is yet to be made public. This sparked off uncertainty regarding the leadership of the Congress. Despite an unwilling Rahul and an ailing Sonia, Manmohan could not fill the leadership vacuum. Budget 2012 added to the economic gloom in the country. The budgetary proposals of GAAR and retrospective taxation gave the wrong signal to foreign investors planning to do business in India. With FDI in multi-brand retail on the backburner, this further eroded Manmohan's reformist image. By keeping the finance portfolio with himself, he is hoping to recover his 1991 glory.

Not Walking the TALK

Instead of governing, each of them pursued individual agendas. The PM was unable to prevent their open defiance.

COAL
SRIPRAKASH JAISWAL
Lacks vision, gets bogged down in details, leading to indecision

RURAL DEVELOPMENT
JAIRAM RAMESH
The headline hunter always delivers-- controversies, and with panache

ROAD TRANSPORT
C.P. JOSHI
Prefers to dabble in Rajasthan politics rather than undertake ministerial work

POWER
SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE
His credentials as 10 Janpath loyalist act as cover for non-performance

HEALTH
GHULAM NABI AZAD
Has no interest in his ministry; would rather be in parliamentary affairs.

1 Valuable coal blocks were given out on a first come, first served basis.
IMPACT The scam took place before Jaiswal assumed office in 2009. But a CBI inquiry has paralysed decisionmaking in his ministry.

1 In his draft Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, he backed the state's role in acquiring land.
IMPACThThe Standing Committee on Rural Development and Mamata Banerjee oppose this stand.

1 National Highways Authority of India remained headless from January 2011 until this June.
IMPACT Targets could not be achieved.

1 He failed to push power generation to cope with the increasing demand.
IMPACT Demand for power this summer peaked at 2,17,000 MW. But power generation, at 1,99,877 MW, was much less.

1 After RTE, the next trophy legislation was to be a bill promising healthcare for all but it is caught in red tape.
IMPACT This would have been a major vote-winner for UPA.

2 Coal India Limited's (CIL) monopoly on coal production continued.
IMPACT A total of 550 million tonnes (MT) was produced in 2011-12, largely by CIL. The shortfall of 20 per cent was met through import of 85 MT coal.

2 As environment minister, a portfolio he held till July 2011, his decision to classify forests into "go/no-go"areas stalled all mining activities in forest areas.
IMPACT As many as 26 coal blocks came under no-go areas.

2 Even though the ministry claims it has met the target for awarding contracts for 2011-12, execution has been tardy.
IMPACT Contracts for construction of 6,491 km of highways were awarded during the year. But only 2,248 km could be constructed.

2 He could not persuade states to reform distribution companies.
IMPACT With the exception of Delhi and Odisha, as also cities such as Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata, none of the states has privatised their distribution companies, which made a loss of Rs 65,000 crore in 2011-12.

2 Announced a National Urban Health Renewal Mission this year for urban poor but is still to generate funds for it.
IMPACT In April, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health asked Azad to assess the mission's fund requirements realistically and then requisition the Planning Commission.

3 No effort has been made by CIL to
invest in modern machinery.
IMPACT CIL uses obsolete machinery that can extract only up to 300m below the surface, leaving huge coal reserves deeper out of reach.

3 Ramesh also upset states by taking recourse to Environment Impact Assessment Notification and Forest Conservation Act, 1980.
IMPACT Vedanta's plans to mine bauxite & Posco's steel plant stalled.

3 Joshi's record as the rural development minister, a portfolio he held until 2010-end,was also below-par.
IMPACT His decision to make payments under MGNREGS through bank accounts and post offices failed to stop corruption in disbursement of funds.

3 Price of imported coal has shot up.
IMPACT The fate of thermal power plant ventures based on imported coal hangs in the balance.

3 In 2010, he suggested a truncated
MBBS course for rural doctors. IMPACT Asks BJP MP Sanjay Jaiswal, "Why are you giving villages unqualified doctors?"

minister Salman Khurshid called his Government directionless. Observes BJP leader Yashwant Sinha: "What we are seeing is a complete lack of governance. It brings us to the crux of the problem, which is lack of leadership." Even the economists who once cheered him are now abandoning him. Jagdish Bhagwati and Arvind Panagariya wrote an article for Project Syndicate titled `The Bell Tolls for the Congress Party' in which they painted a bleak future for the Congress. Time magazine called him an underachiever. His international fan club is shrinking. There are some lessons to be learnt from the early 1990s. When Manmohan was the finance minister in the Cabinet

of prime minister P.V. Narasimha Rao, he became the liberator of the Indian economy because he had the full backing of his boss. On paper, the command centre in UPA is clear: 10 Janpath handles political management while Race Course Road governs. That has not worked, especially in UPA 2 with Sonia Gandhi suffering from health problems and the Government working at random. With an eye on political benefits, Sonia has been urging Government to implement the Food Security Bill. This will inflate the subsidy burden from anything between Rs 20,000-45,000 crore. Both Mukherjee and Pawar have raised this point. But since it was Sonia's brainchild, Mukherjee had said in his

2012 budget speech that "food security will be fully provided for". However, he raised the food subsidy by a marginal Rs 2,177 crore for the year 2012-13 from the revised estimate of Rs 72,823 crore in the previous year. This led the Left to observe that the Government did not seem committed to the Bill. After taking over the reins of the finance ministry, the Prime Minister has been holding meetings with key economic advisers almost on a daily basis. He has laid out a roadmap for the country's economic revival, but it remains to be seen whether he can take effective follow-up action. In the meanwhile, his Cabinet colleagues continue to make things difficult for him, as the sacking

of the DGCA and the furore over Chidambaram's statement on middle class consumption showed. The Prime Minister needs to do some spring cleaning, something he has been avoiding in the first three years of UPA 2. He has to let go of underperformers such as Beni Prasad Verma, S.M. Krishna, and Sushilkumar Shinde, or assign them less important portfolios. He also needs to reallocate key portfolios such as human resource development, IT and telecommunications, textiles, and micro, small and medium entreprises. When Manmohan took over as Prime Minister in 2004, he was criticised by the Opposition for being Sonia's rubber stamp and inducting tainted

ministers like Lalu Yadav in his cabinet. With his image still intact, an angry Manmohan took on the BJP and gave as good as he got. In Delhi, before his very first press conference in September that year, his then press adviser Sanjaya Baru asked if he wanted to refresh himself before reacting to the media. "Kya sher bhi kabhi kulla karta hai (Does a lion ever wash his mouth)?" retorted an angry Manmohan. Today, the Prime Minister is talking about reviving the "animal spirits" in the economy. Going by the diminishing credibility of this Government, it is unlikely that waking up his inner lion so belatedly will save his discredited regime--let alone his own legacy. with SPS Pannu

34

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

35

NEW-NEW

