Signature
R O U G H

KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

A PRIMER FOR THE PM
My dear Manmohan Singhji, As one coverboy of Time magazine to another, namaskar. People tell me you are upset that America's premier newsmagazine has called you an underachiever, but I say to them, at least they gave you a visa to dine with Barack Obama. I have not had the privilege though the Chinese have been very warmly disposed towards me and treated me very well when I visited China for five days last year. In the interests of bipartisan politics (see, I am very up to speed with my American references) may I recommend a few things you could do:  Stop talking about animal spirits. I am a vegetarian. So are many others in this great country. Pick a vegetable instead. No, no, I didn't mean you.  Stop apologising for being chosen prime minister. I remember what you said in 2004: "I had not imagined in my wildest dreams that I will be the Prime Minister of India. It was a mandate for Sonia Gandhi, not for me, but she made me the prime minister." Get over it. Look at me, I didn't apologise even for the Gujarat riots and Gujarat still loves me.  Don't do email interviews. Try meeting people face to face, even if occasionally you have to walk out of a live interview, taking your mic with you.  Don't stand in the way of big business, even if they make too small cars and produce too little gas. Give them what they want. FDI in retail, defence and aviation. Forget the retrospective tax and GAAR. Why lose jobs to Africa? (Note to self: Locate exactly where Africa is in relation to Gujarat and whether I can travel to some of their key nations. Most important: Do I need a visa?)  Don't worry about being written off by your friend Jagdish Bhagwati. He's a great economist who also happens to be a Gujarati. I will have a word with him.  Appoint a new PR. Amitabh Bachchan has done a great job for tourism in Gujarat. Would you like me to speak to him?  Please put a stop to these public applications for the finance portfolio. It's not a toy. If you scream loudly and long enough, you don't get it. Please tell your colleagues it is most unseemly.  Please don't use clichés. You said in your recent newspaper interview: "We have tried to build a peaceful, harmonious, secure, friendly, prosperous India where every citizen can aspire for the best in life. We have an unfinished agenda." Please allow me a monopoly on such statements.  If you're really keen to run the finance ministry and recapture the spirit of 1991, I genuinely believe you should do so. You could always appoint me prime minister, since my own party won't. I will give you absolute freedom to complete the great reforms you began 21 years ago.  Let me know when you want to be nominated to the Rajya Sabha again. If not Assam, remember there is always Gujarat. Yours always, Narendrabhai PS: If you're suffering from work-related stress, I know some great yoga moves. from 10 a.m. instead of 8 a.m. No agents will be allowed to book Tatkal tickets from 10 a.m. to 12 p.m. over the counter as well as on the Internet. OFFERED A $100 million (Rs 550 crore) loan by the World Bank, for a rural livelihood project in Bihar. The project is expected to benefit 1.5 million households. REJECTED The plea of former Lok Sabha member Anand Mohan, by the Supreme Court. Mohan had appealed against his conviction and life sentence in the 1994 murder of Gopalganj district magistrate MOHAN G. Krishnaiah.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

DON'T STAND IN THE WAY OF BIG BUSINESS, EVEN IF THEY MAKE TOO SMALL CARS AND PRODUCE TOO LITTLE GAS. GIVE THEM WHAT THEY WANT. WHY LOSE JOBS TO AFRICA?

S I G N P O STS
BOUGHT By India, a rich archive comprising thousands of letters and documents related to Mahatma Gandhi. The letters, including those on his friend architect Hermann Kallenbach, were to be auctioned

in Sotheby's, UK. SENTENCED Four people to life imprisonment, by the Bombay High Court in the 2002 Best Bakery carnage in which 14 people were killed in Vadodara, Gujarat. LAUNCHED New scheme for booking of Tatkal tickets. Passengers can now book Tatkal tickets

GANDHI

16

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

NEW

