GUJARAT

INDIA

MAHARASHTRA

Na tion WESTERN GHATS

Western Ghats

GOA KARNATAKA TAMIL NADU KERALA

STATES VOTE FOR GROWTH
NESCO's decision on July 1 to award World Heritage Site status to the 1,600 km-long Western Ghats has found few takers in the corridors of power both at the Centre and in the states. Kerala, Karnataka and Maharashtra, three of the six states the Western Ghats traverses, have objected to a report submitted in August 2011 by the Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel (WGEEP), which was constituted in March 2010 by the Union Ministry of Environments and Forests. Although Jairam Ramesh, who was environment minister when WGEEP was constituted, has lauded the panel's report as "balanced", the ministry, headed now by Jayanti Natarajan, gave in to pressure from the states and decided on July 7 to set up another committee to review the report. Environmentalist CTS Nair, former director of the Kerala Forest Research Institute, Thrissur, says the Central Government has never quite been in favour of the report. Though the report was submitted in August 2011, it was not made public until this May. The ministry even objected to an order issued by the chief information commissioner to make the report public and

World Heritage status for Western Ghats will stall development, say governments

U

did so only when the Delhi High Court overruled its objections. The states chiefly oppose the strict measures recommended by the panel against various "development projects" going on in the Western Ghats. Depending on the location's ecological sensitivity, the WGEEP report calls for a moratorium, phasing out or regulation of activities such as mining, setting up of industries, SEZs, as well as infrastructure and tourism projects. It calls for designating the Western Ghats as an ecologically sensitive area and classifying the ranges in different zones based on eco-sensitivity. It also calls for scrapping hydropower projects in Athirappally in Kerala and Gundia in Karnataka and comes down heavily on iron-ore mining in Goa and polluting industries in the Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg districts of Maharashtra. Kerala, the state that has the highest diversity of vegetation in its parts on the Western Ghats, has been the most vociferous in objecting to the recommendations. "The demarcation of ecologically sensitive zones is so impractical that even a major part of Thiruvananthapuram would be regarded as ecologically sensitive with a

moratorium on development," says Kerala Chief Minister Oommen Chandy. Karnataka opposes inscribing 10 spots in the Ghats within the state as protected by World Heritage Site status, while Maharashtra objects to WGEEP's recommendation for a moratorium on industries and roads outside the buffer zone of core areas. WGEEP panel head Madhav Gadgil is dismayed. "The objections would only mean continuation of attempts to further destroy this great treasure in the name of pseudo-development," he said. Environmentalists want the WGEEP recommendations implemented. "The report is a draft constitution for the green politics of the future and takes a people's view of the environment instead of elitist, statist or Euro-centric perspectives," says environmentalist E. Unnikrishnan. Western Ghats is the sixth Indian site so far to receive the World Heritage status, which would ensure it greater financial and technological assistance for conservation from UNESCO. But that is contingent upon a halt to rampant ecological destruction in the name of development. Will the governments of the Western Ghats states listen?
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

THE WESTERN GHATS IN MUNNAR REGION OF KERALA
GETTY IMAGES

