Society CROSS-CULTURALMARRIAGES
By Asit Jolly and Binduraj J.

T

hirty-five-year-old Kuttiyeri Valiyaveetil Baby keeps a small but delightful home in Subhash Nagar just off Hansi's Navi Sabzi Mandi in Hisar district. A hesitant, shy young bride when she arrived in this off-thetrack Haryana township six years ago, she has blossomed into a confident young woman conversant in Hindi as well as a smattering of Punjabi. Born in Eramal, a small village in Kerala's Kannur district, Baby is among scores of young women who journeyed 3,000 km north to track their destinies in the dusty Jat hinterland of Haryana. Her father Balan, an out-of-job farm worker, and mother Kalyani struggled to make ends meet while supporting four growing children. They had reser-

K.Valiyaveetil Baby,35
Married to Ram Prakash Khalra in 2006 From Eramal, Kannur district, Kerala

"We were four siblings in a very poor home. I was determined not to be a burden on my parents any longer."

Bindu Nagpal,35
Married to Subhash Nagpal in 1999 From Kunnaru, Kannur district, Kerala

"Haryanvi men are caring. There have been some cases where women have gone back to Kerala, but those are very few."

NORTH MEETS SOUTH FORAHAPPILY EVER AFTER
Young women from Kerala discover wedded bliss in the dusty hinterland of Haryana
vations when a neighbour first suggested a groom from faraway Haryana. "But there was no option," she recalls. "I was determined not to be a burden any longer." Her husband, Ram Prakash Khalra, 45, an autorickshaw driver in Hansi, calls her Deepa. "Isn't she great?" he says with obvious pride in the woman he wed in December 2006. "She is the kindest soul I have met," he declares, remembering how she lovingly cared for his ailing father till he passed away a year ago. Today, there is little that betrays Baby's roots barring faint vestiges of her southern accent and a rich dusky complexion. And she has become something of a culinary queen, happily plating up everything from north Indian puri-halwa and Haryanvi churi or churma and kheer to distinctly southern coconut and asafoetida-tempered flavours of sambar, idlis and appams. A stone's throw from Hansi's historic Char Qutab masjid, 35-year-old Usha Dhamija equally delights her husband, 38-year-old Rakesh Dhamija's extended family with south Indian fare. "Chachi is the best!" says Hemant, 21, the couple's college-going nephew who particularly relishes her Malabari-style mutton. Her mother-in-law Prakash Devi, 73, is immensely proud of her Keralite bahurani. "She runs the household more efficiently than I ever did," says the old woman, admitting she had initial reservations about a bride from Kerala. No one is really certain how or when the growing trend of marriages between Kannur and Hansi really started. Locals in Hansi recall one of the first such alliances between a nurse

from Kerala and a patient. Others believe it all began over a decade ago when a truck driver brought home the first bride from Kannur. While there has never been an official headcount, such marriages are by now fairly commonplace. The number of Kerala brides in Hansi alone is estimated to be over 300. Referred to as "Haryana kalyanams" in Kerala, akin to Arabi kalyanams (Arab marriages), they are essentially driven by the scarcity of young women in Haryana consequent to its skewed sex ratio and the extreme poverty of many rural Hindu families of Kannur. This, coupled with steep dowry demands and impossible-to-match horoscopes, is what prompted a widow like Kalyaniamma to find Haryanvi grooms for her five daughters. Left to fend for herself in Kunhimangalam after her husband succumbed to cancer, she found her saviour in a neighbour who married a factory worker from Haryana. "She told me there were many unmarried men in Haryana and even offered to find suitable matches for my girls," she recalls. Now nearing 75, Kalyaniamma is relieved that all her daughters are married, including two in Haryana. Her daughter Usha, 38, who wed Rajinder Kumar Makkar, 43, in March 2003, became a mentor of sorts for younger brides from Kerala. "She is a great source of support and inspiration," says Baby, recalling how the older woman helped her deal with the linguistic and cultural mismatch to assimilate better. Makkar runs a general store in Hansi's Lal Sadak area and is one of the few Haryanvi spouses who took the trouble to learn to read, write and speak Malayalam. "I could not

Usha Dhamija,35
Married to Rakesh Dhamija in 2007 From Kadannappally, Kannur district, Kerala

"My husband's family loves me and that makes me happy.The only thing that I miss is that they don't show any Malayalam channels on cable TV here."
Photographs by ANIL DAYAL

have wished for a better life," Usha says, recalling the penury of Kalyaniamma's home in Kunhimangalam. Hansi affords the Kerala brides a relatively affluent lifestyle. Usha Dhamija's husband Rakesh earns well from a small juice stall in the busy Char Qutab area. "He is a generous man. I have a mobile phone and he ensures there is enough money in it for me to talk to my family every evening," she says. But amid the happy stories, there are a few tales of anguish as well. Of mistreated and abused women driven back to their parental homes in Kerala by wayward and alcoholic spouses. Ratheesh Kaleeyadan, director of the Kozhikode-based Media Analysis and Research Centre, says there are nearly 50 instances wherein "women complained that they were subjected to severe mental agony and physical exploitation in their husband's homes". None of them was however willing to file police complaints. Though small, the influx of Kerala culture in Haryana may be having a significant impact on long prevailing social mores. Baby has a daughter who is possibly more pampered than the average Haryanvi son. Four-and-ahalf-year-old Bhawana is her father's pet and is fluent in Hindi, Malayalam and Punjabi. "She speaks to me in Malayalam and instantly switches to Hindi or Punjabi when her father comes home," says Baby. Hansi is today a thriving and happy cross-cultural melting pot. "This is no longer a foreign place," says Bindu Nagpal, 35, a nurse who married a local soap trader, Subhash, in 1999. "We watch Malayalam videos or simply talk to each other in the mother tongue," says Baby, laughing that very few of the men can follow the conversation at gatherings, which mainly happen during Onam and Vishu festivals. For those who decided to stay on in Hansi, the extreme weather is possibly the only thing they still haven't acclimatised to. "It is either burning hot like this summer or freezing cold. My mother told me (on phone) that it is raining in the village," Usha says wistfully, clearly missing the gentler weather of Kadannappally. 

50

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

51

