Obi tuary
DARA SINGH 1928-2012

The Last Action King
He was the ultimate physical hero, with a touch of maturity, a whiff of intelligence
By Shiv Viswanathan

ndia never had a native Tarzan because we wanted something more than a noble savage. Our Junglee was a totally different creature, raucous, rustic or even autistic in a different way. Our culture valued physical prowess but demanded some additives from it. We wanted the authenticity of culture rather than nature from our hero. He could not smack of the jungle but of the grace and power of folk prowess, folk remedies. We wanted a Punjab-da-puttar rather than Tarzan. Our physical hero had to have a touch of maturity, a whiff of intelligence. Humour could not hurt and nor would chivalry. A mere inmate from an akhada would not do. The akhada, despite its role during the Partition, was a narrow domain, and eventually an annex for elections. The wrestler as a hero had to wrestle with life, and in wrestling with life, had to paint a larger sociological, even civilisational picture. The image and career of Dara Singh, alias Deedar Singh Randhawa, was made to order for just this. Dara was not a mere wrestler. He was a folk hero, a toast of princes and eternal joy of haats and melas. As a wrestler, he was victorious, winning jousts all over the Commonwealth. In that world of excess we called wrestling, he was the world champion, though one must confess the world was a smaller place then. Dara Singh was a piece of folklore dying to enter Bollywood. He did this as King Kong in 1962. He sensed he had to pick the right myths and the correct moments. He was a great fighter and his goodness blended the physical and the moral. He found his niche as Hanuman in Ramanand Sagar's TV adaptation of Ramayan. This was an archetypical role. As a celluloid Hanuman, he knew he could not be a hoodlum, the goonda, a rowdy; at the most he could be a dada, well endowed, well intentioned, with the right mix of nature and culture. He had to aspire to no Olympics as he

I

was an already Olympian figure. Dara Singh was an archetype who could be reduced to mere type. What marked him was a sense of versatility, a readiness to experiment. True he exuded the physical as he moved from being the Rustam-e-Hind of wrestling to the Action King of the Hindi film industry. He was a Salman Khan in an age where a Salman Khan could not be thought of. But if the latter was a perpetual brat, the other was perennially mature. He was no sidekick. The authenticity of the man created versatility as he mellowed. He discovered Mumtaz and worked with her in 16 films. The BJP, which was always a shrewd judge of TV as folklore, made him a member of the Rajya Sabha from 2003 to 2009. Yet he was no Hindi Heartland provincial. His appeal extended to Tamil and Hindi films and he played Rajnikant's father in Maaveran, a remake of Mard. He had a guest role in Anand. He acted in 118 films ending it with Jab We Met in 2007. By that time, the raw physicality had mellowed to a deeper authenticity laced with rustic wisdom. There was a Punjabi verve to it which one sensed in his last film where he played a grandfather whose juices were flowing. He did not have to act, he just had to be himself. His humanity comes out in his Punjabi interviews. When asked to play Hanuman at the age of 59, he hesitated, wondering whether he had the physical aura for the role. He aged in an interesting way. He did not wither like Rajesh Khanna or Dev Anand. His moustached bristled, his muscles rippled, conveying a deep commitment to life. The humour bubbled and one realised that he would always be an archetypical Indian; local in values, global in impact. Dara's career was not just the life of a champion but what future legends would call a champion of life. He was the Bollywood ultimate where screen and life combined till one did not know the difference--the legend as the ultimate reality show.
Shiv Viswanathan is a social scientist

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

