Na tion UTTAR PRADESH
Photographs by B K RAMESH

MAYAWATI PLANS REVIVAL
BSP supremo uses a court reprieve to set the stage for the looming Lok Sabha battle
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

and Ashish Misra n March 6, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) chief Mayawati was plunged into gloom as the Uttar Pradesh Assembly results poured in. Exactly four months later, on July 6, she had reason to smile. A Supreme Court bench of Justices P. Sathasivam and Dipak Misra pulled up the CBI for misunderstanding its directions in the Taj Corridor case and overstepping its jurisdiction by registering a separate case of disproportionate assets (DA) against Mayawati. They said that a direct roving probe was not ordered and that the scope of the earlier September 18, 2003, order was limited to money released for the Taj project. The September 2003 order came just 10 days after Mayawati's rival, Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Mulayam Singh Yadav, won the vote of confidence in the Uttar Pradesh Assembly, displacing her as the chief minister on September 8, 2003. CBI, working overtime, filed an FIR against Mayawati on October 5, 2003, for amassing disproportionate assets as chief minister. On July 6, the bench said : "Whatever directions were issued by this court were only in respect of Rs 17 crore alleged to have been released without proper sanction and there is not even a whisper about making an investigation into any other assets of the persons involved in general." Wearing one of her rare smiles and her favourite beige salwar kameez, Mayawati came out of her official home at 13 Mall Avenue in Lucknow to read out a prepared statement: "I welcome the Supreme Court judgment. I thank Harish Salve and S.C. Mishra for following up the case tirelessly. I want to thank my party supporters for unflinching support through ups and downs." She was not excessively happy though. Mayawati is shrewd enough to

O

AP

MAYAWATI IN LUCKNOW ON JULY 6

MAYAWATI REALISES THAT SHE HAS GOT A REPRIEVE ONLY ON TECHNICAL GROUNDS
realise that she has got a reprieve only on technical grounds and that the case against her could be revived whenever the Government chooses to do so. It is not likely to happen anytime soon though, with Mayawati extending support to Pranab Mukherjee's candidature for president. Sources in CBI claim they could still appeal against the Supreme Court order, and that a different bench of the court, on October 25, 2004, had delinked the two cases. "It is just a matter of legal nitty-gritty," claimed a CBI official. The investigating agency also has the option of starting afresh by seeking the permission of the Uttar Pradesh governor to proceed against Mayawati. The former chief minister is using the respite to plan her revival. This includes return of her close aide and

Rajya Sabha member Satish Chandra Mishra to the forefront. Mishra, a Brahmin, was in charge of formulating the upper caste strategy for BSP in the Assembly elections. He was keeping a low profile ever since the party's debacle but now after he successfully represented her in Supreme Court, Mishra is all set to get additional responsibility in the party. Along with former minister Ramvir Upadhyay, Mayawati has made him the convener of Brahmin Bhaichara Committee to mobilise the upper caste votes in 80 parliamentary constituencies. With her focus firmly on strengthening the party before the next Lok Sabha elections, she is also targeting the 17 reserved parliamentary constituencies. She has reconstituted the Muslim, Backward and Brahmin Bhaichara committees to mobilise the communities in favour of Dalit candidates. The BSP chief has already made the state's deteriorating law and order situation under SP an issue. She has constituted a cell in the party office which will maintain records on the SP government's misdeeds. Swami Prasad Maurya, removed as the state BSP chief, has been given charge of organising protests against SP rule regularly. Mayawati has already stepped up her attack in the Vidhan Parishad, where BSP is in majority with 59 out of the 100 MLCs. The party successfully stalled SP's bill seeking to abolish reservations in promotions in state services by sending it to a select committee of the House on June 26. Two days later, BSP returned a bill seeking to increase the tenure of lokayukta and deputy lokayukta from six to eight years. The bill was sent back to the Vidhan Sabha with a recommendation that the term should be only five years. However, the bill was passed without discussion in the Vidhan Sabha, rejecting the Vidhan Parishad recommendation. Senior BSP leader and leader of opposition in the Vidhan Parishad, Naseemuddin Siddiqui, said that the party will not take it lying down and will oppose the wrong decisions made by the SP government. Mayawati is obviously in no mood to let Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav breathe easy. 

TIRUMALA TEMPLE

People's faith is the crux and whatever measures we take should not shatter it. The state and its institutions like TTD have to play the role of a regulator and facilitator."
C. RAMACHANDRAIAH Endowments Minister

ANDHRAPRADESH

TEMPLE OFBOON
Endowments minister takes on mighty Tirumala administration, wants CAG to audit its accounts
t's been four months since he recommended that the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) should scrutinise the account books of the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD), which manages the country's richest Hindu shrine. But Andhra Pradesh Endowments Minister Chennamsetty Ramachandraiah, 65, is still waiting for word on it from the state's finance department. "Unlike other government departments, temples under the Hindu and Charitable Endowments Department and TTD are solely dependent on donations from devotees and do not receive government funds. But these are not thoroughly accounted for," the chartered accountant and banker-turned politician told INDIA TODAY. TTD revenues are expected to reach Rs 2,010 crore in 2012-13. A pro-reforms minister, Ramachandraiah, is eager to introduce greater transparency and accountability in the management of temple assets. "People's faith is the crux and whatever measures we take should not shatter it. The state and its institutions like TTD have to play the role of

I

a regulator and facilitator," he says. Conceding to a CAG audit of TTD is likely to lead to a flurry of protests. It is autonomous, so the accounts are audited by an independent audit firm. "Let the minister do what he wants. TTD is an autonomous and independent institution," says TTD chairperson Kanumuri Bapi Raju, 65, a former endowments minister. However, Tirupati MLA B. Karunakar Reddy welcomed Ramachandraiah's move. "An agency like CAG auditing TTD's affairs will enhance the credibility and confidence reposed by the people in temple management," said Reddy, 54, a former TTD chairperson. Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy has whittled down the TTD board to just seven from the earlier 15. Ramachandraiah is planning for amendments to the Andhra Pradesh Hindu Charitable and Hindu Religious Institutions and Endowments Act and the TTD Act to check the unbridled powers enjoyed by the TTD board and other temple committees in leasing lands and incurring avoidable expenses.
by Amarnath K. Menon

36

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

37

