BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE DOCTOR OF DRIFT
A veteran like Pranab Mukherjee could have held the erhaps the question is not asked as often as it should be because the answer is either unexpected or unwelcome. wheel, as he did so ably between 2004 and 2009. But Does a prime minister become stronger or weaker after convinced, justifiably, that there was no hope of Congress re-election? The record, across the world of democracy, is making him Dr Singh's successor, he took a practical heavily weighted in favour of pessimism. What should be a exit ramp to a high office that offers a chance to provide leadership of ideas, if you have any ideas, but is above rejuvenation gradually slips into an unsavoury confusion. The reason lies in the leader rather than the system. The political minefields. The most senior Cabinet member after agenda of a first term is driven primarily by the perfectly him, Sharad Pawar, leads a single-digit party; with less than legitimate ambition to return to office. It therefore encour- 10 MPs he cannot even hope for a miracle that elevates him ages a practical programme of governance rooted in the pub- to the top of the UPA coalition. lic's immediate needs. A second term breeds both exhaustion The power of a prime minister is, in a sense, office-neutral; and complacency: After the high of re-election there seems he is only as powerful as his personal drive and circumstance nowhere to go except downhill. A democracy like America permit him to be. Dr Singh's second term has been neutered by has ended the very concept of a third term; in India, no the simple fact that he has ruled himself out of contention. He national government has obtained one after Jawaharlal has sabotaged his own best asset, his record, with this denial. Nehru, and that was half a century ago. Neither his Cabinet nor his party is in any mood to listen to him, The concentration of a re-elected PM invariably shifts because he does not promise any reward. Rahul Gandhi, the away from basics; he is content with a holding operation that man who has been given the key to the future, shows no serves nothing more than the personal comfort of glamour inclination to grasp it. Rahul Gandhi cannot outsource his role, events like world summits, opportunity is frittered away in and then claim the applause if a surrogate does indeed play his staged drama, and thoughts turn to largely unattainable part with reasonable acumen. In any case, there is not much temptations like world or regional peace. If Dr Manmohan talent left in the present Congress; the stage is full of hams, not Singh seems to be doing all three, it is because he is doing all stars. The party therefore clings on to Dr Singh, despite his three. To be fair, he declared as early as in 2009 that he did minimalist attitude to performance. The Government has not belong to the future and the future did not belong to him, shifted gear from fast forward to drift to idle. when he offered to step aside for Rahul Gandhi at any time The most optimistic projection of Congress fortunes lies of the latter's choosing. The not in its own capability, but in SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com next election is Rahul Gandhi's the hope that the voter will find to win or lose, not his. the alternative worse. The theThis might have worked if ory is that all it has to do is serve there was someone furrowing a out its second term and a third parallel policy line; but there is will come walking by. At a time no one at the wheel, driving when Congress needs some setowards a political destination. rious thought, this is slippage Sonia Gandhi has lost the way into wishful thinking. A swamp because her nominated driver, releases some strange drugs. her son, dispirited by defeat in Their very futility encourages Uttar Pradesh, has abandoned greater hallucination. the midterm moment when a A flurry of soundbites can transition to the next generation create an illusion of activity, could have taken place. It does as happened when Pranab not matter, in 2012, whether Mukherjee resigned and some Rahul Gandhi spends his time sections of media projected the abroad or in India, for even notion that 1991 had reapwhen he is in his country he peared. But 1991 was the beDr Singh's second term has been neutered does not contribute to public life ginning of a first term, not the by the simple fact that he has ruled by setting out a framework for end of a last term. There was the future with which he or the the frisson of ideas, and the himself out of contention. He has Congress can be identified. The energy to implement them. sabotaged his own best asset, his record, Congress therefore is swimDespite this, Narasimha Rao did with this denial. Neither his Cabinet nor ming in a vacuum; it is going not get a second term; and the his party is in any mood to listen to him, nowhere very slowly and sweatloneliness of his last days is a because he does not promise any reward. ing profusely in the process. parable for his successors. 

P

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

