Leisure
BOOKS FA S H I O N CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Lost in Translation
After Jacqueline Fernandez, another Sri Lankan model has Gamya landed in Bollywood.G Wijayadasa, 25,Miss Sri Lanka 2009,has already got a taste of item numbers,having danced to Chadhti Jawaani in Aalaap.No surprise then that she is vying for more,but we wish she would get her act together.While her representative claims she has a role in director Luv Ranjan's upcoming project,the director says,"I am not even sure what I am making next."Acase of lost in translation?

FORGIVE AND FORGET
After topless photo shoots and raunchy item numbers,it's time for actor Veena Malik, 28,to repent.On Pakistani television,during Ramzan.She will be hosting a show on Hero TV called Astaghfar (Repentence),in which she will seek forgiveness for her sins."Main hoon Veena Malik, is Ramzan main karoongi aapke saath, apne aur aapke gunaahon ka astaghfar," she says in the promos, dressed in a blue salwar kameez with her head covered and an artful teardrop streaming down her face. Do we hear television screens being smashed across the border?

WIJAYADASA

MALIK

IN SISTER'S FOOTSTEPS
We have been waiting for her with bated breath,and now it's just a matter of time before Katrina Kaif's younger sister, Isabelle, 23,finds her way to Mumbai.She has done an acting course at New York's Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute and is using her skills behind the camera to produce an independent film in New York. Now,all she needs are a few Hindi lessons and she is good to go.

LOVE IN PARIS
Even if Shekhar Kapur doesn't release Paani, he will at least always have Paris. The 66-year-old filmmaker has decided to move on from making films to acting in them. Kapur has joined the cameo bandwagon of Preity Zinta's debut production Ishkq in Paris, which will release in September. The actor is very excited as he plays French actor Isabelle Adjani's husband in the film.
KAPUR

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND THINGS THAT MATTER
MUST WONDER

Whether actor and producer Uday Chopra is dating newbie Nargis Fakhri and took her home to meet his parents. Something cooking?
MUST LAUGH

At Ranveer Singh for wearing a traditional Gujarati costume to practise for his next role, while watching Bol Bachchan in Bhuj.
MUST PRAY FOR

Ailing yesteryear actor Shatrughan Sinha,who underwent an open heart surgery recently,and has been in and out of hospitals.
MUST SEE

ISABELLE

Fashion designer Raghavendra Rathore's new label `Club J'for young men in small towns, to help them experiment with a new look. Compiled by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege

Volume XXXVII Number 31; For the week July 24-30, 2012, released on July 23
72
INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

I

