Na tion KARNATAKA

SHETTAR'S HOME STRETCH A DVANTAGE Clean Cash in the Coffers
GUJARAT

No MLA wants an election at the moment. The new Chief Minister will survive, but will he govern?
By Sowmya Aji

arnataka Chief Minister Jagadish Shivappa Shettar, 56, the third person to occupy the post in the four years of BJP rule, has been insouciantly confident of running his administration and completing the remaining 10 months of tenure, even as his party infrastructure crumbles amid internal conflict. The first week of his rule has already seen snarling ministers fighting for plum portfolios and an MLA from the BJP's coastal stronghold, Halady Srinivasa Shetty, resigning from his Assembly membership, after being denied a ministerial berth. Several other MLAs including S. Angara, Gopalakrishna Belur and B.P. Harish are threatening to resign for the same reason. And yet, the first statement the Chief Minister made on July 12 after being sworn in was: "I have the political skill to deal with everything. I have fulfilled every responsibility the party gave me. I will fulfil this one also." The Assembly session beginning on July 19 will be an acid test, as the state's finance bills have to be passed, but Shettar can afford to be indifferent to the threats. Barring a few who are satraps of their constituencies, every BJP MLA knows that his or her re-election is seriously in doubt. There is palpable public disgust in the state at the unashamed scramble for power by MLAs who were elected due to the efforts of a dedicated cadre of party workers. "So, nobody will bring down the government at this point, despite all the grandstanding and blackmail tactics to grab more power. No MLA wants elections," a senior BJP leader

K

PTI

SHETTAR (LEFT) BEING SWORN IN AS CHIEF MINISTER ON JULY 12 IN BANGALORE

told INDIA TODAY. "This will help Shettar survive and hang on to power till the elections are due." Shettar, like recent chief ministers before him, held a video conference with deputy commissioners of all districts and zilla panchayat CEOs soon after being sworn in, and "cracked the whip", as it is always called by the local media. The Chief Minister demanded action from them over the severe drought situation in the state and blithely ignored the fact that while the entire political class has been squabbling, some of the bureaucracy has been doing its best to tackle it. "Nobody expects Shettar to do much even in this drought situation, despite the fact that he hails from a region that

is among the worst hit. It is not his style to be a stirring leader. Also, what can he do that bureaucrats have not already done?" a party acolyte asked. Since expectations from him are so low, anything that Shettar does will be to his advantage, unless he gets caught in a public scandal similar to his current mentor, former Karnataka chief minister B.S. Yeddyurappa. The possibility of that has already surfaced. On July 13, a complaint was filed with the lokayukta, pointing to a dubious land denotification deal that Shettar sanctioned in 2006 as revenue minister. Shettar allegedly took a unilateral decision to denotify 188 acres of land that had been acquired from farmers by the S.M. Krishna-led Congress government in 2004. Shettar was revenue minister in the succeeding H.D. Kumaraswamy government, and is

THE FIRSTWEEK OF SHETTAR'S RULE HAS ALREADY SEEN MINISTERS FIGHTING FOR PORTFOLIOS AND AN MLA RESIGNING FROM HIS ASSEMBLY SEAT.

accused by NGO Kannada Janajagruti President Talakaadu Chikkarange Gowda of letting go of the land in favour of real estate developers. "We are getting a detailed list of who benefited from the land denotification, but it is obvious that there were motives to do it. The decision should have gone to the Cabinet, but Shettar decided on his own, just based on the state's highlevel committee recommendation. And none of the land was returned to the farmers," Gowda contended. A lokayukta investigation that begins just a day after Shettar took over as chief minister is ominous. It was a lokayukta investigation as well that brought down the well-entrenched Yeddyurappa. But political observers say that the remaining tenure of the BJP government is so short that this investigation report may come too late to either harm or benefit Shettar. Shettar has not even bothered to respond to these allegations. He has also ignored the caste cauldron that has started simmering in the state, with several Vokkaliga and other backward class leaders openly opposing his elevation to the post. BJP's attempt to placate both the communities by offering a deputy chief minister's post to each of them, in the form of R. Ashoka, a Vokkaliga, and K.S. Eshwarappa, another backward class politician, does not seem to have borne fruit. With almost every one of the party's 121 MLAs turning into a ministerial aspirant, it is apparent that the RSS ideals of discipline and public image have taken a severe beating. "RSS is now trying to take over the party organisation by putting in a disciplined worker as the state unit president. But both RSS and the amiable Shettar will only be able to oversee the damage that has been done to the party prospects in the next Assembly elections. They won't be able to stem it," another senior BJP leader admitted to INDIA TODAY. I

Modi attempts to inject transparency into the collection of party funds in the run-up to elections
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

ujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi is building on his good governance credentials by attempting to introduce transparency in the collection of party funds. He is pitching it as something that could reduce the influence of big business on politics. "Let us collect funds from people and small-time businessmen on the strength of our good performance," he told BJP office-bearers at a meeting in February. On cue, party workers started collecting funds the same month, issuing receipts for every rupee donated. Before the exercise was launched, all elected representatives of BJP from an MLA to a panchayat member and all party office-bearers till ward level were trained in how to go about it. They were told to go in a group of three-four to prospective donors and seek funds on the strength of the state government's overall performance, especially highlighting the 24-hour power supply to all villages, something unique to the state. By July, the collections touched Rs 150 crore, with people donating anything from Rs 10,000 to Rs 2 lakh and even more. Over 60 per cent of the money was given in cheques, showing the extent of transparency in the exercise. The drive in Ahmedabad district yielded Rs 18 crore, while Surat city contributed nearly Rs 15 crore to the party coffers. The collection in Rajkot city was over Rs 10 crore. As Haresh Shah, a Rajkot trader who made a donation of Rs 1 lakh, puts it: "For a BJP supporter and donor like me, the satisfaction is that the fund is indeed going into the party kitty." Of the total money collected, 25 per cent each goes to the taluka and state BJP unit, while 50 per cent re-

G

MODI

mains with the district unit. At the taluka level, the money can be withdrawn by three office-bearers signing together. "Workers at the taluka level are proud that they can now spend money collected by themselves for local events and don't have to go begging to the district unit or approach local businessmen for assistance," says Bharat Pandya, state BJP secretary. "Until now, fund collection was believed to be the domain of leaders, not workers. The exercise has brought a lot of satisfaction to the party rank and file," says Surendra Patel, state party treasurer. The funds drive comes at an opportune time for BJP, with the electoral code of conduct likely to kick in some months later with state Assembly polls scheduled for December 2012. Says political analyst Vidyut Thakar: "At a time when the Election Commission is keeping an eagle eye on the use of black money in elections, this is a farsighted attempt at transparent political funding. BJP will certainly make it an election issue in the forthcoming polls." by Uday Mahurkar

34

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

35

