GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI
RAHUL

TIME OUT
all it the war of the summer holiday. On June 26, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav said in an interview that "politicians are not supposed to go on a holiday" . After taking over as chief minister, Akhilesh cancelled his annual summer vacation. It was a not-so-subtle nudge to Congress General Secretary Rahul Gandhi who was vociferously defended by Digvijaya Singh just a day before. Singh denied that Rahul was missing in action and said he "had gone out on the invitation of another government" . He did not say which country invited him. With the prince-in-waiting, everything is a state secret.

C

MONUMENTAL BATTLE
s if the commotion over the ABHIJEET BANERJE Bhindranwale Memorial was not enough, now both the BJP and Congress want more. On June 25, senior BJP leader and former minister Manoranjan Kalia called on Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal to build another memorial "along the lines of Jallianwala Bagh" to commemorate the victims of the 1984 riots in Delhi. Not to be left behind, Punjab Congress chief Amarinder Singh has also demanded a "peace memorial" for all the lives lost during the militancy years. "Memorials cannot be selective," he declared on June 26 in Chandigarh. "At this rate, we won't need milestones in Punjab. We'll be measuring distances in memorials," says a wit.

A

K ASIF

FLOOD OF EMBARRASSMENT

NO VOLUME
eteran Congressman P.C. Chacko seems the person most likely to succeed Abhishek Manu Singhvi, whose daily

V

A

SHIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

lmost half the state is reeling under floods, but guess where Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi is? In the United States since June 20, ironically to attend a seminar on disaster management organised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. This is Gogoi's sixth official overseas trip since May 2011. He is expected back on July 2.

CHACKO

sermons on television channels came to an embarrassing halt after the revelation of a certain CD. About time. Of late Congress has had to rely on Renuka Choudhary, who loves discussing her hairdo (thankfully off the record), and Rashid Alvi, who cannot remember whether Mulayam Singh Yadav is a friend or foe (he recently called him a BJP agent after the Samajwadi Party chief supported Pranab Mukherjee's candidature for president). Which leaves the party with Manish Tewari, who is always ready to offend.

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

SA UR AB H

CHAMBER OF SECRETS
SI NG H/ ww w. ind iat od ay im ag es .co m

hat secret does Prithviraj Chavan's chamber in the Mantralaya hold? Ajit Pawar would like to know. Pawar, the Maharashtra deputy chief minister, was heard asking why Chavan's chamber was unaffected by the fire and his own was. Perhaps because Chavan's chamber is made of cement bricks, as opposed to Pawar's which is made of clay bricks. Did you think we meant something else?

W

CHAVAN (LEFT) WITH PAWAR

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
LOO & BEHOLD
hen DRDO wanted a chief guest to unveil a new range of biodegradable toilets at Dhamra near Bangalore on June 24, they didn't have to look beyond Jairam Ramesh. The Union rural development minister has said access to toilets should be made a constitutional right for women. But they hadn't expected Ramesh to embarrass them. He pointed out that there were no women in the audience, leaving the DRDO officials squirming. They can always check the price of toilets with Montek Singh Ahluwalia.
RAMESH CHIRANJEEVI

BEYOND BENGAL
amata Banerjee is set on expanding her political horizons beyond Bengal. And this time Didi is looking for supporters among disgruntled Congressmen in northern states. On June 22, 50-year-old billionaire businessman and Rajya Sabha member from Jharkhand, K. D. Singh, the man she handpicked to oversee the Trinamool Congress's expansion across five northern states, proclaimed his first big success in luring Sundar Pal Singh. He was Haryana Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda's media adviser since 2004. Sundar Pal will now be K.D. Singh's "deputy" for Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu and Kashmir.
A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

W

M

ON THE WARPATH

P

SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

erhaps Rajya Sabha member K. Chiranjeevi has forgotten which party he now belongs to. On June 23, he told the media outside his Hyderabad home that the only two non-YSR Congress MLAs elected in the recent bypolls were originally from his erstwhile Praja Rajyam Party. He blamed the lack of unity among Congress leaders for its loss everywhere. He is either very brave or very upset.

MAMATA

SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

JOKE
O F T H E W E E K

ROYAL PARDON

RAJE

Three old men went to see God. The first old man, an American, asked God when his country will come out of recession. "100 years," God said. The American started weeping profusely. "I will not live to see that day" Second man, a Russian asked God "When will my country become prosperous?" "Fifty years," came the reply. The Russian too started weeping profusely. "I will not live to see that day" Finally the Indian asked God, "When will my country become corruptionfree?" God started weeping profusely. "I will not live to see that day""

KHAN

"BJP has several persons who can become PM. What does Congress have?"
ANANTH KUMAR BJP Leader

"Twenty uninterrupted years of serving. Not enough talent or looks or game plan. I guess I got lucky, lucky to be working all the time."
SHAH RUKH KHAN Actor

"I believe in miracles."
P.A. SANGMA on his bid for

presidency

with PRIYA SAHGAL, KAUSHIK DEKA, ASIT JOLLY, AMARNATH K. MENON, KIRAN TARE, ROHIT PARIHAR, SANDEEP UNNITHAN

14

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

NEW

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

B

JP's Vasundhara Raje is back to doing what she knows

best: Making friends and wooing enemies. Her May 5 threat to quit the party if forced to help RSS-backed rival Gulab Chand Kataria's planned yatra, that was later put off, is history. On June 23, she met Jhujhar Singh, a former Congress minister of Rajasthan, in Kota. She also met RSS-Jan Sangh old-timers Raghuvir Singh Kaushal, K.K. Goyal and Ravindra Singh. On June 25, she visited another RSS veteran, Harishankar Bhabhra, to wish him speedy recovery after a surgery. Why? She won't say: "Raaz ko raaz hi rehne do (Let a secret remain a secret)."

