In terview of theWeek APJ ABDULKALAM

"Nitish told me I did not have the numbers to win"
When in doubt, sit it out. On June 13, APJ Kalam's prospects of a second innings in Rashtrapati Bhavan soared when Mamata Banerjee and Mulayam Singh Yadav pushed his name. Kalam listened to other voices, discovered he could not win, and opted out on June 18. The good news for him is that his 21st book, Turning Points, is due to hit the shops in the first week of July. According to this account of his Rashtrapati Bhavan years, in 2004 Sonia Gandhi didn't turn up to stake claim to form the government for three days despite the Congress emerging as the single largest party in the General Elections. It was only when Kalam called Sonia and asked her to meet him that she turned up with Manmohan Singh by her side. The former president spoke to Editorial Director M.J. AKBAR. Q. Shall we begin by discussing your book? How many books have you written? A. 20. This is my 21st book. Q. 21st! As an author too you have become an adult. A. (Laughs) Right, right. Actually, two of my books--Wings of Fire and Ignited Minds--have sold a million copies. The others are also doing well. Q. So have the publishers paid you your due royalties? A. Yes, they pay very well. Q. Would it be correct to say that every book of yours is, in a sense, an autobiography? A. My experiences are somehow integrated with people's experiences. For me there are two types of people: The young and the experienced. So, you will find that in every book, I have narrated certain experiences from my life. Thousands of people have written to tell me how Wings of Fire,
AP PHOTO

Ignited Minds and Indomitable Spirit have touched their hearts and made a difference in their lives. That is the greatest satisfaction for me. Q. Which is the experience you would consider the most negative you have written about? A. For me, there is no such thing as a negative experience. But I have faced problems. Two instances come to mind. My first experience of professional failure occurred in 1979, when a satellite carrier failed to launch. But I never allowed failure to become my captain. I also learned from observing some remarkable people. Instead of blaming me, my boss at the time accepted the entire responsibility for the failure of the project in front of 120 mediapersons. When I succeeded the next year, he did not take the credit and instead asked me to address a press conference. That leadership quality--in failure, having the ability to take the blame for your team, and sharing in their success--is a lesson I learned very early in life. Years later, when I became president and was presented the Office of Profit Bill, I felt there was a problem. I asked Parliament to reconsider. Of course there was a lot of controversy regarding my stance... a Standing Committee had to be set up to study the matter, but I stuck to my beliefs. Q. You've observed life at the level of the common man, then later as a professional and in the last 10 years or so, you have watched India at

the highest levels of political leadership. Do you find any leader today with the capacity to take the blame and share the success? A. (Laughs) No.... Look at this photo. I call it "political grace". It was taken in 2002 when my name was nominated by both Vajpayeeji and Soniaji... It shows all the political leaders together. Q. So what happened to your name this time? A. Well, no one proposed it. Of course there were discussions in political parties but I haven't been nominated. Some people asked me to contest and I told them I would announce my decision at the right time, which I did. Q. But Mamata Banerjee and Mulayam Singh Yadav proposed your name. A. (Laughs) It was proposed and withdrawn too! Q. So what did you think of Mulayam Singh's withdrawal? A. I don't know. But I have written

TURNING POINTS: AJOURNEYTHROUGH CHALLENGES
byAPJ Abdul Kalam HarperCollins Price: RS 199 Pages: 192

I RECEIVED A LOT OF PHONE CALLS from various leaders asking me if I would agree to stand for election if I was nominated.

KALAM AT RASHTRAPATI BHAVAN IN 2007

a letter to Mamata in which I have praised her leadership qualities. Q. Leadership qualities? A. Yes, because she was close to the golden throne. If she had worked through (with) the system she would have got whatever she wanted or at least half. But she took a stand and lost that opportunity. Of course she can recover her position. But she has the courage of a leader. Who must also have vision. Q. Do you think Mamata Banerjee has vision? A. Let me define a leader. He must have vision and passion and not be afraid of any problem. Instead, he should know how to defeat it. Most importantly, he must work with integrity. Q. And a leader should not change his mind in 24 hours! A. (Laughs) I can only define a leader. I can't give you any examples! Q. The whole country has been watching this political drama (presidential election). A. During the Mamata and Mulayam press conference, I was in Bihar as editor for a day for Prabhat Khabar. I told the newspaper 10 days earlier that if they want me to edit their paper, the first page must contain a thought that makes people smile and feature success stories of a farmer, fisherman, politician or anyone else. The paper showed me 20 success stories out of which I selected four and also contributed a poem I had written for the youth of Bihar. Q. If you had to write a poem about this presidential election, what would be the first line? A. Courage, courage, courage. Q. But nobody showed any courage! Is that an appeal? A. (Laughs) I'm proposing in Parliament that parties should devote more time to developmental politics. If one party promises to eradicate poverty in 10 years, another party should challenge it and promise to create economic prosperity. Q. It is said that a day before you released a statement saying you would not contest the presidential polls, you had prepared a statement outlining the reasons why you would be a candidate. Including that you

40

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

41

In terview of theWeek APJ ABDULKALAM
would be a "people's candidate", not a party's candidate. Is that true? A. At no time did I prepare any such statement. Q. Did you consider yourself a candidate? Or tell anyone privately? A. No, no. I received a lot of calls from various leaders asking me to contest and asking if I would agree to stand for election if I was nominated. Q. Did Mr Advani call you? A. Yes, a number of people called. Q. Did Mamata Banerjee call you? Mulayam Singh? A. Yes, all of them called me and asked me to stand. Many of them had doubts about whether I would stand. Q. So finally, you took the decision not to contest based on the fact that you didn't have sufficient numbers. A. Not only that. (Points at a photo on the table.) This photograph will reveal a graceful political system. I dream of that and will work for that. Q. But this photo is invalid because the Congress consciously never accepted your name this time. A. I want you to understand from this photograph, taken in 2002, how the political system should work-- politicians must work together for the good of the nation. Q. Were they able to work together because Atal Bihari Vajpayee was then prime minister? A. Yes, leadership counts. A leader is a visionary, a missionary. He is not afraid of any problem, does not follow anyone but makes his own path. Q. You make a fairly bland statement that you were surprised Mrs Gandhi did not stake her claim (to become PM in 2004). If we revisit that period, what happened during the first meeting you had with Mrs Gandhi and Dr Manmohan Singh? A. After they (the Congress) won the elections, no one from the party came to meet me for at least three days. As they were the single largest party, I called Mrs Gandhi and asked her to meet me. She arrived with Dr Manmohan Singh and said that the party had decided to make him the prime minister. If you remember, at the time many parties were against Mrs Gandhi becoming PM, despite the Supreme Court giving her the go-ahead. I had also received several letters against her becoming PM which I had forwarded to the government (the Congress). Q. So what was the government's response? A. No, no, government doesn't reply (laughs). Q. Subramanian Swamy has said it was his intervention; he had raised the issue of citizenship. Then there were SMS campaigns against Mrs Gandhi becoming PM. A. Besides Mr Swamy, many other parties and individuals also wrote to me. We have to remember that after all those campaigns a judicial judgment was taken. After the Supreme Court announced that Mrs Gandhi could become PM, how could I supersede it? Q. Then what stopped her from staking claim to the PM's post? A. That only Mrs Gandhi knows. Q. Did you meet Mr Vajpayee after he was defeated? A. A number of times. He took the defeat in his stride. That's another example of leadership qualities. I remember when Narasimha Rao was PM, I was his scientific adviser for the atomic energy programme. Just before the 1996 elections, Rao told me, "I'm going to Tirupati, stand by for nuclear tests." Success seemed assured and he wanted to celebrate with a nuclear test. Unfortunately, he lost. Soon after, I got a call from both victor and vanquished; they wanted to meet me. Rao asked me to brief the new PM on the nuclear programme. Where matters of the country were concerned, work would go on.

WHY SHOULD I CLING TO POWER? What will I gain by becoming the president again? I don't need anything from anybody.
couldn't become a minister as my work on the two programmes would suffer. Later, I finished work on the programmes, left the government and went back to teaching. It was then that Vajpayee called me and asked me to become president. Q. Do you think Vajpayee considered Modi guilty of the riots? A. I can't speak for him. Whether the riots were planned or just happened, we don't know but any right-thinking individual would not support any wrong being done to a community. When I visited Gujarat, I did not go to investigate what happened and whether Modi was right or wrong, but to remove the pain and accelerate relief work. Q. There is a controversy over whether Modi can be a prime ministerial candidate. What is your view? A. It doesn't matter what I think. We are a democratic country; the people of India will decide. Q. Between Nitish Kumar and Modi, who would make a better PM? A. (Laughs) Don't drag me into a controversy! I know both of them very well and they are good friends. Q. You just met Nitish Kumar... A. Yes, we discussed the presidential elections. He told me I had a lot of support within the NDA but did not have the numbers to win. Q. So you took his advice and decided not to contest. A. I also relied on my conscience. Conscience is my king. Q. Yet you put your conscience aside during the Bihar Assembly polls when the PM spoke to you and said the government would fall. A. The Bihar governor had sent the PM a note stating the Assembly was not functioning at all and the state government was in chaos. The PM called me in Moscow and said the situation had reached crisis point. He asked me for my views and said he had called a Cabinet meeting. I did some research of my own and then the PM called back in an hour and relayed the Cabinet's decision. So I took an informed decision. Q. But you write in your book that you almost resigned. A. Almost. Because the judiciary believed I took the decision sitting in Moscow, unaware that I was receiving up-to-the-minute information. They found fault with the governor, so I felt I should resign. But the vice-president was away on tour so there was a gap of a few hours before I could inform him. In that time period, I met the PM and we had a long chat during which he convinced me not to resign in the interest of the nation. So I didn't. Q. But so many people use that as an excuse to continue in office. A. Not me. Why should I cling to power? What will I gain by becoming the president again? I don't need anything from anybody. Q. Corruption is one of the most serious threats facing our nation today. If you were prime minister, would you pass the Lokpal bill? A. Corruption is a continuous process (laughs). There is no doubt that Anna (Hazare) is fighting for an important cause. But if the Lokpal bill is passed, it will just serve to fill up all our jails. Instead, I propose another movement for the youth (below 35) called "What can I give". It has just three components: Make your mother happy, make your father free from corruption and work towards saving the environment by planting trees. Anna heard about my idea and said it will take a long time to bear fruit but his mechanical process will only end up filling jails, while people's minds and hearts remain unchanged. Q. Anna Hazare says 15 ministers are corrupt. How much corruption did you see while in government? A. I didn't calculate (laughs). I

AP PHOTO

KALAM WITH SONIA GANDHI AND ATAL BIHARI VAJPAYEE IN 2002 WHEN HE WAS NOMINATED AS PRESIDENT BY BOTH LEADERS

PEOPLE CAN CALL ME XYZ, THAT'S THEIR freedom of expression. There is no conflict regarding my faith in Islam. I visit temples and churches as well.

Nation is bigger than political party. Q. There is a famous story that you were blessed by Swami Sivananda in your youth. A. As a child I wanted to be a pilot. So when I grew up, I applied to the Indian Air Force and was called for an interview to Dehradun. For 10 days I was put through a series of gruelling tests and then I found out I had failed the medical test. Despondent, I left Dehradun and on the banks of the Ganga, I saw Swami Sivananda surrounded by thousands of devotees. I sat in the last row. A little later he beckoned me and a French tourist and blessed us and gave us vishwaroopam, what Lord Krishna gave Arjun to dispel all his fears. When I returned to Delhi, a job was waiting for me: Senior scientific adviser in the Ministry of Defence. Q. In the book, you mention that you do the morning namaaz. A. Yes, every day, whenever possible. My father was very strict about namaaz and would wake me up at 4 a.m.

and take me to the mosque. I also fast. Q. So why is it that the so-called Muslim leaders in the North always have the feeling that you are not a practising Muslim? A. First of all, I am an Indian and try to be a good human being. People can call me XYZ, that's their freedom of expression. There is no conflict of any kind regarding my faith in Islam. I often visit temples and churches as well. God is everywhere. Q. You had several conversations with Vajpayee when he was PM. In your own assessment, do you consider Modi guilty of the Gujarat riots? A. I'm not there to pronounce a judgment on the Gujarat riots; that's the work of the judiciary. But I will narrate another incident about Vajpayee. When he took over the Cabinet, I was scientific adviser. He called me to his office one night and offered me a Cabinet post. I was busy with the Agni and nuclear programme. The next morning I went back to meet him. He sat in his room, surrounded by trays of sweets, which were a weakness of his. I told him I was sorry but I

42

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

43

