Na tion

AVIATION
YASHBANT NEGI / www.indiatodayimages.com

MINISTRYREBUTS CAG ON AIR PORTDEAL
Ministry of Civil Aviation asks CAG Vinod Rai for opportunity to clarify legalities of deal with its private partner DIAL
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

he Ministry of Civil Aviation (MCA) has written to the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India Vinod Rai, saying it is incorrect to say that undue benefits were accorded to the private partner Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL), in the Delhi Airport modernisation project. Referring to CAG'S draft performance audit report on "Implementation of Public-Private Partnership projects: Delhi Airport--A case study", Nasim Zaidi, who retired as civil aviation secretary on July 31, wrote to Rai on June 26 that the ministry should be given an opportunity to clarify its position with all records, to prevent inaccuracies creeping into the final report. Zaidi said MCA had forwarded its comments on the draft audit report on March 12. This was followed by an exit meeting on March 16, where it was agreed that MCA officials would have a second round of discussions with the auditors before finalising the report. "However, this has not been captured clearly in the minutes, and this process has not been carried out," he wrote. The exit meeting was attended by Zaidi, other ministry officials, representatives of the Airports Authority of India (AAI), Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) and DIAL. According to Zaidi, the AERA chairman, Yashwant S. Bhave, had clarified many points where he had felt the understanding of the audit was not correct. Zaidi stated that some of the issues mentioned in the draft report have

T

HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

TERMINAL 3 AT THE INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONALAIRPORT, DELHI

been resolved, which include "Concession Period, Right to First Refusal, Upfront Fee, the basis of fixing Rs 6.19 crore for additional 190 acres of land allotted by AAI, levy of Development Fee, categorisation of aeronautical and non-aeronautical services, and the Till system". While Zaidi alleged that some of the points discussed in the exit meeting were not part of the minutes, he said there were several aspects that found their way into the minutes, which were neither discussed nor included in the draft report. He wanted

TERMS AND CONDITIONS IN THE BID DOCUMENT WERE REVIEWED BYAN EMPOWERED GROUP OF MINISTERS AND APPROVED BYCABINET.

these to be addressed by CAG, with MCA given a chance to clarify its stand on certain issues, including commercial exploitation of land. Zaidi said that the issue of leasing of an additional 190.19 acres of commercial land, that was valued at Rs 1,29,639.21 crore, to DIAL by AAI, was raised by the audit team and clarified by MCA. The ministry claimed that the additional land was only meant for operations of aeronautical services and had no commercial value, and suggested that CAG drop this point, to which the audit team seemed to have agreed. However, the minutes of the exit meeting mentioned the figure of Rs 1.63 lakh crore, which would accrue to DIAL as lease rentals over a period of 58 years from 240 acre of land meant for commercial exploitation. This was never discussed in the exit meeting, and the ministry was not given a chance to explain its stand. MCA said the figure of Rs 1.63 lakh crore was grossly misleading. "It is

simply the absolute amount of revenue that would accrue to DIAL over 58 years (with 45.99 per cent of the same to be shared with AAI), and does not represent the time-value of money," it said. CAG also said the Government decision to offer "post-contractual benefit" to DIAL of levying development fee forced passengers to cough up Rs 3,415.35 crore towards the project cost. The ministry said that AERA, an independent regulator responsible for determining tariff at major airports in the country, had approved the levy of development fee at Delhi, as well as Mumbai airport, after taking the Supreme Court judgment into account. CAG had also said that DIAL was given unfair advantage by grant of unilateral right to extend concession by 30 years without renegotiating the deal. The ministry explained that the objective of long concession period was to attract investments in a capital intensive sector when government could not invest, to provide impetus to privatisation efforts and enhance Government revenue over a longer period. The ministry said the concession period of 30 (plus 30 years, the extension being prerogative of the joint venture agreement) was mentioned in the Operations, Management and Development Agreement, and released to all bidders during the bidding process in 2005. It was not only for DIAL, and the same conditions were offered to bidders for Mumbai airport. All the terms and conditions in the bid document were reviewed by the Empowered Group of Ministers and approved by the Cabinet. This included allowing the use of 5 per cent of airport land for commercial purposes. "There has been no change in any condition/ criteria/ clauses after the bid completion and award of contract," claimed the ministry. Zaidi said that the audit officers should hold further discussions with the Ministry of Civil Aviation officials before finalising the CAG report and tabling it in Parliament. 

SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE AND P. CHIDAMBARAM (RIGHT)

CABINETRESHUFFLE

THE TESTED AND TIRED
The elevation of P. Chidambaram and Sushilkumar Shinde shows the limits of UPA'S resources
n July 31, Manmohan Singh rearranged a few chairs in his Cabinet. There was no sign of the much-hyped reshuffle. Nor did Rahul Gandhi make his ministerial debut, despite a recent statement that he wanted to play a larger role in the party and government. With India under the grip of its biggest power breakdown, Power Minister Sushilkumar Shinde was further empowered with the plum home portfolio, and P. Chidambaram went back to finance. When Manmohan had taken over finance from Pranab Mukherjee, there was a media blitzkrieg from the PMO claiming the Prime Minister was taking an active interest in the ministry, and had told officials to find ways to restore investor faith by reviving mutual funds, taking a relook at GAAR and retrospective tax. But the enthusiasm soon fizzled out as the Prime Minister realised there was little he could do. Chidambaram is yet to reveal his magic formula. Corporate Affairs Minister Veerappa Moily is saddled with additional charge of power. In the last

O

reshuffle in July 2011, Moily had been shunted out of the law ministry because of his lacklustre performance. Moily had said he "should not be hanged for mistakes of the administrative machinery". Two Cabinet ministers shrugged when asked why the Prime Minister had handed the crucial power portfolio to Moily, and that too as merely an additional charge. The buzz in the Congress is that Rahul will not be joining the Government. Digvijaya Singh, his official mind-reader, told the media recently, "I want Rahul to take a larger role and prepare the party for the 2014 elections; I don't want him to join the Government." Rahul has, in the recent past, accompanied his mother Sonia Gandhi to congratulate Mukherjee on his presidential poll victory, and met Congress Chief Ministers Prithviraj Chavan and Ashok Gehlot. He also found time to watch a late night show of the movie Cocktail, in one of Delhi's upmarket theatres. The Congress is hoping he'll soon get on with his own show.
by Priya Sahgal

36

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

37

NEW

NEW

