Pro file ASHOKE SEN

UNIVERSE ON ARUBBER BAND
String theorist Ashoke Sen wins $3 million international physics award for expanding the understanding of what is possible

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Damayanti Datta

cientists will continue to be from Mars and the rest of us from Venus. But it's difficult to relate to what Ashoke Sen, 54, does: Be it S-duality, tachyon condensation or black hole entropy. But these are what make his scientific colleagues stand in awe. Two weeks back, US multi-billionaire Yuri Milner called him up to tell him about the first Fundamental Physics Prize (FPP). Milner, who wants to recognise physicists working on the mysteries of the universe, asked him to keep it a secret till the word was officially out. Was he surprised? Sen smiles politely. For a man who has received 13 national and

S

international awards, almost every year since 1989, it's all in a day's work. But on July 31, the news jolted the world. While the Nobel Prize is worth $1.2 million (Rs 6.6 crore), FPP is bounteous with $3 million (Rs 16.6 crore) per scholar. There are eight others. Unlike the Nobel, applicability is not the touchstone here, ideas are: Ideas that expand the understanding of "what is possible". In a list swarming with Ivy Leaguers, MIT, Princeton, Stanford or Caltech, it came as a surprise that an Indian scientist was digging into the deepest mysteries of the universe from a little-known research institute in a remote corner of rural Uttar Pradesh. Pretty as a postcard and quiet as a church, Harish-Chandra Research Ins-

titute (HRI) has been Sen's home since 1995. Located in Jhusi, 120 km from Varanasi and an hour from Allahabad, it is funded by the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, and named after Kanpur-born mathematician Harish-Chandra. Why did Sen choose such an isolated spot? "That's partly personal," he says. "I was at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Mumbai while my wife was working at the Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar. So when my former teacher at IITKanpur, H.S. Mani, became the director, he called us and we came." But that's only part of the story. For Sen, his laboratory is in his head. He does some of his best thinking in front of his Apple Mac, but is equally comfor-

table musing about science almost anywhere in this tranquil outpost. "I can work anytime I want to, sometimes for 16 hours at a stretch. There's nothing to distract you," he says, as he sits in his spartan office, dressed in a T-shirt and cargos. If his mind gets clogged, he wanders around the campus, answers his email, talks about science with his wife, goes to the market, or cooks. "The beauty of string theory is that it is all about mathematics," he says. "For that, you don't need resources or labs. Just sit in your room and do the maths." That's the elegance, some say weakness, of string theory. In most of physics, theorists have to test their hypothesis through rigorous experiments. But this cutting-edge field is

largely beyond any experimental con- physics at Scottish Church College in firmation and hence often criticised for Kolkata. "My dream was to be a `scienbeing as much philosophy as science. tist' even before I knew what a scientist Sen doesn't accept those views. "The did," he smiles. He was supplied endbeauty of science is to imagine more lessly with books on popular science than we can prove," he says. "And written for children, both in Bengali and string theory gives you a radically dif- English. "And I grew up in the Calcutta of 1970s, where every bright student ferent interpretation of the universe." What is string theory? "One of the was encouraged to study physics. All my questions that always puzzled human friends at Presidency College were tophistory is, what are we, and everything pers in the school-leaving exam and around us, made of," he points out. had great enthusiasm for physics," he Modern science has responded by says. He also inherited his mother dividing matter into its smallest parti- Gouri's love for philosophy. String thecles: Molecules, atoms, electrons, pro- ory gave him the scope to combine both. From the beginning, Sen tried to tons, neutrons, quarks and so on. According to string theory, if we could plug the loopholes in string theory. examine these particles with even "Since it's difficult to experimentally greater precision--that is currently be- prove it, I started to focus on questions yond our technological capacity--we that would verify the theories indirectly would find that matter ultimately con- by ruling out mathematical inconsistensists of tiny, vibrating loops, like infi- cies," he says. From the mid-1990s, nitely thin rubber bands. For the maths every paper he published started earnto work, string theorists consider the ing attention and admiration: Be it the universe to be made up of 10 spatial di- theory of S-duality in particles that mensions, not the three dimensions ob- brought five contesting theories under served in everyday life, seven of which one umbrella and won him awards, or his contribution to black stay out of human sight. hole disorders that "I got attracted to it brought great exciteas a researcher at Stony "THE BEAUTY OF ment in the field. Any Brook, US, in the 1980s SCIENCE IS TO Eureka moments? "I reafter reading papers by member coming up with John Schwarz and MicIMAGINE MORE the equation m1=m2 on hael Green of Caltech," THAN WE CAN S-duality in February Sen recalls. He was alPROVE. STRING 1994," he says. "I knew ways interested in unit was going to be signifderstanding the force of THEORY GIVES icant. Such things make gravity that binds us to YOU A RADICALLY me happy." earth. "It's a fundamenDIFFERENT Away from the hubtal force that's not well bub of city life, Sen and understood." But in conINTERPRETATION his wife Sumathi Rao, a ventional physics, it is OFTHE professor in solid state assumed to not occur physics at HRI, keep each among atomic particles. UNIVERSE." "I felt our understanding other motivated. Their of the world won't be fields are different but complete till we have a theory that binds it's an understanding they developed in gravity as well." He found that in years ago as students in the US. She is string theory, with new theories enrich- the first person he shows his work to ing it in the 1980s. "That gave new hope and vice versa. They travel around the that it could be one umbrella theory that world together, entertain friends and can unify every fundamental force and family during Kumbh Mela at Prayag be the final theory of nature." every few years. The rest of their uninIn a way, by choosing string theory, terrupted hours are meant for reSen has combined two of his legacies. search. Sen still has one dream left, to He inherited his love for science from see the fruits of his labour validated in his father, Anil Kumar Sen, who taught the laboratory one day. 

34

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

