AnimPACTreature

THE YOUNG LEADER'S "HUMAN TOUCH"
Akhitesh Yadav, the youngest Chief Minister of this mega state, implements a visionary action plan that would not only give the much-despised police force a human face but would also give it enough moral strength to fight lawlessness. He calls it "Care Therapy" as a part of which over 33,500 policemen were brought closer to their families overnight. People call it a historic move.
t was an event that changed it all. On March 9, 2011 the Khadiclad Akhilesh Yadav as the Chief of Samajwadi Party's youth and students' brigade watched with shock men in khaki dragging his party's young protesters in Lucknow and brutalizing and trampling them with boots in full public view. In a soliloquy he said the gruesome scene he watched seemed to have been taken straight out of movies on Hitler in which Nazi's storm-troopers played havoc with the opponents. Soon he controlled his emotion and spent the night walking barefoot alone across the palm tree-lined lush green lawn at the Vikramditya Marg Bungalow analyzing the mindset of the police and the causes behind this extreme brutality. How come the police force could be used as an instrument of terror! Is UP a Police State? He kept asking these questions to himself till the rising sun spread its divine glow over the misty lawn and the morning breeze laden with sweet aroma gently hit his face. He smiled. He had found an answer: frustration, fatigue and humiliation by the autocratic rulers had turned largest state's police into brute militia. While walking back to his bedroom for a nap he had realized that every dark night has a bright morning. Though not angry the day's event was etched on his conscience. "As humanbeings policemen too need love, care and respect" he told his friends promising "we will do it if voted to power". Soon his Kranti Rath rolled across the state creating hopes among the people of a new dawn and wherever he found a tired police man he enquired about his problems including the problems caused by being lonely while his family members lived at far off places. Like a psycho-analyst he concluded that the long term emotional distress could wreak havoc on people's lives. f CARE THERAPY": He peeped into their heart, listened to their tales of woes and decided to look after personal problems of middle and lower level policemen, the very foundation of the huge and top-heavy police system. Head Constable Prabhakar Sagar of Farukhabad personifies every constable's agony. Leaving behind his family in Farukhabad he served in Lucknow and then was shifted to Jaunpur in the east. Children's education and family's health always bothered him. None was there to listen to his woes. Hafizullah Khan, the head constable in Moradabad, Satish Mishra, a constable in Gonda, Ramprakash in Ghaziabad, Navjeet Singh in JP Nagar, Dipu Sonkar in JP Nagar, Ambuj Deshwal in Baghpat and Subhash Chandra Tyagi in Ghaziabad had identical problems that diverted their mind. Akhilesh Yadav realized how they would concentrate on their arduous duty with so many personal problems in mind. So once in power the first thing he thought was his promise to restore sanity in the lawless state which he had inherited from the previous autocratic regime. Being simple and sober with a poet's r heart and mind of a tough administrator he worked out a prescription

I

AnimPACTpeature
called "Care Therapy" to the force which fights criminals, mafia gangs and crime. Exactly a year after the March 9 2011 event he held the first cabinet meeting after being sworn-in as Chief Minister on March 15 and got approval for the model policy he himself had conceived. MAKING OF A MODULE: After getting approval from cabinet the chief ministers humanitarian concepts was given a formal shape in a meeting called by Mr Rakesh Garg IAS principal secretary to the chief minister in his office with the DGP Mr A.C. Sharma IPS and principal secretary home Mr R M Srivastava IAS and it was also attended by then IG {Administration) Mr Sandeep Salunke IPS where Mr Salunke was entrusted by his seniors to make this entire exercise transparent and to implement the wish of the chief minister in most accurate way. Mr Salunke silently used Transfer Module Software that helped over 33,500 constables spread over length and width of the state to get posted around their home districts. Aim, explains Mr Subash Chandra IPS, IG Lucknow zone, was to make their home and families within their reach. The beauty of this scientific system of transfer and posting at the grassroots level was that none has to do pairvi, run around their superiors or make rounds of DirectorGeneral of Police [DGP] office, or grease the palms of the middlemen. The idea behind this exercise was to free the force from families' worries and create a new kind of enthusiasm among the policemen. In fact decision taken at the first cabinet meeting was quickly followed up by issuing an advisory to the State Police Administration and the DGP to post Head constables and constables in the districts of their choice in the neighbourhood of their home districts. In the light of Chief Minister's directives the policemen in large number were transferred and posted close to their homes at regional and zonal level in the first phase. Yet there were many who wanted transfer in far off places and they too were given this option. TRANSPARENCY: Ways were worked out to overcome difficulties in affecting transfers in bulk. Inspector-General [Establishment] established coordination with officials belonging to Technical wings and thus everything was done in shortest possible time. Those who wanted to avail themselves of this facility to get posting outside the zone were asked to apply in the prescribed Performa. They were asked to give a choice of three districts and the same were fed into computers. This made the process hassle-free, corruption-free. Thus in the history of the state over 20,000 policemen in the first phase found themselves at places close to their homes and families. This was done by May 15. This is considered a successful experiment towards modernization of police system. Technology was fully used to ensure complete transparency. In nutshell 20,324 constables and head constables were transferred in the first phase. Under this exercise 17,133 policemen got the posting on the basis of their first choice, 14,444 policemen got the place of their second choice and 971 cops got the place of work according to their third choice while 780 others were absorbed according to their own options. In the 2nd phase the transfer of 4221 Armed Constabulary was finalized on May 22. Of them 3707 policemen got the posting on the basis of their 1" choice, 294 on the basis of 2nd choice 220 others were given positing of the basis of their 3rd choice. Likewise the 3'd round was completed on July 14. In near future too the same hassle-free system would be followed. Clearly those who used to silently jeer their bosses as well as the governments have now started openly cheering the Chief Minister who has brought cheers on their and their families faces. The youthful Chief Minister says this is just the beginning of his attempt to give human face to his administration at all levels and in all spheres. Summing up his philosophy he quotes Martin Luther King Jr "Power without love is reckless and abusive, and love without power is sentimental and anemic."

Challenges & C.M.S [CM's Solution)
 Poor police-public ratio: Despite having largest police force UP has the worst police-public ratio. According to National Crime Records Bureau [NCRB] (Crime in India 20111 UP have only 94 policemen per one lakh population [but still better than many states including Bihar which has 65 policemen per 1 lakh population. C.M.S: Appropriate manpower management, proper training and motivation will take care of gaps. It includes distribution of force keeping in view geography and sociology of each zone. Our plans to bring the policemen closer to their home and families would go a long way in correcting the situation and creating confidence among them.  Humiliation of cops: Till recent past some arrogant masters [politicians! used the force as domestic help, used them to terrorise the opponents and bully the people. C.M.S: Restore a sense of dignity in the mind of policemen, remove the fear from their heart of being punished if they ignored illegal orders and inspire them to develop partnership with the public in controlling crime in urban and rural areas.  Disgrace as political vendetta: Often politicians in the past used a few officers to demoralize the force in a bid to settle political scores with opponents. Best example of this was when the Mulayam Singh Yadav govt recruited 22000 policemen & women to overcome shortages the next government got it cancelled and used a high-ranking officer to prove alleged irregularity and leveled wild charges against women-appointees. The High Court later rubbished all the charges. C.M.S: Treat all policemen & women with respect, never inflict humiliation on cops. And use carrot & stick policy only where it's needed. Must protect dignity of those who are charged with protecting people's lives and properties. We will soon launch a programme to improve the behaviour of policemen with masses.  Fatigued force needs care: Admittedly our police force is overworked. Sometimes the call of duty is so intense and over-stretched that even the best of the force will crack. This tells upon their attitude. Living far off places from families for months and lack of proper working conditions often make even the most disciplined personnel crazy. C.M.S: Our decision to post the cops in the neighbouring districts that would bring them closer to families and friends is aimed at creating safety valves for the cops just like the army. Proper training, happy family life, involvement in sports/ games and occasional entertainment will impact their attitude and create a new enthusiasm among them.  State police force lacks modernization: Our cops who are supposed to be fighting and controlling highly organised criminal & mafia gangs as well the terrorists are still armed with obsolete and outdated system. Situation needs to be corrected. C.M.S: We have already planned to better equip the personnel with stare-ofthe-art gadgets, get them trained by army in sensitive areas as to how to deal with organised and well armed Mafia, Maoists and terrorists. The Police administration has been told that funds will not be an obstacle. Our police force

