:S

B ACK O N
JJF Si^fe. - и* ' f ии

\

r /"";. I

!^

The smile, at long last, is back on the faces of farmers in Madhya Pradesh, with granaries overflowing and prospects for a still brighter future very well within the sight And about time, one would say, as farming had been growing more and more a loss making proposition forcing its practitioners to wean away from their ancestral profession over a considerably iong period.

T

he credit for this turnaround undoubtedly goes to the committed and well-conceived efforts made by the state government in this direction that supplemented the toil of the farming community. The state government has rolled out a slew of effective measures pursuing a twin goal of reducing the cost of farming and ensuring remunerative returns to farmers. The recent onset of monsoon in the state preceded the showers of a number of bonanzas to farmers including, inter alia, zero percent farm loan by the Chief Minister Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan, himself a farmer by profession and committed to the cause of farmers and farming. As a result of the efforts the state has posted an all time high 18 percent agricultural growth rate in year 2011-12. The last seven years will be a watershed as far as agriculture development is concerned in this Heartland State of the country. The overall farm output that was 145.45 lakh MT in year 2002-03 has gone up to 254.86 lakh MT in year 2010-11. Similarly, the average farm productivity that was 831 kg during year 2002-03 has increased to 1230 kgs in year 2010-11 This increase is 47 percent. Madhya Pradesh has a number of firsts to its credit in the field of promoting agriculture and benefiting the farmers. First of the firsts is that the state government is paying bonus at the rate of per quintal to the farmer on procurement of wheat on the Minimum Support Price(MSP). The Chief Minister has announced to double the bonus on paddy ,too, from Rs. 50 to Rs. 100 per quintal. Again Madhya Pradesh is the only state to offer zero percent farm loans to farmers. Madhya Pradesh is also the first state to have introduced the system of direct depositing of amount against wheat procurement and successfully using the Information Technology in wheat procurement. Madhya Pradesh is also the first state that treats non-sprouting of seeds as a natural calamity and offers succor to the affected farmers accordingly. In yet another first, the state government has decided to levy no interest from farmers on advance lifting of fertilizers. In order to ensure retention of nutritious elements in soil the state government has implemented an Organic Farming Policy to promote it in a big way. This year Madhya Pradesh has grown a record 1.30 lakh tonne wheat. It is mainly attributable to augmented irrigation facility from canals upto tail end besides other measures like extension of farm

tl

SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN Hon'ble Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh

Ф,%, * *

>
loan at lower interest rate and providing farm inputs like fertilizers, seeds etc to the farmers on time. The irrigation area doubled from over 8 lakh hectare to over 16 lakh hectare from government sources. Including private sources 22 lakh hectare wasJrrigated this Rabi season. Around 85 lakh tonne wheat has been procured from the farmers on minimum support price on which the state government paid a bonus of Rs. 100 per quintal to the farmers. Madhya Pradesh is the only state in the country to do so. Eight years ago the farmers had to cough up 17-18 percent interest on short term cooperative farm loans. The present government gradually reduced it to one percent Better marketing facilities and forward and backward linkages have been put in place to ensure them remunerative returns of their produces. Efforts to reduce the cost of cultivation have also yielded encouraging results. For better coordination between agriculture and allied sectors a Krishi Cabinet has been constituted and its decisions are not subject to approval of the state cabinet. Along with the payment against wheat procurement all the subsidies are now directly deposited in the bank accounts of the farmers. A number of facilities have been provided to the farmers enabling them to produce more. They have been allowed to directly purchase farm implements on subsidy. Balram Pond scheme has been implemented to preserve surface and ground water and to ensure its efficient use. Subsidy is provided for construction of these ponds. The 8500-odd Balram ponds have played a major role in pushing up farm output in the state. Soil health cards have been issued to over 8 lakh farmers to help them maintain good health of soil. Madhya Pradesh is the first state to have constituted Seed Producers Cooperative Societies to increase availability of seeds. So far, 1200 societies have already been formed. Laboratories have been established in every division to ensure quality seeds and fertilizers. Seed Grid has been set up for seeds production and better distribution of the same. A logistic hub is being established at Pawarkhera in Hoshangabad district to facilitate easier availability of logistics required for agriculture. The state government has totally banned the auction of farmers' lands who had obtained loans from cooperative banks, especially from Agriculture and Rural Development Banks. A sum of Rs. 1800 was provided to compensate the loss caused to Electricity Board following waiver of three years' electricity bills of agricultural consumers. Rs. 6,500 crore subsidy was provided to M.R State Electricity Board/ Power Distribution Company between 2004 and 2011 to cushion the farmers against the increase in power tariff. Free electricity is being supplied since year 2004 to the farmers of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes owning upto one hectare of land for power pumps of upto 5 horse power capacity. Agricultural power consumers having no electric meters have been provided the facility of paying the electricity bills twice in a year. A scheme has been launched to facilitate farmers to have their own transformers from May 2011. Under the scheme the farmers can install their own transformers as per the norms prescribed by Power Distribution Companies. и HORTICULTURE Eight new schemes have been introduced to promote horticulture and increase the area under it. The farmers have been allowed to sell their fruit and vegetable crops outside mandi premises to get remunerative price thereof. For better storage of crops 101 pack houses, 13 cold storages, 12 grinding and waxing units, one wholesale market, 115 rural weekly.markets and one ripening chamber have been set up. Top-up subsidy has been increased from 50 percent to 70-80 percent to increase micro irrigation. Cluster based hub has been set up for encouraging horticulture crops. Law pertaining to sale-purchase of early perishable horticulture crops has been suitably amended in ttie interest of farmers. Facilities like chilling plants, food

LARGEST PROCUREMENT EXERCISE The process of procuring wheat oil support price from farmers carried out in the state from March 15 to May 31 this year. Record 85.06 lakh metric tonnes of wheat was purchased from farmers during the period. This is 88.95 lakh metric tonnes by adding last year's surplus. Farmers were invited through SMS to procurement centres for selling wheat. The State Government had made advance arrangements for gunny bags at all the procurement centres. Besides gunny bags, arrangement of silo bags was also made. Payments against wheat procurement were made within a week by depositing amounts directly in their bank accounts. Entire process concluded without any break, which goes to prove success of wheat procurement policy of the state. Storage of procured wheat has also been made before monsoon. The successful pattern adopted for wheat procurement in
Madhya Pradesh has drawn encomiums at the national level. testing, roads and common facilities have been provided to augment jobs through processing units. Financial assistance is also provided for this. The state government has come out with a Horticulture Hub Policy for giving a fillip to horticulture in the state. Objectives of the policy include making horticulture profitable, increasing production and encouraging post-harvesting management including storage, grading, packing, quality improvement and marketing arrangement. Food processing has been encouraged for value addition of agricultural crops. Various types of structures are being constructed for safety of crops in bad weather conditions. Cultivation of flowers and vegetables is being carried out in these structures. This leads to quality improvement of the crops and better returns to farmers. For construction of upto 50 tonne capacity warehouses for onion 50 percent of cost subject to maximum Rs. 1.60 lakh is being provided. Area under cultivation has been increased. For this, under Vegetable Area Expansion Scheme 50 percent of cost of input for improved/crossbreed vegetables subject to Rs. 12,500 per hectare is provided. и WELFARE OF FARMERS Besides concrete efforts to turn agriculture into a lucrative proposition the Chief Minister has paid equal attention to betterment and welfare of farmers. In order to provide adequate relief to farmers in the event of crop failure, damage to crops due to natural calamities, accident and to meet other emergency expenditures a number of effective steps have been taken. The provisions of Revenue Book of Circulars (RBC) have been suitable amended considerably increasing the amount of relief provided under different heads. The compensation for loss of crops has been tripled. Orders have also been issued to pay compensations to farmers whose crops are damaged by wild animals. Loss to Pan Barejas and vegetable crops has also been covered under natural calamity. The Chief Minister has announced that henceforth in case of the death of a farmer while working on the field ex-gratia of Rs. One lakh would be paid to his next of kin. The state government would meet the expenditure incurred on medical treatment of small and marginal farmers in case of serious ailment. The subsidy for tube well would be increased from Rs. 24,000 to Rs. 40,000. From next year power supply would be made for eight hours a day for farm operations. He has also announced the establishment of a Vocational University for imparting vocational education to the youths in the state. One would, thus, conclude that while it would be naive to see through rose coloured glasses, but at the same time one can look forward to a more prosperous Madhya Pradesh by joint efforts of the farmers and the state government.

