SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story
SURELY THE BEST PLACE IN TOWN, HAUZ KHAS VILLAGE IS A REPOSITORY OF KITSCH AND QUIRKY ITEMS. SIMPLY DELHI TAKES YOU AROUND THE BEST PLACES IN THE AREA

Kitsch Store

PURPLE JUNGLE
Like many foreigners, French designers Iris and Emeline were also fascinated by the vibrancy of India symbolised by the chaiwalla, barber, auto rickshaws, fruit juice corners, cows, and messages on trucks. Purple Jungle brings out the colour of everyday life in their range of kitschy accessories like bags, posters, coasters, cushions and sofas. Their products already retail out of stores in Bengaluru, Mumbai, Chennai and Surat. The products here are displayed in an unusual manner. While the bags hang from white plastic taps, pouches are stored in steel utensils and stuffed toys in plastic tubs. The shape of the bags may be conventional and the material ordinary, but the funky designs do the trick here. WHERE Shop No 16, Hauz Khas Village COST Rs 200 to Rs 600 (Pouch); Rs 600 to Rs 2,000 (bags); Rs 1,000 onward (cushions TEL 26538182; purple-jungle.com
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

LOLA'S WORLD
This mom and childrens' store houses international brands for kids-from clothes, toys to furniture. The brands include Bensimon for shoes, Moulin Roty for soft toy characters like Louna the bee, Petit Jour for kitchen accessories, Madam Mo notebooks, postcard and colouring books. Mother-daughter French designers Chloe le Bonnois and Danielle brought their French brand Nana Ki to India in 2006 which is also available at the store. The best part about their clothes is that they use Indian fabrics and motifs in kids' clothes. Some of the most picked items from their store include colourful school bags and soft toys. WHERE Shop 30, Hauz Khas Village COST Rs 600 to Rs 6,000 for kids furniture, toys and clothes TEL 64514201; lolasworld.net

s-14

SIMPLY DELHI N AUGUST 2012

SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story

VIKRAMSHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

MAATI
Hand-painted is the buzzword here. Owners Aniruddha and Swati Saha go to villages near Kolkata and in Uttranchal to buy works of local artisans. All their products highlight traditional art forms like dokra earrings from Jharkhand, jute earrings from Assam and water hyacinth jewellery from Nagaland. T-shirts and kurtis are painted with motifs like Nataraja and Shiva. The items considered best buys include their hand-painted peacock clutches, saris and blockprint dupattas. WHERE 26 Hauz Khas Village COST Rs 650 to Rs 1,600 for T-shirts and kurtis, Rs 1,400 to Rs 1,600 for bags, Rs 150 to Rs 500 for cushion covers TEL 9910085433; info@maati.co.in
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

NAAPA DORI TWISTED
Rohit Kant, a graduate from National Institue of Fashion Technology ditched the ramp to start something of his own. He started with painting a few helmets which were loved by his designer friends. Within a few months Kant had painted all sorts of bric-a-brac that he saw around-from keychains, cigarette cases, card holders, wallets, ties and bags to pocket watches. At his store, which opened last year in January, there are helmets and ties with Che Guevara paintings, and wallets with paintings of Indian legends like Bhagat Singh and Subhas Chandra Bose. You can even get your BlackBerry painted the way you like. WHERE T 49, Hauz Khas Village COST Rs 500 to Rs 800 (wallets and card holders) TEL 9560709313; facebook.com/rohitkant Giving up his career in fashion to let leather and thread (nappa and dori) play muse to his skills, Gautam Sinha set up Nappa Dori in HKV. In his store, he combines Indian rural scenes or images of the British Raj, Moghul architecture or portraits of holy men with leather, canvas and fine craftsmanship. Look for their laptop bags with digital prints of Delhi's monuments or life in Kolkata, satchels made of harness leather, same as what you'd find on a horse saddle, and iPad covers made of cow hide. Accessories like pencil rolls, storage boxes and colorful macaroon measuring tapes are cool buys here. WHERE Shop No 4, Hauz Khas Village COST Premium collection ranges between Rs 3,000 to Rs 15,000 TEL 9810400778; nappadori.com

s-16

SIMPLY DELHI N AUGUST 2012

