Na tion

POLITICS

RAMDEV (CENTRE) WITH GADKARI (LEFT) AND SHARAD YADAV AT RAMLILA GROUNDS ON AUGUST 13

RAMDEVBECOMES MAGNET
By Devesh Kumar

Non-Congress leaders make common cause with the yoga guru,aim for his support base
Delhi unit chief Manjit Singh to share the platform with the other NDA bigwigs. Nama Nageshwara Rao, Telugu Desam Party's leader in the Lok Sabha, came to the venue around the same time. Hours later, Bahujan Samaj Party leader and former Uttar Pradesh minister Bhagwati Prasad showed up. On August 12, Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik had despatched Rajya Sabha MP Rabi Narayan Mohapatra to the Ramlila grounds. The yoga preacher also claims the support of Shiv Sena, Nationalist Congress Party and Samajwadi Party (SP). "Our party is against black money. We'll support whoever talks about bringing back black money," SP chief Mulayam Singh Yadav declared outside the Parliament soon after Lok Sabha had been adjourned over the issue on August 13. Was BJP wise in lending its muscle to Ramdev? The party thinks so. "Much before Ramdev began his campaign against black money, L.K. Advani had converted it into one of the central themes of NDA's electoral plank in the run-up to the 2009 Lok Sabha polls," says a senior leader. The move to support him may not win the party immediate votes, but it would help in the long run by lending impetus to the antiCongress mood swirling across India for its inability to control corruption. "It will add to the atmospherics," the BJP leader says. "As an issue, corruption and black money are ideologically neutral. It will help BJP in reaching out to other opposition parties," he adds. Sharad Yadav also says that NDA was already at the forefront of the campaign against corruption and

aba Ramdev at his weakest can be an NDA asset. That was the message NDA sent out as it despatched BJP President Nitin Gadkari and his Janata DalUnited (JD-U) counterpart Sharad Yadav to share the platform with him at the Ramlila grounds on August 13. The campaign launched by Ramdev, who began a symbolic fast against black money and rampant corruption on August 9, floundered, with the UPA Government remaining unmoved and the crowds dwindling. It was only after the NDA leaders appeared at the venue that crowds resurfaced. BJP wants Ramdev's votes without his intervention in their affairs. A weakened yoga guru, a senior BJP leader said, would not be in a position to dictate terms to them. Other NDA allies are equally keen to tap into Ramdev's support. The Akali Dal extended its backing by sending its

B

A WEAKENED YOGA GURU, A SENIOR BJP LEADER SAID, WOULD NOT BE IN A POSITION TO DICTATE TERMS TO THEM.
NEW

AUGUST 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

AFP PHOTO

Na tion
black money. "There is no question of allowing others to appropriate the cause," he told INDIA TODAY. "Ramdev had been calling us to share the dais with him. Gadkari discussed the issue with me, and we agreed," he added. More than the JD(U) president, it was Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar who was enthusiastic about extending support to the yoga guru. "Ramdev enjoys a tremendous following in the Hindi heartland. He also happens to be a Yadav," explains a party MP. The Congress, expectedly, insists the Opposition-bolstered stir would not make any difference at the hustings. "One thing the people of this country do not lack is robust common sense," observed party spokesman Manish Tewari, "They can see through the charade and chicanery very easily." He was confident that the

ASSAM

TARUN GOGOI

BADRUDDIN AJMAL

MINORITYRAP
Chief Minister sides with the Bodos, sees the recent violence as a conspiracy of Muslim leaders to topple him
ssam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi sees the violent clash between Bodos and alleged Bangladeshi immigrants as a conspiracy by Muslim leaders to dethrone him. On August 11, he mocked perfume baron and All India United Democratic Front chief, Badruddin Ajmal. "Badru bhai has been praying to Allah for the last eight years to unseat me as the Chief Minister. But Allah failed him. I hope this time Allah succeeds in toppling me. I will be at peace," said Gogoi in Guwahati and laughed at his own joke. He was reacting to Ajmal's demand for Gogoi's resignation over his failure to control violence in the Bodoland Territorial Autonomous District (BTAD) areas that erupted on July 20 and has claimed 78 lives. Dismissing Congress General Secretary and observer for Assam Digvijaya Singh's assertion that there was no dissidence in the Assam Congress, he even said that a Cabinet colleague of his had joined hands with Ajmal in this effort. Gogoi also contradicts the Congress on the involvement of illegal immigrants in the BTAD violence. On July 10, Singh said in Guwahati that the recent clash had nothing to do with illegal immigrants. A day later, Gogoi said that over 39,000 persons identified and confirmed as infiltrators by tribunals in

A

"Our party is against black money. We will support whoever talks about bringing back black money."
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV, Samajwadi Party chief

Congress would be able to thwart the challenge posed by the Ramdev-BJP duo. "Political battles are best fought frontally and proxy fights are not worth fighting,'' Tewari added. Not everyone thinks so. "The decision by a number of political parties to rally behind the yoga guru is going to be a win-win situation for both," says Anand Kumar, professor of sociology at Jawaharlal Nehru University. "It will isolate the Congress further in the next 14 to 18 months. In fact, the twin campaigns (of Ramdev and Anna Hazare) have made an outstanding contribution by politicising the social dissatisfaction about growing corruption and forcing anti-social elements to move to the background in political affairs,'' Kumar added. 

Assam were absconding. This admission goes against the traditional stand of the Congress, which has long considered the immigrant population as its most secure vote bank. The Chief Minister has already made it clear which side he is on, during the clashes between the Bodos and the alleged immigrants. On July 28, when he accompanied Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to Kokrajhar relief camps, the Chief Minister was seen with a Bodo scarf around his neck. In the last 11 years, Gogoi has rarely worn any scarf, not even the traditional Assamese gamchha. The Chief Minister even endorsed the claim of the Bodo Territorial Council (BTC) leadership, which runs BTAD, that there could be people from outside the affected areas in the relief camps. "We have told the BTC leadership that there is no space for any illegal immigrants in BTAD areas. Only bonafide land owners will live in BTAD. We have records with us and we will go by those alone," Gogoi said. This admission was one of the many U-turns Gogoi has made since violence broke out in the BTAD areas. On July 28, the Chief Minister said: "This is actually a conflict of interest over land. There are no Bangladeshis in this, just Indian citizens."
by Kaushik Deka

44

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012

YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

