NET FLUX
web chatter

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video
People don't follow sms etiquette

White and Tight

So vaginas are back in the news thanks to 18 Again, a gel that "rejuvenates and tightens your vagina" . In the advertisement that has gone viral with over 22 lakh views on YouTube, a sari-clad woman sings to her husband `Oh, I feel like a virgin'after which they proceed to dancing around the house about how it "feels like the very first time" . Ultratech has launched the product saying it will redefine women empowerment. More like make women feel more insecure about their A STILL FROM THE VIDEO intimate parts.

3.5 million views
Girl talks about her cancer diagnosis

430,000 views
Human jukebox
A SHOT FROM SMS-ETIQUETTE VIDEO

707,000 views

This week, an animated video complaining about how people don't follow proper etiquette while sending SMSs--replying immediately or using `K'as a response, a musical group performing songs based on the number of coins they receive from New Yorkers, and a 12-year-old girl explaining her recent cancer diagnosis, have gone viral. *Views from when videos were uploaded This week's app round-up is for newlyweds, amateur singers and fitness fanatics. Make your smartphone smarter with these apps. WedPics collects all the pictures your friends took on your special day and puts it together in one big album. Cardiio turns your phone's front camera into a biosensor that measures your heart rate.

tweet tweet
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on August 14: Yoga guru Baba Ramdev ruled social networks when he courted arrest and called for political change. BJP leader Subramanian Swamy dubbed the protest "a fight between Om and Rome" , causing the topic to trend. The end of the London Olympics now has sports fans looking forward to the Paralympics, that features sportspersons with physical disabilities. Netizens congratulated wrestler Sushil Kumar for winning a silver medal. People explained their understanding of freedom ahead of Independence Day.

app alert

Ruling the Roster

Top of the Lot
Sing brings karaoke to your mobile phone and lets people from all over the world join you.

smart sheet
Boxer M.C.Mary Kom captured India's imagination when she won bronze at the London Olympics.An article depicting MARY KOM how truly inspirational the five-time world champion is exploded on social networks.Written by journalist Rahul Bhattacharya for Intelligent Life, the arts and culture magazine of The Economist, the piece `India's Shot at Gold'spoke of how the daughter of landless agricultural labourers finally made it.

star of the week

Story of a Champion

Simple Star

SARGUNARAJ

#Ramdev
4,710,015

#Paralympics
1,572,530

#Sushilkumar
1,071,648

weirdonet
Researchers at MIT, Harvard University and Seoul National University have developed a robotic earthworm. If you thought Facebook couldn't get more intrusive, there's now an option to inform friends of pregnancies with details like gender, due date and ultrasound photo.

#Freedomis
531,350

#Omvsrome
332,826

*Figures denote number of followers

YouTube celebrity and parody master Wilbur Sargunaraj has enthralled millions of viewers with his songs on arranged marriages and Chicken 65.And now, he has a new role--a film star.The Coimbatore native, who has over 25,000 Facebook fans and three million followers on YouTube, will be releasing his film Simple Super Star next year.With the attitude of Rajinikanth minus the style (he mostly wears a white shirt, black trousers and sunglasses), Sargunaraj, 37, is putting together the film with the money contributed by his fans. Scripted, directed and with music by him, the movie is semiautobiographical and has been shot in India, Canada, Dubai, Britain and Europe.

66

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012

