HEALTH

by DAMAYANTI DATTA

WHAT'S IN YOUR HANDBAG?
Wallet, makeup, mobile, keys. What else does your handbag carry? Thousands of germs, say scientists. In fact, your handbag could be making you sick. Here's how.

YOUR DIRTY LITTLE SECRET
As your handbag goes everywhere with you, and is often placed on the floor or on counters, it easily picks up germs. Microbiologists at the University of Wisconsin, US, have tested samples from hundreds of purses and handbags. And they have found some level of bacteria on each item-- from pseudomona, staphylococcus aureus, E. coli, to salmonella. The scientists found that these bacteria can cause infection on skin and soft tissues, eyes, ears, bones, lungs and stomach. Rarely fatal, but the diseases they cause can create discomfort, along with fever, nausea, cough and diarrhoea.

Tissue Issue
How many times have you wiped your child's nose with a tissue while on the go, and then stuffed it in your bag? The viruses that cause colds don't die easily and can survive on tissues for a long time. Make sure you throw them away as soon as possible. Wash your hands or just use hand sanitiser.

Check Your Makeup
If your handbag is stuffed with makeup, spring-clean it. Just as you would throw away old food, makeup should also be replaced. They can harbour bacteria beyond the expiry date. This is especially true for mascara. Wash makeup brushes regularly and avoid sharing with friends.

GENTLEMEN PREFER WALLETS
Men tend to carry their wallet in the back pocket of their trousers. Convenient, but it can create a pocket in the muscle lying underneath the wallet, leading to pain and discomfort. Some tips:


Top Five Things Found in Women's Handbags

Remove your wallet or other items if you have to sit somewhere for long, or if you are driving. Go for a briefcase or bag with a wide adjustable strap, long enough to loop over your head. This distributes the weight across your body evenly. Switch sides every now and then if you are carrying a heavy bag or briefcase. Empty out unnecessary items. Place wallets and cellphones in the front pockets of your bag. Stretching around to reach for your wallet can result in neck or back pulls.





WHAT WOMEN KEEP
Women tend to carry many items in handbags. Carrying a bag that weighs more than 10 per cent of one's body weight can create problems. A heavy handbag can interfere with one's movements, especially when hiked over one shoulder. What's worse is that the spine curves towards the shoulder.


62

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012

