(LEFT) RALLY BY A RADICAL MUSLIM STUDENT FRONT AND (BELOW) EZHAVA RALLY IN KERALA

The Big Story

KERALA
C SHANKAR

KERALAIN ALEAGUE OFITS OWN
The growing clout of the Muslim League in the UDF leads to mobilisation of Hindu and Christian groups
By M.G. Radhakrishnan

P

anakkad is an obscure village deep in the bowels of Malappuram, Kerala's only Muslim-majority district. In September, the state government will showcase 22 proposed projects here, totalling an investment of Rs 2,000 crore, at a global investors' meet in Kochi. With reason. Panakkad is the home turf of the Kodappanakkal family of Sayyid Shihab Thangals, the most prominent spiritual leaders of Kerala's Muslims since the 1980s. Traditionally, the eldest Thangal becomes president of the Muslim League, which has propped up the United Democratic Front (UDF) since it came to power in May 2011 in the state with a slender six-seat majority. The League is UDF'S second largest constituent with 20 seats, and exercises almost total control over Kerala's Muslims, the state's second largest community with 25 per cent of the population. Empowered by the com-

munity's economic and demographic growth, the League has grown steadily in strength. Muslims are the largest beneficiaries of foreign remittances, that totalled Rs 50,000 crore in 2011 according to a study by Thiruvananthapuram-based Centre for Development Studies, sent by its two-millionstrong diaspora in the Gulf. Not just that. According to the 2001 Census, while Hindu and Christian populations showed a decline, by 1.48 per cent and 0.32 per cent respectively, the Muslim population went up by 1.70 per cent. Consequently, the League has wrested several privileges from the present government: Five Cabinet berths, free land in the Calicut University campus, special privileges for Muslim management schools, and Muslims recruited to raise awareness about littleknown minority scholarships in the community. Chief Minister Oommen Chandy has faced much flak from all around--including his own party--for succumbing to the League's pressures. In May, Aryadan Muhammed, the

JOHNY THOMAS

Power Minister, was heard warning Chandy: "If you give them a fifth Cabinet berth, you'll be the last Congress chief minister." Congress is also worried about an open war against these moves by the Opposition, as well as smaller Hindu fronts. The Nair Service Society (NSS), which represents Kerala's 14 per cent upper caste Nairs, and Sree Narayana Dharma Paripalana Yogam (SNDP), which represents the state's largest Hindu block of 24 per cent of Other Backward Caste (OBC) Ezahavas, have decided to jointly fight this `appeasement'. This has strengthened the League's clout within Muslims. Even groups like Popular Front of India (PFI) and Jamaat-e-Islami, which the League calls "extremists", have pledged support. Says PFI'S General Secretary P. Abdul Hameed: "The League is being attacked for its legitimate efforts to give the community its rightful place." None of this emerging power is evident in the soft-spoken demeanour of the Thangals. Sayyid Hyderali Shihab Thangal, 65, took over as the League's president in 2009 after the death of his legendary brother Sayyid Muhammad Ali Shihab Thangal, who led the party for three decades. Unlike his elder brother, a graduate of Egypt's Al Azhar University and a Sufi-poetry enthusiast, Hyderali is home-grown. Go to Panakkad and his power is palpable. He is just back from a trip to Dubai. A long queue of Muslim men and purdah-clad women wait patiently to seek his advice on problems ranging from family disputes to ailments. As he sits on a leather chair behind a large desk, petitioners take turns to whisper in his ear. He speaks in an undertone, beckoning the next in queue, and breaks the monotony with short invocations. Hyderali does not comment on politics or religion. He speaks rarely and only after much persuasion. "We never play pressure politics. We'll not grab anyone else's rights. But we'll not let others take what is due to the community. We also won't hurt communal peace," he says. He shrugs off murmurs within Congress against the

40

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012

AUGUST 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

The Big Story KERALA
JOHNY THOMAS

CHURCH FUNCTION IN KOCHI, 2010

League's "pressure tactics". "We have excellent relations with them. Some Congress friends are misled," he says with a smile. He rejects the fear of rising communalism as an exaggeration, saying the League continues to oppose extremist groups. "We campaign regularly within Muslims to isolate these fringe groups," he points out. But Hindu groups are livid. Both NSS and SNDP blame Chandy for favours granted to the League, ignoring even Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee's (KPCC) objections. "The fifth berth was Chandy's personal surrender. It was opposed even by KPCC," says G. Sukumaran Nair, NSS general secretary. The 98-year-old NSS runs schools, colleges, hospitals and plantations with an annual budget of Rs 93 crore.

We never play pressure politics, and won't grab anyone else's rights.
HYDERALI THANGAL
Muslim League President

If there's a surge in Hindu communalism in Kerala, UDF is to be blamed.
V. NATESAN
General Secretary, SNDP

The fifth berth was Chandy's personal surrender. It was opposed even by KPCC.
G. SUKUMARAN NAIR
General Secretary, NSS

says the League's attempt to show its clout springs from their weakness: "New organisations, with more radical slogans, are weaning young men from them and eroding their claim as the sole representative of Muslims." But why is there a new consolidation on caste and religious lines? Many blame it on `appeasement' by political parties. "Not only Congress, even the Left now chooses candidates by caste and religion," says Chennamangaloor. Historian K.N. Panikkar blames the Left for its failure to extend its campaign against religious

fundamentalism and caste consolidation. He also cites the growth of a "parasitic" middleclass, that shows all signs of modernity but has a feudal mindset. He is optimistic, though, that it won't last. "The recent consolidation will soon collapse, as in the past, owing to contradictions within the communities. The moderate League and the militant PFI will not be together, and Nairs and Ezhavas will fall out over reservations." Till such time, suspicion and hostility will reign in a state known for its communal harmony. 

42

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012







ellappalli Natesan, the general secretary of SNDP, is equally incensed. "Kerala will soon be swallowed by minorities," he says grimly. He says the rapid rise in BJP'S vote share in the Neyyattinkara seat, from 4 per cent in the 2011 Assembly polls to nearly 30 per cent in the by-election in March, indicates a growing Hindu rage against the government. "We won't ally with BJP, but if Kerala witnesses a surge in Hindu communalism, the government is to be blamed," he says. Many groups within Kerala's prosperous Christian community are also peeved at what they say is a Muslim monopoly of privileges meant for both minorities. "One community is grabbing everything," says V.C. Sebastian, secretary, Laity Association of the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church. Christian and Hindu groups also decry the so-called "Love Jihad"--conversions of Christian and Hindu women to Islam to marry Muslim lovers. There are critics of the League within Muslims. "Thangals as spiritual leaders are on the decline, with the emergence of a new middleclass as a result of the Gulf migration. This has made the League's position shaky. Hence the muscle-flexing," says writer and activist M.N. Karassery. Social critic Hameed Chennamangaloor

V

