HEALTH by DAMAYANTI DATTA

WOMAN ON TOP
Women's IQ scores have risen above men's for the first time, since IQ testing began a century ago. They have moved ahead by over five points this year. The finding has been made by James Flynn, the IQ testing guru from New Zealand. One possible explanation is that women's lives have become far more demanding as they multitask more now. Another is that women have a slightly higher potential intelligence than men and are realising it now. "What we are seeing here is the impact of modernity," says Flynn. "The brains of modern people are growing differently and showing increased cognitive complexity. This improvement is more marked in women than men because they were more disadvantaged in the past."

ART OFAPOLOGY
If you need to apologise to someone special, do it the right way. Here are some tips from the world of science:

1 Actions and words need to come together to make the wronged person feel that the damage has been fully repaired. 2 Saying "sorry" without making amends elicits a lukewarm response. 3 A grand gesture without a heartfelt apology may make the injured party behave more warmly, but they will still be seething inside. 4 Apologies go down better through the right ear. Scientists have found that when we are angry, the right ear becomes more receptive to sound than the left.

SHALLWE DANCE?
This is evolution at work: Men shown videos of women dancing were most attracted to their moves when the women were closer to ovulation. It's likely to be the result of physiological changes linked mainly to an increase in oestrogen levels, which impacts muscular control, ligaments, tendons, and hence body movement. Scientists are speculating if the changes in women's movement have evolved specifically to signal fertility to potential mates.

THE MAGIC TOUCH
Everybody knows that the face heats up when emotionally roused.The standard reasons are stress, fear and anger. But for women, it seems, there's a fourth reason--a man's touch.Women literally get hot and bothered, with temperature shooting up by as much as 1 degree Celsius, according to researchers at University of St.Andrews, UK. Most women are unaware of their skin temperature reaction.The researchers can't say if the changes are perceptible to men.

Do Men and Women See Colour Differently?
Yes, say vision researchers. Most women have a special pigment in their eyes that allow them to perceive more colour bands. According to Webdesignerdepot.com, men and women show very different colour preferences on the Internet.
Men
57% 2% 7% 5% 3% 14% 1% 2% 9% 35% 6% 3% 1% 9% 23% 5% 1% 14% 3%

Women

Journal reference: Journal of Positive Psychology, Hormones and Behaviour; Biology Letters; Personality and Individual Differences, 2012

AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

