DESIGNERS GUN FOR GOLD
With couture labels stitching sportswear, here's a look at why the 2012 Games are a fashion delight
By Hitani Kaur

I

n 1948, London staged the XIVth Olympics, also known as the Austerity Olympics because of postWorld War II rationing. The sporting headlines were dominated by Dutch sprinter Fanny Blankers-Koen, who won four golds in athletics. On the sidelines, though, history of a different kind was being written. The magical meeting between Rosita Jelmini and Ottavio Missoni was then viewed as just another Games romance--she was a shy 16-year-old daughter of an Italian shawl maker; he was a handsome 27-year-old Italian hurdler. They had discovered that in addition to their mutual love of sport, fashion featured high on their lust list. As fashion and love collided, they came

together to form brand Missoni. Several decades later, the love affair between fashion and sport has morphed into a full-blown relationship, complete with whims, tantrums and doublespeak. So if you thought the Olympics was a sporting spectacle that purely played itself out on the track and field, think again. The 2012 London Games showcases fashion like never before. No longer are athletes satisfied with designing their own outfits, as Florence Griffith-Joyner once did to a stunned reception. Today, brands are a must on the tracks. After all, nothing screams patriotism louder than a designer label. Wear your support, and get ready to witness what Giorgio Armani describes as "the most fashionable Games ever".

GETTY IMAGES

STELLA FOR TEAM GB
Designer Stella McCartney has been one busy woman. How do you give a creative twist to an outfit that screams utility and comfort? Lycra is not the most fetching material to work with, but the designer has managed to give Team GB a fashion headstart at the Games. The Union Jack, redrawn in two shades of blue, which is the centrepiece of the British team's official kit, has been disapproved by many fans for McCartney having largely jettisoned the trademark flag-red from her design. She has also created an Olympic Villagewear collection for participants to wear off the field, and for fans to buy. The red of the Union Jack has been used as trimming on many of the 590 individual articles created for Team GB by Adidas. River Island has also joined forces with Adidas to create a Team GB sportswear collection for both men and women, which is decked in red, white and blue, save for some cropped vests with metallic prints; hoodies with Union Jack motifs; and dresses with lion detailing.

CEDELLA MARLEY WITH USAIN BOLT

JAMAICAN RUSH
Usain Bolt, the world's fastest man, will be sporting an outfit designed by Cedella Marley. Yes, the name rings a bell. The daughter of reggae god Bob, Cedella is behind the Jamaican team's outfits. Complimenting the designerwear will be Puma shoes. The designs reflect the colours of the Caribbean, moving from yellow to green shades.

Designed by Cedella,the `military' jackets for the Jamaican team are embroidered with a Bob Marley patch,accompanied by song lyrics on the back.Go Jamaica!
AFP

The Union Jack and its colours are predominant references in the designerwear for Team GB,with prices starting at £16 (Rs 1,400).

50

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 6, 2012

RALPH ALL THE WAY
The US team has fashion icon Ralph Lauren as their outfitter. The Ralph Lauren 2012 Olympic Collection features reissued heritage pieces from the 1930s and 1940s, including fleece warm-ups, a cricket-collar shirt and sweatshirts with USA appliqués featuring an updated 1948 crest. The colour palette matches the country's flag--red, white and blue. In addition, newsboy caps are making quite a statement this Olympic season.

PERFECT TEN
By Anushree Basu-Bhalla

AFP

Watch out for this league of extraordinary men and women as the greatest games on earth kicks off in London

Trust the US to take patriotic fervour to extremes.Angered at uniforms being made in China,Senator Bernie Sanders said: "When millions are unemployed in the US, why aren't our Olympic uniforms being made here?"

USAIN BOLT, JAMAICA
Age 25; Track and field (Men's 100m, 200m and 4x100m relay)
`Thunder' Bolt clocked 9.58 secs in the 100m and 19.19 secs in the 200m at the 2009 World Championship in Berlin, records to this day. He, however, battles a hamstring injury and competition from fellow Jamaican Yohan Blake in London.

AZERI FASHION BIAS
The Republic of Azerbaijan has certainly marked a spot for itself on the global fashion map. Having roped in European luxury brand Ermanno Scervino as their official Olympics outfitter, the country's competitors are all set to make a statement on D-Day. Scervino has designed both formal and casual apparel for the athletes, to be worn by them both on and off the field. Flaunting the colours of the Azeri flag, the kit blends the blue, red and green shades with the crescent moon and eight-point star, symbols of the republic's flag, and adds to them a touch of designer signature vibe.

Cricket's loss is athletics'gain.Bolt started out as a fast bowler before changing track.
AP

YELENA ISINBAYEVA, RUSSIA
Age 30; Pole vault
The queen of pole-vaulting is eyeing her third consecutive gold at the London Games. The Russian has already set 27 world records but aims to surpass mentor Sergey Bubka's mark of 35. Her world record of 5.06m is the equivalent of clearing a London double-decker bus with more than two feet to spare.

AP

THE ITALIAN JOB
Italian athletes are being clothed, naturally, by Giorgio Armani. Designed by his EA7 Emporio Armani sportswear label, the collection features 50 pieces of clothing and add-ons. The palette is white and midnight blue, the country's competitive colours. To add a swatch of patriotic fervour, inside each garment are words from the Italian national anthem.

NOVAK DJOKOVIC, SERBIA
Age 25; Tennis
In 2011, he swept almost everything from Wimbledon to the US and Australian Opens as well as five ATP Masters titles. The `Djoker' has slipped a little this year but come London and expect him to be at his best.

Every Italian athlete will be issued a set of Armani luggage, with an asymmetrically-zipped tracksuit to wear on the podium,warm-up kit,shorts,trousers,shirts,shoes and tees.

Djokovic is a polyglot; he speaks English, German and Italian besides his native Serbian.

She is a captain in the Russian army.

MICHAEL PHELPS, USA
Age 27; Swimming (Men's 100m & 200m butterfly, 200m & 400m individual medley, 4x100m medley relay, 4x100 freestyle relay, 4x200 freestyle relay)
He may have an anatomical advantage in swimming with his long torso and arm span of 6'7" but winning 16 Olympics medals is no mean feat. Michael Phelps is set to awe spectators in London.

The uniform has a strong-shouldered,notch-lapel navy blue jacket of heavy stretch cotton, with white chino trousers for men and white pencil skirts for women.

Phelps was diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder when he was nine years and took to swimming as therapy.
AP

GETTY IMAGES

52

AP

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 6, 2012

AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

53

SAORI YOSHIDA, JAPAN

PERFECT TEN
LIN DAN, CHINA
Age 29; Badminton
The southpaw will defend the gold medal he won at the 2008 Beijing Games, which came after a shock first-round defeat at the previous Olympics in Athens. `Super Dan' is a fiery spectacle on court.

Age 29; Wrestling (freestyle)
Yoshida has only lost once since 2001 and remains unbeaten at the Olympics, World and Asian Championships. The double Olympic gold medallist secured her ninth consecutive world title in 2011.

He marks every victory with a military-style salute to all four sides of the arena.

She is Japan's flag-bearer at the opening ceremony in London.
REUTERS

MATTHEW MITCHAM, AUSTRALIA
AFP

Age 24; Diving (10 m platform)
Mitcham became the only non-Chinese diver to win gold in the 2008 Beijing Olympics as well as Australia's first male Olympic gold medallist in diving since Dick Eve in 1924. The Chinese will breathe down his neck again. But that's par for the course.

JORDYN WIEBER, USA
Age 17; Artistic gymnastics
The reigning US all-around champion has her sights fixed on gold in London. A win would make her the third consecutive American gymnast to win the Olympic allaround title after Carly Patterson in 2004 and Nastia Liukin in 2008.

Wieber adores musician Justin Bieber and has been quoted as saying,"I'm not sure what it's going to take to meet Justin Bieber." An Olympic gold, maybe?
GETTY IMAGES

He was one of only 11 openly gay athletes who competed at the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
GETTY IMAGES

ANNA MEARES, AUSTRALIA
Age 28;Track cycling (individual sprint, team sprint, keirin)
The coal miner's daughter from Queensland has won three Olympic medals, including a gold in the 2004 time trial event. Meares aims to become the first female cyclist to win four Olympic track medals.

IM DONG-HYUN, SOUTH KOREA
Age 26; Archery
The target is 70m away. The bow weighs 13.6 kg. Add to that a condition where the archer can barely see the target and shoots by feel. That's twotime Olympic gold-winner Im Dong-Hyun for you.

Meares likes to paint. Her `modernised image'of her reaction to winning Olympic gold raised $4,600 at an auction in 2010.
AP

He's legally blind,yet he does not wear corrective glasses or contacts during competition, and has refused offers of free eye surgery to improve his vision.

GETTY IMAGES

