Cover Story SHARAD PAWAR

NEW OPPOSITION
The NCP supremo may have agreed to a ceasefire but the UPA Government is feeling the heat from aggrieved allies just when it is all set for a leadership transition
By Priya Sahgal and Kiran Tare

THE

With Congress General Secretary Rahul Gandhi tipped to join the Cabinet, Sonia is keen to ensure a soft landing for her reluctant son. For this, she needs Rahul to be accepted by the allies.
RAHUL GANDHI

he war-scarred Grand Maratha chose to strike at UPA'S most vulnerable moment. On the evening of July 19, a sulking Sharad Pawar turned the sweltering heat in the Capital a notch higher with a high-profile tantrum. The Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) threatened to withdraw its ministers from the UPA Government in Delhi and the Congress-led government in Maharashtra, claiming that it had been humiliated by the arrogant Congress. The party said it wanted respect. Less than 48 hours later, another disgruntled ally, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, announced that the Trinamool Congress would not be aligning with the Congress in Bengal. "In Delhi, we are part of the alliance as long as we are given respect," she warned, "but in Bengal, we will go it alone." On July 22, Samajwadi Party leader Mulayam Singh Yadav sent a letter to the PMO "urging" the Prime Minister "not to open up the retail trade to FDI any further". The letter was also signed by CPI(M) chief Prakash Karat, CPI's Sudhakar Reddy and JD(S)'s Danish Ali. The Congress, which had always regarded Mulayam's 22 MPs as a buffer to Banerjee, got a rude shock. Anand Sharma, the commerce minister, who had been preening all over television cameras stating that there was

T

SHARAD PAWAR

PRAVEEN NEGI

MANDAR DEODAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Cover Story SHARAD PAWAR
a "strong consensus" in favour of FDI in retail, lost his smirk. The brief appearance of confidence after the Congress's effective crisis management during the presidential election suddenly seemed punctured. The allies are back in the business of baiting the Government they are a part of, and all the hinges on which the UPA majority rests are becoming unhinged again. Pawar's revolt was the most unexpected. His nature is not mercurial. His nine MPs in Delhi may not be vital but his MLAs are crucial to the alliance in one of India's richest states, Maharashtra. He has dealt with Congress-NCP conflicts and tensions with maturity. Even when the business interests of close associates in Lavasa were hurt, Pawar maintained a studied silence. Where other allies have proved demanding, he has offered support-- from the nuclear deal to FDI in retail to getting the Shiv Sena's support for UPA's presidential candidate. Perhaps that is why the Congress has started taking him for granted. Yet, finally, even he had enough of being bullied by Congress. Being a shrewd politician, Pawar chose his moves well. He timed his revolt as soon as Pranab Mukherjee, the Congress party's chief troubleshooter, got elected to Rashtrapati Bhavan. After Mukherjee, Pawar was the most senior member of the Cabinet. Yet, Manmohan Singh chose Defence Minister A.K. Antony to replace Mukherjee as his No. 2. This hurt the three-time former Maharashtra chief minister, yet Pawar did not make this the core issue of his grievance. Instead, he demanded better coordination between the Congress and the allies, both at the Centre and in the NCP-Congress government in Maharashtra. The patch-up on July 24 was a resolution, but not quite a solution. After an hour-long meeting between Manmohan, Sonia Gandhi, Pawar and the NCP's Praful Patel at 7 Race Course Road, it was decided that the UPA Government would set up "an effective coordination mechanism with the allies very soon". According to Patel, this panel would be headed by Sonia and would meet once a month to discuss policy and other issues. NCP was also assured that the coRahul as prime minister is another matter," says an NCP MP, pointing out that even Mukherjee had once stated that he would not be part of Rahul's Cabinet. Pawar has never been a favourite of 10 Janpath. Sonia has not forgiven him for using her foreign origins as an issue to split the Congress. When she met Pawar on July 20, it was probably the second time during UPA 2 that he visited 10 Janpath. Usually, it is Patel who is NCP's ambassador to 10 Janpath while Pawar deals with the Prime Minister. "The two Congress leaders whom Pawar finds it hard to say no to are Pranab Mukherjee and Manmohan Singh," says the NCP MP. Ever since Mukherjee vacated the No. 2 slot, Pawar had been fuming in silence. The NCP chief was hoping he would be accorded the chair next to Manmohan. But at a Cabinet meeting on July 12, Antony got the honour. Antony used to work under Pawar when both were in the Congress (S). The Congress claims it could hardly give the No. 2 post to an ally. NCP did not hide its displeasure but it took seven days for the Prime Minister to realise that something was seriously wrong, when on the evening of July 19, his aides informed him that both NCP ministers, Pawar and Patel, had not shown up for the Cabinet meeting although both were in town that day. Manmohan told the cabinet secretary to inform the rest of the Cabinet that he would be delayed and dialled Pawar. Later that evening, Pawar drove to Race Course Road and handed Manmohan a letter. In it he simply stated that since NCP was a small party, it was not given much stature or respect within UPA and so he would like to devote his time to party work. "This was an offer to resign from the Cabinet," said an NCP leader. The next morning, Pawar met Sonia. He told her that the Congress was not running an inclusive government and cited the example of NDA, which had both a chairperson and a convener. While a BJP leader was the chairman (L.K. Advani), the post of convener was held by an ally (Sharad Yadav). Pawar also pointed out that ever since the Left walked out of UPA 1, there had been no co-ordination committee. The NCP source added that "Sonia heard this patiently and said that she will try to rectify the situation. She also said that a difference of opinion would only weaken the Government."
CHANDRADEEP TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

PRITHVIRAJ CHAVAN WITH HIS DEPUTY, AJIT PAWAR
FOTOCORP

Points of Discord
NCP has a long list of grouses with Congress
PAWAR SONIA

1

NCP wants UPA 2 to have a coordination committee. It feels Congress takes

decisions and presents these to the allies as fait accompli. NDA has both a chairperson and convener. UPA only has the Congress president as chairperson. Congress has agreed to a committee with Sonia heading it.

2 It was Congress's prerogative not to make Sharad Pawar No. 2 but it was
inappropriate to humiliate him by briefing the media that as the leader of a small party, Pawar should not expect that position. He is, however, the most senior Cabinet minister after Pranab Mukherjee's exit.

3 NCP wants better coordination within the Congress-NCP government in Maharashtra. The coordination committee has not met for nearly three years. Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan has called a meeting in end-July.
NCP wants Maharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan to not target its ministers. On May 4, Chavan announced a white paper on the state's expenditure by the irrigation department over the last decade. NCP's Ajit Pawar was the irrigation minister from 1999 to 2010.

4

ordination committee in Maharashtra would meet more frequently. It has not met for three years. There is a pattern in Pawar's politics. It was after Indira Gandhi's humiliating defeat in 1977 that he broke away from the Congress in 1978. He returned in 1986. Later in June 1999, he once again left the Congress to form NCP. This was three months before the 1999 general elections and at a time when Sonia had barely firmed her hold over the party. Pawar used Sonia's foreign origin as an excuse to split the Congress. He was hoping that in the event of a hung Parliament, he could emerge as a prime ministerial candidate. This did not happen as the NDA alliance came back to power in October. With Congress General Secretary Rahul Gandhi tipped to join the Cabinet later this year, Sonia is keen to ensure a soft landing for her reluctant son. For this, she needs Rahul to be accepted by allies. "Pawar has no problem sitting with Rahul in the Cabinet, but whether he will be part of a Cabinet that has

(FROM LEFT) NCP'S TRIPATHI, PATEL AND TARIQ ANWAR IN DELHI ON JULY 24

5 NCP as well as other UPA allies have no role in appointments. In eight years, the Government has appointed 24 Rajya Sabha members and 50 governors. Even the post of deputy chairperson of the Rajya Sabha was decided without consulting them. Congress has agreed to consult allies.

Ever since he took office, Prithviraj Chavan has been making life miserable for NCP. This has hurt Sharad Pawar, for Maharashtra is the NCP's sole bastion.

22

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 6, 2012

AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

23

NEW

NEW

Cover Story SHARAD PAWAR
While it waited for the Congress response, NCP upped the ante, with some help from the allies. During the July 21-22 weekend, Banerjee called Pawar from Kolkata while Patel dropped in to visit the ailing Uddhav Thackeray in a Mumbai hospital. There is also talk of a patch-up between Uddhav and his cousin Raj Thackeray. This will only strengthen the antiCongress forces. On July 23, DMK's T.R. Baalu met Pawar at his home in Delhi's 8 Janpath for a well-publicised visit. "We don't do No. 2 ki raajneeti. We only believe in Number One," says D.P. Tripathi, NCP ideologue and MP. When Sonia met Patel in Parliament at a farewell tea for outgoing president Pratibha Patil on July 23, she cajoled him: "Praful kuch karo (do something)." Standing next to her, BJP leader Sushma Swaraj laughed and said, "Praful, kuch mat karo (don't do anything)." Joining in the fun, CPI(M)'s Sitaram Yechury piped in, saying, "Praful, khush karo (make us happy)." Patel retorted with a "Pehle aap sab decide karo (first, all of you decide)". Pawar's game is long term and he is playing for the next general elections. In 1991, after Narasimha Rao became prime minister, Chandra Shekhar told a disappointed Pawar that a Maratha had never ruled over Delhi. Pawar is still trying to prove him wrong, hoping to emerge as the principal leader of an anti-Congress, anti-BJP alliance with enough seats to form a national government, with or without outside support. The subtext of the NCP revolt is not the numbers but the quality of government. Patel says, "The Government (at the Centre) has not functioned according to our expectations and has no consideration for our views. This is true even in Maharashtra." The mismanagement of allies could see the Congress lose yet another large state. It has already virtually lost Andhra Pradesh to Jagan Mohan Reddy. In Maharashtra, Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan is making life miserable for NCP. He chafes publicly at the portfolio distribution that was arranged before he became CM. Most of the heavyweight portfolios including home, finance, power, water resources, rural development, public works and tribal development are held by NCP. Soon after he assumed charge in November 2010, Chavan claimed that as the bigger party in the coalition, Congress should get finance and home. In October 2011, he gave his nod to the filing of a criminal case against Lavasa, a hill township near Pune conceptualised by Pawar, for violating environment rules. The case is pending before the Pune sessions court. NCP has its own reasons for griping. In May last year, the Reserve Bank of
PRAVEEN NEGI NAVEEN JORA

(FROM LEFT) FORMER MAHARASHTRA CMS ASHOK CHAVAN; VILASRAO DESHMUKH AND SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE

controlled by NCP. Losing control of MSC Bank hit NCP hard as its leaders could no longer channel the funds to the sugarcane growing farmers of western Maharashtra, its core base. The final provocation was Chavan's announcement on May 4 to publish a white paper on the state's expenditure on irrigation sector since the last 10 years. The state's annual economy survey report released in March stated that the area under irrigation has grown by only 0.1 per cent in last 10

Pawar hopes to emerge as the principal leader of an anti-Congress, anti-BJP alliance with enough seats to form a national government.
India dissolved the board of directors of the Maharashtra State Cooperative (MSC) Bank, which had been controlled by Sharad Pawar's nephew and the state's Deputy Chief Minister Ajit Pawar for the last 17 years. Chavan quickly replaced the dissolved board with his handpicked administrators to run the bank. MSC Bank provides funds to district banks to give loans to farmers. An enquiry by the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) revealed that most of these loans were given to cooperative sugar factories and spinning mills directly years despite the state's expenditure of Rs 70,000 crore during this period. Since Ajit Pawar was the minister for water resources from 1999 to 2010, Chavan's announcement came as a big blow to NCP. Current water resources minister, NCP's Sunil Tatkare, claims that the state's area under irrigation has grown by 5.5 per cent, not 0.1 per cent, during the last decade. Ajit Pawar dubbed the 0.1 per cent figure mentioned in the economy survey report as a "printing mistake", to which the Chief Minister retorted that the white paper would correct

UDDHAV (LEFT) AND RAJ THACKERAY

all mistakes and bring out the reality. Chavan also holds the urban development portfolio. Scarred by the Adarsh Society scam that felled his predecessor Ashok Chavan, he initially refused to clear new projects. He asked then Mumbai municipal commissioner Subodh Kumar to frame a stringent policy regarding new constructions. Kumar stopped permission to all upcoming housing projects till the policy was framed in January this year. This has angered the pro-NCP builders' lobby. The cold comfort for NCP is that Prithviraj Chavan is equally unpopular with the Congress: 42 out of 82 Congress MLAs had sent a letter to state unit chief Manikrao Thakre and state incharge Mohan Prakash in June complaining against the Chief Minister's style of functioning. This undated letter was leaked to the media on July 24, right in the middle of the Pawar revolt. Known as Maharashtra's A.K. Antony because of his `Do Nothing But Stay Clean' image, Prithviraj Chavan maintains that he will clear only those work proposals which are in public interest. He has created a computerised system where all requests from MLAs are stored as most MLAs came to him to clear personal projects, not to discuss development projects. According to one of Prithviraj Chavan's aides, the Chief Minister suspects money transactions behind these requests and hence is reluctant to grant them. For the record, NCP says it has never asked for Prithviraj Chavan's removal. "We have never insisted on a leadership change in Maharashtra or for a particular person to be made chief minister," says Praful Patel. He doesn't need to, as Congress MLAs are already baying for Prithviraj Chavan's head. Former chief ministers Ashok Chavan, Vilasrao Deshmukh and Sushilkumar Shinde complain that the Chief Minister has done nothing to save them in the Adarsh scam. As the Congress is slowly realising, its main opposition is from within. So fragile is the Manmohan Singh Government that even a nine-member party can make 206 Congress MPs tremble. 

24

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 6, 2012

NEW

NEW

