GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

IMPORTED GLORY
akistan is ready to learn from Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar. If the state information and public relations department is to be believed, Pakistan senate leader and secretary general of the ruling Pakistan Peoples Party, Jahangir Badr, wants Nitish to visit Pakistan and help the country understand the nuances of "Bihar's extraordinary turnaround" . Badr, who led a Pakistani delegation to Patna on August 25, had showered Nitish with praise. Basking in the imported glory, the department promptly issued a 2,348-word press release, with underlined passages on Badr's speech. Last heard: Nitish has accepted the invite and is likely to visit Pakistan by the year-end.

JOKES
O F T H E W E E K

P

Last week was good for online humour, given the Government's hamhanded attempt to control social media networks. Here are some laughs: Dr MuM Singh will surely quit once he takes the charge. Earlier our PM used Promise. Now he opens his mouth for Coalgate. Pepsodent feeling left out. Two new book titles coming soon: Sootable Boys. Lignited Minds.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

FLOOD OF PROTEST
ajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot has an odd way to deal with distress. On August 25, before flying to Barmer to prepare for Sonia Gandhi's August 30 visit to inaugurate the town's lift canal, he made light of reports of the Jaipur flash flood that left 55 dead."Media has created an atmosphere as if half of Jaipur is under water," he told Prime Minister Manmohan Singh over the phone on August 22. And when Governor Margaret Alva blamed the government for people's suffering, Gehlot chose even more inaction: He sent Urban Development and Housing Minister Shanti Dhariwal, the man responsible for the collapse of infrastructure and civic amenities in Jaipur, on a twoweek visit to Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia on August 25.

MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

TURF WAR

R

U

ttar Pradesh Chief Secretary Javed Usmani may have made it clear that he wants to return to Delhi to his old job in the Prime Minister's Office, but Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav will not be left without a powerful bureaucrat. Anita Singh, a 1990-batch IAS officer, who is currently secretary to the Chief Minister, is using her proximity to Mulayam Singh Yadav to wield clout and is engaged in a turf war with Usmani. Both have served a stint in Mulayam's Chief Minister's Office.

ANITA SINGH

USMANI

SPEAK EASY
ast week, the Congress appointed two new spokespersons--Sandeep Dikshit and P.C. Chacko--just in time for Coalgate. Until then, the task of defending the party in numerous controversies mostly fell upon Manish Tewari, given that Renuka Chowdhury is not too proficient in Hindi and Satyavrat Chaturvedi is not fluent in English. Finance Minister P. Chidambaram and Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal have briefed media-savvy party MPs such as Deepender Singh Hooda, Sanjay Nirupam and RPN Singh to bolster the party's frontline. Is Chacko's inarticulate mumble Congress's best defence? CHACKO
DIKSHIT
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

L

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

GEHLOT

14

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
THE SILENCE OF MOTHER EARTH
DO-NOTHING GOVERNMENT
elhi's bureaucratic fraternity has found a new reason to avoid decision-making. The fear of CAG and CBI is old news. Now, top bureaucrats fear proximity to UPA ministers. After the coal scam's taint on Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, most believe that the countdown to the end of UPA tenure has begun in earnest. Senior secretaries and additional secretaries--all eyeing plum jobs and lucrative postretirement assignments in 2014--want to present an image of non-cooperation with UPA to win favour with the successor government. Expect more policy paralysis.

C

ongressmen are talking about the silence of the Niyamgiri Hills lobby. Both Rahul Gandhi and his self-appointed echo, Union Rural Development Minister Jairam Ramesh, have been noticeably silent in defending the Prime Minister on the coal scam. Could it be that both Rahul and Ramesh actually disagree with this apparent gifting away of natural resources? Or is it that both are sulking after the Cabinet referred Rahul's trophy Land Acquisition Bill, drafted by Ramesh, to a Group of Ministers.

D

PRIYANKA WITH SHARMA (LEFT) IN AMETHI

FAMILY DIVIDE
or the first time, there seems to be a divide in the Gandhi family. And it's over the redoubtable Kishori Lal Sharma, the Gandhi loyalist in charge of managing Amethi and Rae Bareli, who has been sidelined of late by Team Rahul. Priyanka Gandhi, now looking after her mother's constituency, has rehabilitated Sharma and put him in charge of Rae Bareli. Unlike brother Rahul and his laptop brigade, Priyanka realises the value of old-fashioned politics of personal contact. Perhaps Rahul could follow.

F

RAHUL

RAMESH

DHUMAL'S POWER PLAY

H

imachal Pradesh Chief Minister Prem Kumar Dhumal, well-known for his earthy sense of humour, has made Prime Minister Manmohan Singh the target of his japes. Narrating a new joke on the "powerless" Prime Minister's imagined response to the recent

power grid failures, Dhumal told an audience of industrialists in Amritsar: "Arre tumse 8 ghante bina power jhelna mushkil ho gaya... Mai to pichhle 8 saal se jhel raha hoon. (You can't manage power failure for eight hours... I have been suffering it for eight years without power supply."
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

DHUMAL

"The real PMO has offended the people of India far more than any fake parody account can or ever will."
CHETAN BHAGAT, Writer, on blocking of social media accounts

"Parliament adjourned again as I think of T.S. Eliot: `I have measured out my life in coffee spoons.'"
DEREK O'BRIEN Trinamool leader
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

"If the future is to be handed to the nation, then those who have foresight should be sent to Parliament."
ANNA HAZARE, Social activist
BHAGAT

with PRIYA SAHGAL, AMITABH SRIVASTAVA, ROHIT PARIHAR, DHIRAJ NAYYAR

16

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

GETTY IMAGES

