Sp ort

CRICKET

THE TERRIFIC TRIO
Unmukt Chand, Harmeet Singh and Baba Aparajith brought India the Under-19 World Cup. They may well be Team India's future.
By Dileep Premachandran

B

efore Unmukt Chand's brilliant unbeaten 111 in the Under-19 World Cup final--Wasim Akram called it the finest junior innings he had ever seen--only two others had scored centuries in the tournament's summit clash. Yet, mention Brett Williams (Australia) and Stephen Peters (England) to the average cricket fan, and you are likely to get a blank stare. Peters, now nearly 34, never won an England cap, despite making more than 12,000 runs in first class cricket, while Williams played only four first-class games before fading away. After India's victory at the Under-19 World Cup in Malaysia four years ago, Virat Kohli, who captained the side, said: "I told the boys that we had to go out there and play the game of our lives." Kohli has gone on to become a star, with a remarkable 13 one-day international (ODI) centuries from 87 innings. In January, he also scored his first Test hundred-- against Australia in Adelaide. But for most of his teammates, that day in Kuala Lumpur

will always be the highlight. For every Kohli or Yuvraj Singh, man of the tournament when India's Under-19s emerged triumphant in 2000, there are dozens of others for whom the junior final is the zenith. Ravneet Ricky topped India Under-19's batting charts in 2000, but last played for the Punjab Ranji team in 2008. Shalabh Srivastava, who took 14 wickets for the class of 2000, was recently banned for five years after being found guilty of agreeing to fix a domestic game. At a function to honour the 2008 winners, Rahul Dravid spoke of how difficult the transition would be. "I just want you to remember that of the boys who won the U-19 World Cup in 2000, only one member (Yuvraj) was part of the Indian team (that won the three-nation CB Series) in Brisbane today," he said. "It's something for you to think about. I played for the U19s in 1991, and was the only one in my team to go on and play for India. This is the start of a critical phase in your lives. What you do from here on is what matters." With Indian cricket staring transition full in the face, it's no surprise that there's so much excitement over the Under19 World Cup heroes. But Unmukt apart, most of them are

Baba Aparajith 18 MAN FOR ALL REASONS
Right-handed middle-order batsman, offspinner He was man of the match in both the quarter-final against Pakistan and the semi-final against New Zealand.Apart from being a fluent strokemaker, his offspin was devilishly difficult to get away. He took four catches in the Pakistan game, three of them at slip and one at mid-off. In the final, he played some magnificent cover drives and shared a 73-run stand with Unmukt Chand that wrested the initiative. Aparajith made his first-class debut for Tamil Nadu last season, and had a top score of 44 not out. In the later games, he was promoted to bat at No. 3. Dr R.N. Baba, his father, handles media for the Tamil Nadu Cricket Association. Indrajith, his older twin by 40 minutes, has led the South Zone Under-19s and only just missed out on a place in the World Cup squad.Those who have watched the twins practise testify to a tremendous work ethic.

Unmukt Chand 19 MR DEPENDABLE
Right-handed opening batsman Cometh the hour, cometh the boy-man. Unmukt Chand had scored just 135 runs before the final. India needed to pull off the highest run chase of the tournament in the summit clash against Australia but Unmukt spearheaded a memorable victory. The son of Bharat Chand Thakur, economics teacher at Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya in Delhi, and Rajeshwari Chand, Unmukt is a BA student at St. Stephen's College. Unmukt already has a firstclass century and has played IPL for Delhi Daredevils.Aside from big-match temperament--he also scored a hundred in the Under-19 Asia Cup final against Pakistan that ended in a tie--he is a wonderfully clean hitter down the ground, the mark of a quality player.The Under-19 captain travels with a dictionary. In a pre-tournament interview, he was quoted as saying that there were no "recalcitrant players"in his team.

Wait in the wings R.Ashwin, an offspinner with a Test ton, is already in the Indian team. Harbhajan Singh is on the comeback trail.Aparajith will have to serve time in domestic cricket before getting his chance.

India via Delhi Ian Chappell called him "very talented" . With Virender Sehwag, Gambhir and Kohli on India duty, Unmukt should get plenty of chances to impress for Delhi.If he does,expect to see him in India colours soon.

54

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

NEW

SEPTEMBER 10, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

NEW

55

Sp ort

CRICKET

Harmeet Singh 19 TURNING THE TIDE
Left-arm orthodox spinner While Jasbir Singh, his father, managed a business, Paramjeet Kaur, his mother, took him every day from Malad to Shivaji Park Gymkhana in Dadar, Mumbai, where he has played since he was nine.Among his coaches was legendary left-arm spinner Padmakar Shivalkar, who took 589 first-class wickets while Bishan Singh Bedi won plaudits with the national side. While most current spinners bowl flatter trajectories to contain batsmen in ODIs, Harmeet uses old-world methods of flight and loop as weapons.That led to comparisons with Bedi: The late Dilip Sardesai, who watched Harmeet play as a young boy, was among the first to do so. Ian Chappell then beat the same drum during the Under-19 World Cup. His attacking style notwithstanding, Harmeet finished with an outstanding economy rate of 3.02 for the competition.Apart from his tidy bowling, his World Cup was notable for the unbeaten 34-ball 13 that took India to victory against Pakistan in the quarter-final. He kept Sandeep Sharma, the No. 11 batsman, calm and struck the winning runs over midwicket once the field came in. Despite taking 17 first-class wickets in his first three games, Harmeet didn't get a Ranji game for Mumbai last season. He had to rest content with captaining Mumbai in the Cooch Behar Under-19 Trophy.

Road ahead Pragyan Ojha is India's left-arm spinner for now. If Harmeet gets a run of games with Mumbai, he can force selectors to sit up and take notice.

not even guaranteed starting places with their Ranji Trophy sides. While this victory puts them in the limelight, the hard work starts now. Two of Kohli's Under-19 colleagues, Ravindra Jadeja and Saurabh Tiwary, also earned the India cap. Neither is close to being a regular though. Manish Pandey, the first Indian to score an IPL century, is another who has yet to make the grade. Unmukt, who has made a habit of summoning up big innings when the team needs it most, clearly has the mental strength to make the leap. Baba Aparajith, who dug the team out of a deep hole against Pakistan in the quarter-final--they were 8 for 3 at one stage--has shown similar mettle, while it was Harmeet Singh who closed out that game by holding his nerve in the face of unrelenting pressure. Sandeep Sharma, who swung the ball prodigiously while also landing yorkers almost at will, and Kamal Passi, who impressed with both bat and ball, were other players to catch the eye. But as Dravid said, it's what they do from here that will determine whether they emulate Kohli and Yuvraj rather than the what-might-have-been stories.
The author is editor-in-chief of Wisden India

56

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

