HEALTH

by DAMAYANTI DATTA

EIGHTTHINGS THATMAKEYOU AGE FASTER
Seemingly harmless habits can add years to your life or shorten it. Here's our list of dos and don'ts for a healthier lifestyle.

LOW FAT DANGER
Think of your skin before switching to a low-fat diet. A diet like that may help you shed your extra flab, but if they cut out good, healthy fats, such as Omega-3 fatty acids, it can negatively impact the speed at which you age. Omega-3 fatty acids, present in oily fish, walnuts and flax seeds, keep the skin supple and wrinkle-free, boost brain health, keep the heart in good condition and can thus enhance lifespan. DO drink out of a glass and not from bottles or straw. The latter can cause the same pursing action as smoking and the same fine lines and wrinkles around the mouth. DO keep a glass of water in the room to increase humidity if you are using central heating and air conditioning systems at home. They can severely dry out your skin. DO try sleeping on your back or using silk pillowcases. Sleeping regularly on the same side with your face pressed against a cotton pillowcase may add creases and fine lines on the skin. DO try to stay away from computers at night. The light from the screen can mess up your body's natural sleep signals and lead to premature ageing.

KICK THESE HABITS TO STAYYOUNG
G Watching TV

It may be as bad as smoking, say researchers from University of Queensland, Australia. Each hour of TV viewing after you are 25 can cut 22 minutes from one's lifespan. Blame it on sedentary lifestyle, inactivity and greater opportunity for unhealthy eating.
G Not so sweet

Beware of sugar. It doesn't just bloat your waistline, it's as bad as sun exposure and smoking in causing premature wrinkles. High blood sugar levels cause a process called glycation, that damages and hardens the collagen in your skin. Result? Wrinkles.
G Slippery truth

Your soap is not your skin's best friend. The skin has an acid mantle as its natural protective barrier. Soaps are generally alkaline and can remove this layer of oils, leading eventually to wrinkles. Try using a PHneutral and chemical-free cleanser. The point is to retain your acid layer by not over-cleansing your skin.

1 CIGARETTE CUTS 11 MINUTES OF YOUR LIFESPAN. IT IS THE SAME AS 30 MINUTES OF WATCHING TV.
SEPTEMBER 10, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

63

