HIMACHALPRADESH

DHUMALSLIPS ON SNOW
High court pulls up the state government for flip-flop over a Rs 2,750-crore ski resort
Soon after the high court verdict, imachal Pradesh is on the verge Group and roped in luxury group Six of losing out on a $500 million Senses Resorts and Spas. But once the Dhumal had told the media that he (Rs 2,750 crore) ski valley proj- government changed hands in 2007, would appeal against it. He said, "It is ect because its government couldn't so did its policy towards the project. In not the government which was opmake up its mind. In 2004, then 2008, a committee was set up to re- posed to the project. We had held a Congress chief minister Virbhadra view the project. It recommended can- public hearing at the project site. Singh had given the Himalayan Ski cellation. On January 7, 2010, the Locals and NGOs objected to the project as they feel it is not only environmenValley (HSV) project the go-ahead, but government cancelled the project. "First they (BJP government) spent tally unsustainable but will also desein January 2010, the subsequent BJP government scrapped it. This was two years poring over our plans, then crate land." Those who opposed the touted to be the largest FDI project in we started spending money, and now project had even claimed that the the tourism sector. The policy rever- they say, sorry we were just kidding. I deities were against it. This had a powsal earned the Prem Kumar Dhumal didn't get the punchline, but I did get erful impact in swaying local sentigovernment a scathing rap ment against the project. from the Himachal Pradesh Another objection was High Court. "Governance is that the entire project a continuous process, there was a `clever ruse' to grab should be consistency in the local land. policy matters taken by the "We were creating state government," said 3,500 jobs on 100 acres of Justice Ravi Sharma in his land. Why would I want to June 22 order. grab land? I'm not going It was in January 2004 to start a naval base that Alfred Ford, the great there. The land is three grandson of Ford Motors times the price of land in founder Henry Ford, met Colorado," says an irate Virbhadra Singh and proSims, pointing out that posed a ski resort in the Kulu the court had struck Valley. "This was to be India's down every single excuse THE DHUMAL GOVERNMENT SCRAPPED answer to Davos. It would cited by the state governhave provided employment ment. Although the court THE SKI RESORT PROJECT THAT to over 3,500 people," says has given the project the THEN CHIEF MINISTER VIRBHADRA John Sims, an American hogo-ahead, eight years and tel developer and managing Rs 100 crore on, HSV proSINGH HAD APPROVED IN 2004. director of HSV. moters are not sure if they Singh gave them the go-ahead and punched," says Sims. Interestingly, want to continue. With the state poised a memorandum of understanding the committee's recommendations, for elections in November, Sims and was signed between the state govern- which seemed to sway Dhumal, did Co. are not sure if they can handle ment and HSV in December 2005. not impress the court. In its judgment, what he refers to as "the capricious beThree months later, the state govern- the court observed that "it is duly es- haviour" of another state government. This is yet another example of how ment approved the detailed project tablished that the state government report. Work began on the project as had already made up its mind to can- India is sending a confused message Sims and his team began scouting for cel the project and the issuance of no- to foreign investors. While the Vodathe 100-acre plot on which the ski re- tice based on the recommendations of fone retrospective tax controversy sort was to be built and sent 60 local the committee was merely a ritual. and the flip-flop over FDI in retail residents to Finland for training as ski The notice issued to the company has grabbed headlines, the case of instructors. The promoters hired con- dated 7.1.2010 is without jurisdiction the HSV project has gone somewhat struction major Shapoorji Pallonji and authority of law." unnoticed. by Priya Sahgal

H

SEPTEMBER 10, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

49

