Cr ime BIHAR

NIGHTMARE ON PATNA'S STREETS

Video of girl raped by schoolmates turns spotlight on escalating rate of sex crimes by teenagers in India

The National Crime Records Bureau says 25,125 rapes were recorded in 2011. Priya is the victim of a disturbing new trend of teen rapes. In 2011, teenagers committed 1,149 rapes and 1,231 teens were arrested in connection with them. Rape accounts for a majority of teen crimes. Worse still, of the hundreds of rapists who prey on teens, more than a third are themselves juveniles.

(CLOCKWISE FROM ABOVE) RAHUL LAMBA AND PRASHANT, DINESH, SUSHANT, AND ARMAN

The Making of a Tragedy
THE VICTIM On June 14, a Class IX student accompanied her boyfriend to his friend's flat where she was gangraped. THE PERPETRATORS Three of the rapists are school seniors. The fourth is 26-year-old Sushant, at whose flat she was raped. His domestic, Dinesh, and school junior Arman, are the two others accused. NOTA ONE-OFF INCIDENT Rapes by teens have gone up 288 per cent in the last decade. Among serious crimes by teens, rape accounted for the highest number in 2011.

PROTEST IN PATNA ORGANISED BY VARIOUS WOMEN'S GROUPS
Photographs by K.M. KISHAN

By Amitabh Srivastava

he was a pretty girl studying in Class IX. The sight of Prashant Jha, a `cute' senior in Class XI of the same Patna school, would set her heart aflutter. His mobike was an object of envy, and when he asked her out, she would be happy to skip classes for long drives riding pillion. Two years since she first saw him in 2010, their relationship blossomed. Priya was sure she and Prashant (all names changed) were made for each other. With marriage in mind, she paid no attention to the many rumours of Prashant's affairs.

S

Prashant had other ideas. In June 2012, when his parents decided to send him to Delhi for higher studies, he planned to dump her. But not before satisfying his friends' requests, of `sharing' his girlfriend with them. On June 14, he asked Priya to his friend Sushant's home in Rambha Apartments in Rajvanshinagar, Patna. There, as the 17-year-old fought and pleaded, Prashant laughed away as he invited his friends Rahul Lamba and Rahul alias Ranvijay to strip her naked. They took turns to rape her and filmed the act on a cellphone. Priya says she knew the other rapists--both school seniors--whose sexual innuen-

dos she had ignored in the past as they were Prashant's buddies. The boys shot a 43-minute graphic video, which was uploaded from a cyber café in late June. Arman, 15, Prashant's junior, was the first to get the link. He promptly demanded sexual favours from Priya. A week later, Lamba summoned Priya to a cyber café, showed her the clip, and promised to destroy it if she visited the apartment once again. He told her "Sushant bhaiya" would inform her parents and the police if she did not turn up. Inevitably, when she did visit the flat, Lamba and 26-year-old Sushant raped her again. Emboldened, they called her

over once again a few days later. That is when she finally mustered the courage to refuse them. Two months on, Priya wakes up in dread in the middle of the night. Hers is a nightmare built on an even more horrifying reality; her family thinks she has brought them dishonour. A traumatised Priya has cut herself off from the world. She has deleted her Facebook account and switched off her cellphone. Her friends have been told not to meet the "disgraced girl". "I can't come out of it. I trusted him so much," says Priya in a broken voice. The tables were turned when an FIR was finally registered on July 24

after the Bihar Women's Commission (BWC) tracked Priya down and forwarded her statement to the DGP. "Her family was reticent about filing a case. She is still very vulnerable. We want the government and society to support her," says Kahkashan Parveen, chairperson, BWC. The Patna police have arrested Arman, Prashant, Ranvijay, Lamba, Sushant and his 27-year-old domestic help Dinesh. Prashant and Arman are now lodged at a juvenile home, the rest in Beur Jail. The video is so horrific that it would probably shock even a nation with a sordid track record of 69 rapes a day.

ith teens exposed to more conflicting information and explicit images of sex than ever before, from movies to the Internet, inappropriate sexual behaviour is probably only to be expected, what with no proper counselling, education or the like in place. "It's never too soon. We can't wait for teens to ask questions on sex to discuss the subject with them. The growing obsession among teens is surely a parenting issue," says Dr Hetukar Jha, noted Patna-based sociologist. On a social network, Lamba cites "bed games" as his favourite sport, and describes himself as someone who likes drinking, partying and the company of girls. Prashant's mother acknowledges her son's criminal tendencies. In fact, she had wanted to send her son to Delhi in the hope that the relocation would mend his ways. "Sex offenders are very good at manipulating and deceiving others," says a policeman. Already, all the rapists have offered to marry Priya, in the hope that this would secure them their freedom. Besides, Prashant, whose school leaving certificate mentions his date of birth as March 26, 1994, has managed to fool the police and secure a stay in a juvenile home instead of jail. "As a society, we tend to gloss over juvenile crimes. But we need to understand that most of these criminals return to their predatory ways. Often, this escalates in cruelty and regularity," says Chandramukhi Devi, BWC member. With horrific cases like that of the teen arrested in Mumbai last year, who had names of his seven victims tattooed on his body, India might be awakening to a bitter, new reality. 

W

66

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

SEPTEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

67

