BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THANK GOD I AM NOT GOD
Each time the consequences were disappointing, if not here is a canyon-deep hollow at the heart of Government, which echoes with the rhythm of banal- disastrous. He was never held accountable. Rajiv Gandhi ity. Two crises are corroding the nation's stability. was never as powerful when his mother, Mrs Indira Septic corruption is coiled around the neck of Government, Gandhi, was prime minister. Dr Manmohan Singh began having risen to unimaginable rather than merely unprece- his second term as PM by offering to step down the modented heights. Calculations of malpractice and malfea- ment Rahul Gandhi wanted the job. There has been some sance are little consolation to a citizen battered by relentless depreciation since then, and Dr Singh only expects Rahul news of Government theft exposed by Government agen- Gandhi to join the Cabinet. Every senior or junior Congress cies. In Assam, violence is turning endemic under Congress leader ritually anoints Rahul Gandhi heir and pride of watch; in Mumbai, racism skewers the rhetoric of Shiv Sena Congress; it is the current version of an oath of loyalty. Rahul Gandhi can pick any portfolio he wants. He could politicians who milk votes from animosity. The UPA may not have run out of time, but it seems to become home minister this week and use his abilities to have run out of ideas if a Cabinet reshuffle represents the sort out Assam and Telangana, both of which will be at the gamut of its imagination. An existentialist question must top of his agenda if he becomes PM. Is there a single wish surely leave Prime Minister Manmohan Singh helpless: of Rahul Gandhi in these last eight years that has been Shuffle whom to where? There is little talent left at his thwarted? Not to my knowledge, which may of course be call. There is no hero armed with a magic wand, waiting in limited, but I would be glad to get an education. It is an important moment in a young MP's life when a the wilderness, thirsting for a chance to rub shoulders with history. There is no one who can identify a thread prime minister invites him to join the Government. But such stretched between Delhi and Guwahati, both ruled by an offer is quite meaningless to anyone who controls the Congress, and stitch together a policy framework that Cabinet, either directly or through a mother's proxy. If there is some fire in the works of a possible September will stanch the bleeding in the North-east. His Government's response to corruption is a shrug rearranged into combat- reshuffle, then it comes from the states. Delhi, a rumour mill on an industrial scale, believes that ive postures; if our face is tarred with SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Congress will change its chief ministers corruption, the BJP is also smudged. That in Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and may indeed be true, but how does it Maharashtra. If that be true, the reason reduce the culpability of ministers will not be parental joy at the brilliance of who handed out coal blocks to tricolour a ward, but because all three are deemed or saffron cronies? to have failed. That is hardly the most The only frisson of excitement is ringing endorsement of talent. Failure spurred by the prospect of Rahul Gandhi might be a harsh verdict on Prithviraj entering the portals of power by becomChavan, but the departure of Ashok ing a Cabinet minister or working Gehlot and Kiran Reddy is long overdue. president of Congress. This begs a sepaSo how does it help Dr Singh if they are rate question. When in the last eight shifted to Delhi? If they were competent years has Rahul Gandhi ever been out they would not have failed. Gehlot and of power? He has been the working Reddy do not add value; they extract president of the Congress whenever something from a diminished asset. he has chosen to work. There is only one Congress leader, Whenever he has taken a decision, it Mrs Sheila Dikshit, who would add has been implemented, either at The only frisson of Government or party level. He pushed, excitement is spurred by the stature to Dr Singh's Cabinet, but then the government of Delhi would become where he could, for a younger generation prospect of Rahul Gandhi too puny to withstand current storms. If of chief ministers; and got them in entering the portals of Dr Singh does have some capability Kashmir and Andhra Pradesh. He power by becoming a available, it is outside Congress. Sharad sought to revolutionise Congress through the Youth Congress. No one stopped him. Cabinet minister or working Pawar, for instance, would make a good He wanted to lead his party's campaign president of Congress. This home minister. Thank God, said a wit, that I am not in Bihar from the front, selecting candibegs a separate question. God. Perhaps Sharad Pawar, looking at dates from a personal template. He did When in the last eight years the mess around him, tells himself so. He chose to stake everything in his kitty on the prospect of a few seats more has Rahul Gandhi ever been something similar: Thank you, Prime Minister, that I am not Prime Minister. I in Uttar Pradesh. He went ahead. out of power?

T

SEPTEMBER 17, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

50

