GLASS HOUSE HARD TO PLEASE
ll Yadavs are not charmed by Sonia Gandhi. Last week she reached out to both Mulayam Singh Yadav and Lalu Prasad Yadav in Parliament, after which one ordered 24/7 power supply to her constituency while the other launched a no-holds-barred attack against BJP. She also reached out to JD(U)'s Sharad Yadav, praising the non-BJP opposition for insisting on a debate instead of disruption in Parliament on Coalgate. Sharad Yadav was not amused. "You may be happy whenever Sonia praises you but I am not. My entire politics is based on opposing the Congress. Why should I look for its praise?" he asked. Oops, sorry we asked.

A

PARTY FACELIFT

P

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

erhaps BJP President Nitin Gadkari was inspired by his own makeover, which happened when he underwent bariatric surgery in September last year. Now it turns out that he is intent on smartening the BJP national headquarters as well. A new, plush auditorium has been added in the party's 11, Ashoka Road, office in Delhi. The main building is also being given a complete facelift, with walls being replaced by windows in the interests of transparency. All in keeping with the principles of vaastu shastra.

LEAP OF FAITH

MUSICAL CHAIRS
umours of another reshuffle have surfaced again. The big event is tipped to happen mid to end September, after Sonia Gandhi returns from a foreign trip. The chief ministers of Maharashtra and Rajasthan could be brought to the Centre. While Prithviraj Chavan, who is fed up of dealing with NCP's tantrums, has been lobbying for a return to the Capital,Ashok Gehlot is not as keen. However, he is likely to be replaced by either C.P. Joshi or Rahul Gandhi's favourite Jitendra Singh. Karnataka PCC chief G. Parameshwara could also be dropped but there are no plans to rehabilitate him at the Centre. Unlike the Congress, which is still to make up its mind, NCP has decided to replace Agatha Sangma who came in on a dynastic quota courtesy her father, P.A. Sangma, with the ever accessible Tariq Anwar.

J

itendra Singh, Union minister of state for home, had to use some muscle power to escape from battling Congress workers on August 26. Singh had just taken his seat on the stage as chief guest at a function to inaugurate a new stretch of road in Bhiwadi when a local Congress leader objected to the presence of the head of Janata Sena, a local agitationist group. When the two groups climbed the stage to rain blows on each other, Singh jumped down, perhaps prudently.
SINGH

R
GEHLOT

CHAVAN

RAJESH WARADKAR

MEET AND GREET
al Thackeray had an unusual guest at his Mumbai home on September 2. It was the daughter of BJP leader Sushma Swaraj. Bansuri Kaushal, an Oxford graduate who works with senior advocate Uday U. Lalit, visited the Shiv Sena chief with her mother. Kaushal is fighting Thackeray's defamation case in Supreme Court for two articles published in the late 1990s in Shiv Sena mouthpiece Saamna. Perhaps Thackeray was explaining the nuances of the case in the meeting which lasted 40 minutes longer than scheduled.

B

KAUSHAL (LEFT) AT BAL THACKERAY'S HOME

YASHWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
JUST SAY NO
hen Prime Minister Manmohan Singh offered a Cabinet position to Rahul Gandhi on September 1, it was at least the 10th time he was doing so. In March 2009, the PM had said, "I always wanted to make him minister, but he has been refusing." He repeated the offer after a minor reshuffle in July 2011 and even on board the PM's aircraft in November 2011 on his return from the Maldives. Either Rahul doesn't read the news or he doesn't take the PM seriously.

JAGAN'S PRISON DIARIES
JAGAN MOHAN

W

UNUSUAL SUPPORT
ongress minister and IPL Chairman, Rajiv Shukla, is not famous for doing anyone any free favours. So why is he the only office-bearer in the higher echelons of BCCI trying to save the Deccan Chargers? The IPL team violated BCCI rules by using its franchise as collateral for loans. BCCI gave the troubled team, which has not paid salaries for months, an August-end deadline and then extended it till September 15.The Hyderabad-based Deccan Chargers are struggling to find buyers because of such vexing legal problems and allegations of malpractice.

C

SR Congress President Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy is spending his time in Chanchalguda prison in Hyderabad fruitfully. He has been borrowing books on Mahatma Gandhi and Jyotiba Phule from the library as he works on a party manifesto for the 2014 General Elections. That is, when he is not playing badminton with N. Sunil Reddy, a relative who has been jailed for his involvement in the Emaar land allotment. On September 3, Jagan completed 100 days in a special cell which has a cot with a mattress, two pillows, a table and chair, besides a fan. He believes he'll be in prison for a while, so clearly the manifesto will be a very well informed one.

Y

RAHUL
YASHWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

PLAYING FAVOURITES
ho is President Pranab Mukherjee's favourite bureaucrat? Judging by the latest appointment, it's Kerala cadre officer Thomas Mathew, now joint secretary (JS) to the President. Mathew has been with Mukherjee in two earlier stints--as JS (navy) when Mukherjee was defence minister, and JS (capital markets) when the President was finance minster. Mukherjee's successor in Cabinet, P. Chidambaram, has his favourite too. The panel he appointed to re-examine the controversial GAAR was headed by Parthasarathi Shome, who was Chidambaram's adviser when he was finance minister between 2004 and 2008.

JOKE
O F T H E W E E K

W

Sachin Tendulkar bowled out thrice in a row... Members of Parliament are not performing much anywhere. Knock Knock. Who's there? Kanimozhi. Kanimozhi who? Can you move me to the Coal Ministry? 2G is so passé now. Dear Harry Potter, If it took me eight damn movies to defeat one lame, bald villain, I would give people their money back. Yours sincerely, Rajinikanth

MATHEW

"In the name of dieting, if you have less oil and less spices, and eat less, you can easily contract dengue."
MAMATA BANERJEE,

West Bengal CM

"With age, the feet don't come to the pitch of the ball, the eyes don't pick up the ball early."
SUNIL GAVASKAR, on Sachin

"Gujarat is a middle class state. The middle class is more beauty conscious than health conscious."
GAVASKAR

Tendulkar's batting

NARENDRA MODI Gujarat CM

by PRIYA SAHGAL, DEVESH KUMAR, AMARNATH K. MENON, KIRAN TARE, ROHIT PARIHAR AND DHIRAJ NAYYAR

14

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 17, 2012

NEW

