MAGIC OF MOVIES
By Rachel Dwyer

The Kings of Hindi Comedy

Mehmood
Gumnaam 1965

to "Hum kaale hain in." kya hua dilwale ha

a

Gags, funny faces, pratfalls. Bollywood has thrived on humour as staple fare.

lthough little is as unfunny as the study of comedy, Sigmund Freud's 1905 book, The Joke and its Relation to the Unconscious, argues that comedy arises when thoughts and emotions that lay hidden in the subconscious are expressed consciously. Hindi film melodrama foregrounds the emotions and blends them in its inimitable masala, so we can, as Amitabh Bachchan says, leave the cinema with a smile on our lips and a tear in our eye. Hindi films are notable for their surfeit of emotion, or what could be called melodramas. The audience doesn't feel the same emotion as the character, that is, it doesn't necessarily identify with him or her. If the character is angry with himself we may feel pity rather than share the anger (or a mix of the two), but when it comes to the body emotions--fear, laughter, tears--if we don't respond with the right emotion, then the film isn't working. We can read the film differently--so a truly dreadful movie can be funny rather than romantic, as can a horror film, but if a comedy doesn't make the audience laugh then we must all go home. The Natyashastra included comedy, hasya, as one of its nine rasas, and the vidushaka is a staple figure of Sanskrit drama. This was one of many sources of comedy in Indian cinema, which included a range of humour from Parsi theatre, literary and folk traditions to other forms of cinema. Slapstick was a staple of silent film, and remains popular even today. The Lumière Brothers' L'arroseur Arrosé (The Waterer Watered), 1895, showed a gardener watering a garden with a hose and watering himself. Film comedy includes such comic episodes or moments. These may be slapstick or physical humour--gags, funny faces, pratfalls--or verbal, such as jokes and witty dialogue. Humour also uses devices such as parody, pastiche and satire. It may be unkind, poking fun at people for their appearance, accent, intelli-

Johnny Walker
Anand 1971
INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIVE

"Marte marte chela guru ko jeena sikha gaya. Dukh
often in a parallel narrative to the main narrative, featuring the leading hero and heroine. Character actors or comedians were often comical looking, overweight or rubber-faced, and acted in a different style, pulling faces and talking in funny voices as well as wearing strange clothes. One of the most famous was Johnny Walker (Badruddin Jamaluddin Qazi) who played comic roles in many of Guru Dutt's films, whether they were his comedies (Aar Paar, Mr and Mrs 55) or the darker films (Pyaasa, Kaagaz ke Phool). He was hugely popular and many great songs, often sung by Mohammed Rafi, were picturised on him, including Sar jo tera chakraye. Among the other famous comics was I.S. Johar, one of India's first actors to have acted in international films and known for his sharp dialogues in Hindi films, while the very short Mukri was slapstick and Rajendranath was India's Lou Costello. Mehmood acted in many films, even playing lead, but his most celebrated roles are his South Indian characters in Gumnaam and Padosan. His tradition of mimicry and musical humour continued with Johnny Lever, who had major roles in several blockbusters including Karan Arjun and Raja Hindustani. Comic lead heroes were rarer although one of the greatest stars, Raj Kapoor, who paid tribute to Chaplin in his tramp persona where he mixed pathos and social commentary with his comedy, played a comic hero in Shree 420. Bhagwan, originally a stuntman, had one huge hit as a lead when he romanced Geeta Bali, in Albela, 1951, another romantic comedy classic. Kishore Kumar, one of the most extraordinary talents

"Aisa to aadmi life mein doich time bhaagta hai.
lice ka case ho." Olympic ka race ho, yaa po
36
INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

gence and so on, or it may be more gentle, making fun of characters acting against type, for example a child seeming more mature than adults. Less subtle forms include grossout humour, which is usually sexual and lavatorial. Narrative comedy is rarer although there was a brief flowering of the comedy of manners in the cinema of Hrishikesh Mukherjee and others in the 1970s and 1980s, often developing misunderstandings following from a person being in the wrong place at the wrong time or from a small lie told to smooth a situation which then develops into a series of lies and deceptions. Romantic comedy remains the most popular of all genres and still dominates today's cinema. All these forms of humour are found in Hindi cinema, which produced some outstanding comedians and comic actors, of whom only a few can be mentioned here. More are found in Sanjit Narwekar's fascinating Eena Meena Deeka: The Story of Hindi Film Comedy (Rupa, 2005). Comedy featured in the films of Phalke and Ganguly. American comedies such as the films of the Keystone Cops and Charlie Chaplin were popular during the silent period and India had its equivalents with Dixit of Ranjit Studios whose fat man-thin man pairing with Ghory meant they were called India's Laurel and Hardy, as were Gope and Yakub, while Noor Mohammed Charlie, with his toothbrush moustache, was India's Chaplin. Other genres of comedy were also popular such as Master Vinayak's satires including Brahmachari, 1938. One of the striking features of Amitabh Hindi cinema is that comedy is

apne liye rakh, anand sab ke liye."
in Hindi film history, could put any emotion into his songs but when he acted, it was usually as a comic. His performances in Chalti Ka Naam Gaadi and Padosan are some of the funniest moments in Hindi cinema. He could perform gags, clown, and had a talent for verbal as well as his muchfamed musical humour. Shammi Kapoor was a star of romantic comedies, one of his best being Professor, while the tragic hero Dilip Kumar surprised everyone with his comic performance in Ram aur Shyam. Amitabh Bachchan is a fine comic and perhaps his best role is as Anthony Gonsalves in Amar Akbar Anthony. The real comic star of the 1990s and early 2000s was undoubtedly Govinda, an all-round entertainer and one of the best dancers in Hindi cinema, who was well matched by Karisma Kapoor in a series of comedies, mostly directed by David Dhawan. Govinda played a simple, good-hearted character, whose innocence leads him from one comical situation to another, digging himself deeper and deeper into misunderstandings, disguises and ludicrous situations. Kader Khan often supplemented Govinda's roles with his verbal humour. Several action heroes turned successfully to comedy including Akshay Kumar, who starred in blockbusters such as Singh is Kinng, Housefull and Bhool Bhulaiyaa. In the latter, he was joined by Rajpal Yadav, marking the trend for some of India's mostly highly skilled actors--Paresh Rawal, Anupam Kher, Boman Irani--to take to comedy. Salman Khan, thought of as an action hero although

Bachchan
Amar Akbar Anthony 1977

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

NEW

NEW

37

MAGIC OF MOVIES
his comic performance in Andaz Apna Apna, 1994, was incredible, has become one of the top box office stars in his films which mix action and romance with the comedy, including the brilliant Dabangg. Shah Rukh Khan's biggest hits are his romantic comedies. Perhaps today it is impossible to be a Hindi film star without a talent for comedy on a scale not seen before. Comedy in Hindi cinema, as in Hollywood, is male-centred, with few female comedians evident. The romantic comic heroines include Meena Shorey, the `Lara Lappa Girl', Geeta Bali, Madhubala, Hema Malini, and Sridevi, whose comic talent in Mr India may be revived for her forthcoming English Vinglish. Tun Tun and Manorama provided humour with their funny appearances while Farah Khan breaks the gender stereotype, less as a comic actor than as the director of hugely successful films such as Om Shanti Om, where she parodies all elements of Hindi film style. Many directors have comic moments in their films, so the King of Romance, Yash Chopra, presents characters whose sense of humour is always endearing. r raha hoon aapse ka rz A : r a Kishore m u K e r Humour is also used to talk about forbidden topKisho Kumar ics, so Kal Ho Na Ho and Dostana introduced hoOm Prakash: Karz ke saath arz! Manmauji mosexuality in ways rarely seen in Hindi cinema. 1962 Hrishikesh Mukherjee was loved for his gentle, warm comedy whether directing Raj Kapoor in Anari, or getting Paresh Rawal, is a classic. Rajkumar Hirani has Dharmendra to give a brilliant performance as the brought comedy with a purpose, with the creation of pershuddh Hindi speaking driver (vahan-chalak) of Chupke haps the greatest comic character in Hindi film, Munnabhai, Chupke. His Golmaal had Amol Palekar playing a hilarious again with action hero-turned-comic, Sanjay Dutt, as double role, following his acclaimed performances in Munnabhai and Arshad Warsi as his sidekick, Circuit. Basu Chatterji's Rajnigandha, Chhoti Si Baat and Chitchor. Hirani's 3 Idiots, starring Aamir Khan, one of the biggest hits Sai Paranjpe's Chashme Buddoor is another landmark of all time, is a comedy with a social message. Aamir Khan comedy and the genre was very popular among the new has recently produced two important comedies: Peepli Live!, wave of cinema in the 1980s, with the most enduring a satire on the media, and the scatological Delhi Belly. Film humour has become a source of humour outside the and funniest film being Kundan Shah's Jaane Bhi Do Yaaron, which mixes satire on the building trade with films themselves. Today the most popular jokes are about sufarce, references to European cinema and a crazy staging perstar Rajinikanth and his greatness (Sample this: When I of the Mahabharata. Shyam Benegal's comedy, Welcome pass through immigration, the officers show me their to Sajjanpur, found him new audiences among the passports). Hindi films have not created a character to replace Ajit and Mona Darling from the 1970s. Ajit younger generation, while Anurag Kashyap (Hamid Ali Khan) was associated with crazy shows a major talent for comedy in dialogues and catchphrases (`Come on his Gangs of Wasseypur 1 (2 not Lily, don't be silly'). These circulate released in the UK). more widely than the films themMany of the major box office selves ever did as they also send successes in the last two up the craziness of some Hindi decades have been comedies, film dialogues themselves: Ise in particular those directed Hamlet poison khila do... to be by David Dhawan, who se not to be ho jaayega! and earlier had a string of Isko liquid oxygen mein daal hits with Govinda and do... Liquid isko jeene nahin Priyadarshan, and whose dega aur oxygen isko marne Hera Pheri, where he cast Suniel Shetty and Akshay nahin degi. Kumar along with

reat Wall of China "Raabert, isko G jaakar phansi laga do,

le

Rachel Dwyer is professor of Indian Cultures and Cinema at School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London.

`great wall hanging' ban jayegi."

Ajit
INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIVE

NEW

