Presentation

**

-

&(- a. aood

The right school is only the beginning of a lifetime of educational enjoyment. So a quick guide on what to look out for.
For as many years as there has been a place called "school," educationists have been seeking ways to fashion the best educational experience for our children - the place that would provide students with the best possible education and send them forth fully prepared to meet life's challenges. In this ideal school, all members of the community -- students, teachers, administrators, parents, school staff, and business and community members -would participate in developing and implementing studies. Flexible scheduling would be the norm. A focus on collaboration and the benefits of lifelong learning would also be key. Therefore it is believed that a good school is one with a strong and professional administrators and teachers; a broad curriculum available to all students; a philosophy that says all children can learn if taught, coupled with high expectations for all students; a school climate that is conducive to learning; safe, clean, caring, and well-organised with an ongoing assessment system that supports good instruction supported by a high level of parental involvement.

AnimPACTreature .
Almost a decade, and Scottish High International School today overlooks the many challenging facets that have been dealt with...and one of them was 'Trust'. The factor that propelled it against the odds and won the credence of countless was its tenacity and clarity to build every student into a bright future. The picture today!!! It is one of the largest IB Schools in the world and stands 9th this year among the most respected schools in India.

CALLING THE SHOTS
T
he Quintessence- This Planet and its children are the only real important features of existence. Education is the process of adapting and equipping children for the world in which they live: implanting morality, fostering attitudes and habits, teaching the basic skills that the world requires. It is a barter between the planet and the children. The primordial responsibility of educators today is to deal with them responsibly, and build an environment of equity. Keeping these essentials as pristine, Scottish High International School makes headway towards the skyline that ensures a progressive future. Equipped with all the modern infrastructural amenities that provide world class education to the students, supported by an excellent team of teachers from various fields of knowledge, Scottish High International School believes in augmenting the independence of learning and freedom of expression. have both NCC boys and girls' wings. Scottish High, with its state-of-the-art and fully equipped innovation lab, trail blazes new pathways in the field of communication and technology. It empowers its students with the latest technology tools to aid creativity and innovation. The digitized library boasts of unlimited print and audio visual materials. It is also the Member of the British Council Library and the American Center Library, New Delhi. Over a span of 7 years, the school has stretched itself into broader perimeters with its inexorable commitment, firmly building the academic foundation necessary for a lifetime of learning. With this unexampled undertaking, the school stands on an exalted pedestal with its imperial structure sheltering more than 1400 IB students under one roof, thus being one of the largest IB schools in the world. Personifying Excellence- Offering internationally benchmarked academic programs for the children with an academic curriculum following the high standards and inquiry based learning, the school offers a wide range of interesting electives for the unique students. Dedicated staff, and teachers, integrated infrastructure, unabbreviated aids of learning, teamed up with a clear vision, Scottish High qualifies all the yardsticks of preeminence. In progress, the School won the coveted 'Value for money1 award and ranked 9th this year among International schools in the annual EducationWorld-C fore, India's Most Respected Schools Survey 2012. At the moment Scottish High International School harvests the fruits of its toil with the simplicity of its vision that stands on the keystone of building the future with responsibility!

Consummate program for wholesome growth- An authorized IB World School, from Pre-Nursery to XII, Scottish High follows International Baccalaureate Primary Years Program for classes Pre-Nursery- V, International Baccalaureate Diploma Program for classes XI & XII, ICSE for class X & IX, Cambridge IGCSE for classes IX & X, ISC for classes XI & XII. Besides academics, the School believes in nourishing the students with a parade of activities that can augment their multi-faceted development. Art, Music, Dance, Craft, Yoga, Dramatics, Public Speaking, Soccer, Golf, Badminton, Tennis, Swimming, Horse riding, Archery, Basket Ball, Cricket and Taekwondo are some of the tools that make up for the wholesome evolvement of its students. It is one of the first schools in the country to have ISO 9001 (Quality systems), ISO 14001(Environment systems) and OHSAS 18001 (Health and Safety) certifications. In addition to this, it is also one of the few schools in the region to

With the assertion that 'only when you build these students, the future will come with betterment and breakthroughs', TODAY SCOTTISH HIGH INTERNATIONAL IS CALLING THE SHOTS AMONG THE BLUE-RIBBONED SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTRY.. suitably heralding the onset of a bright future!

AnimPACTreature

NUT Nguru's Interactive Classrooms @ Home
he present scenario in most educational environments where teaching is imparted through conventional means focuses on memory based short term information accumulation and not on the construction of knowledge. As a result, students are not learning through understanding and they find it difficult to tackle questions that appear to vary from those typically found in the textbooks given in the class. NUT brings unique learning solution "Interactive Classrooms @ Home" for the new age learners to make learning engaging and meaningful and also to overcome the current challenges. It is the first 'cloud campus solution1 which is built keeping in mind these central ideas:  Children already have varying degrees of access to technology. Since technology has already entered the schools, now it must be put to better use at homes to teach better and enhance student performance.  Children need to be taught 21st century skills.  With parents as co-teachers, they play a pivotal role in their child's education through technology.  Collaboration, communities and social learning networks are the way forward in the field of education.

T

Challenges Faced by Schools
SCHOOL MANAGEMENT  Connecting with all stakeholders on a single platform  Adoption of appropriate teaching and learning methodologies, which will provide a meaningful and enriching experience for teachers and students. STUDENTS  Comprehending the subject  Recalling all concepts taught  Self-assessment  Developing an interest for the subject  Understanding real life application of the concept learnt. TEACHERS  Time constraints  Making the subject equally comprehensive for all students  Pressure to score high results Parents  Not equipped to contribute actively in the child's overall education.  Do not have access to learning resources to provide support at home or assess the understanding of child.  Unable to stay in constant touch with the child's academic progress. learning can be monitored on a regular basis. A better connect with the school and the teacher is possible through Interactive Classrooms @ Home.  The NCF 2005 has recommended that schools be converted to ICT rich environments. However teachers and schools should not be mere users of technology, instead they should be able to co-create content, adopt their own teaching styles, and collaborate with the entire teaching community in order to learn and contribute to the large repository of knowledge and experience available on the World Wide Web. All this is made possible by "Interactive Classrooms @ Home." NUT Nguru's Interactive Classrooms @ Home (the solution which made learning possible at home through the advanced Cloud Technology) has been awarded "Best Interactive Solution Providers" award in World Education Awards 2012.

Advantages of Interactive Classrooms @ Home
 Technology enabled learning, simulations, 3D animations and interactive models replace rote learning and dull home lessons.  Completely mapped to the school syllabus and daily lessons, Interactive Classrooms @ Home allows students to access lessons, notes, take practice tests, submit assignments and collaborate with peers, all while sitting at home.  This Hybrid model aids students to develop questioning skills and also provides Experiential, Cognitive and Personalized learning.  Parents can now be co-teachers and play a more pivotal role in their child's education. The child's progress and

A Research study affirmed the fact that students can benefit from the flexibility and regular access to course materials provided by online education

An

Feature

MAYOOR SCHOOL,

A Majestic Forward Thinking School with a Rich Heritage
ayo College Ajmer has long carried the torch of being the hallmark of quality schooling in India, built originally to instill education par excellence in aristocratic blood. The first Earl of Lytton, Viceroy of India in 1879 had declared: "Ajmer is India's Eton and you are India's Eton boys". Mayoor School, Noida became tbe first franchise school of Mayo College General Council, Ajmer in the year 2003, inheriting this caliber by design. The school is affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education. At Mayoor, the aim is to nurture a culture of knowledge sharing and provide a dedicated approach to enriching the experiences of children, using highly interactive teaching methods blending modernity with Mayo values and traditions. The school ensures that its students excel in each and every sphere of school life, which is made possible by maintaining a balance between academics and co-curricular activities. Mayoor has established itself as a leading school in NCR and took a major leap when the students scored outstanding results in class XII and X CBSE

i

Exams. Digital learning at Mayoor is child-centered, activity based and participative in nature. Sports facilities provided at school are world class with specialized coaching in Cricket, Basketball, Horse Riding, Tennis, Karate, Swimming, and Skating. Not only this, Mayoor has carved a niche for itself in the field of co-curricular activities and has a many laurels to its credit. In this new world, with our country poised towards the future with substantial force, Mayoor School is the proud recipient of International School Award (ISA) accredited by the British Council. The School has introduced FIITJEE Integrated School Programme, scientifically designed to meet the standards of competitive exams such as NT, AIEEE etc, in the school to enable students score a good rank in competitive Entrance Exams. Mayoor School, Noida has been selected for a student exchange program with Herderschule, Giessen- a renowned school in Germany. Mayoor School also has a tie up with the Global Education Leadership Foundation for promoting leadership skills in its students.

SCOTTISH HIGH INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL, Gurgaon

OFF THE BEATEN TRACK
Scottish High International School, Gurgaon, India, is one of its kind educational institutions that holds the promise of a sustained growth for the child by opening new gates of understanding. An authorized IB World School, Scottish High is proud to be part of a worldwide family helping to develop 'Global Citizens'. The schoos offers a holistic approach to education based on a universally recognized interactive curriculum. Children are channelised, prepared and galvanised to go in and out of the realms of limitations. It is a unique blend of national and international curriculum, which is relevant to the 21st Century and accepted by leading universities all over the world. Following the International Baccalaureate curricula, the school offers a wide array of electives to provide wholesome nourishment of learning. Proudly speaking the school offers IB Primary Years Program for Pre-

A

s more and more educational institutions strive for excellence and perfection with a competitive spirit, the emergence of Scottish High has fairly underlined the poetic adage...'the road less travelled by'.

Nursery to Class V having 1500 students under one roof. IB Diploma Program for Class XI & XII, Cambridge IGCSE for classes IX & X, ISC for class XI & XII and the national curriculum (ICSE) for class X. Parallel to this, Scottish High International School treads off the beaten track having an authorized NCC wing for boys and girls; partnering with Global Education Leadership Foundation (GELF), which trains young students to cultivate leadership qualities. It has an authorized CIE centre for Cambridge teachers' training courses; is a partner with TAISI, The Association of International Schools of India. It is one of the few schools in the country with ISO 9001:2000 (Quality Systems) ISO 14001:2004 (Environment Systems) OHSAS 18001:2007 (Health and Safety) certifications. The notable aisle that has paved its way into being one of the pioneers in entwining education with social responsibility is its confederation with Special Olympics, India and that's not all, it consolidates its avant -garde disposition with its collaboration with the Govt of India for research in Autism, a revolutionary move that integrates special needs children into the mainstream of life and its abundance. TRAIL BLAZING.... Scottish High International School with its facade of Scotland fortress embodies excellence with its unparallel breakthroughs; the rank and file that becomes a force to reckon with as its clock ticks into a resplendent morrow.. ..now that's the road less travelled by.

AnimPACTFeature

NUT brings unique learning solution "Interactive Classrooms쯌ome
 IT Wizard - equips the students with core computer knowledge and IT skills  Quick School - an Education Resource Planning solution for effective school management  Mobile Science Lab - the first of its kind portable computerized Science Laboratory which enables students to correlate scientific concepts taught in the class to real life.  NUT MindChampions' Academy (MCA) - a not-for Nguru is a holistic education solution which helps profit initiative set up as a joint initiative between teachers to incorporate ICT and make teaching-learning Grand Master Viswanathan Anand and NUT, wi a better experience. NUT Nguru suite consists of objective of promoting Chess in schoolf to en,  Interactive Classrooms - an end to end Teaching development of young minds. Learning solution for classrooms that uses elements of  IPICT - The International Pedagogical interactivity, automation and web links, library  Interactive Classrooms @ Home - It is first of a kind comprehensive, flexible and effective programme for the continued professional solution which uses the Cloud technology to make development of teachers. learning possible at home and make it a 24 x 7 텮ccreditation - Accreditation is awarded to serrate"" process after carrying out structured assessment of***^  Math lab - State-of-the-art Mathematics Laboratory compliance to the standards. for schools which comes with Geometer's Sketchpad Software, Multiple Teaching and Learning Aids like With a great vision of betterment and improvement in Technology Applications, Videos, Manipulative, the education system, NUT Nguru promises the best of Measuring Instruments and Theme Based Ambience services and quality to all its customers.

N

UT Nguru has changed the way children learn with the introduction of complete education and technology solutions for the next generation schools. Across 17,000 schools in India, it has made learning an easier process for more than 10 million children. It has dexterously leveraged technology and encompassed all possible components to meet the present and future needs of schools.

DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOL, Gautam Buddh Nagar

PS, Gautam Buddh Nagar, believes in a comprehensive system of education that will help develop children into well-groomed personalities and channelise their inherent talents. The school is committed to provide a system of instruction that will encourage the thought process and reasoning, which would gear children to be logical, analytical, practical, creative and innovative. Set in the lush green, (10 acre) plot of land in a pollution-free environment with an ambience, which would be unparalleled, DPS, Gautam Buddh Nagar is a part of one of the largest chains of educational institutions in the world. Mrs. Indira Kohli, Principal, of the esteemed institution is a seasoned professional with 22 years of rich experience in teaching, Examination Coordination and managing School Administration. Dr. Rajneesh Dubey (IAS), Joint Secretary (Ministry of Environment & Forests, Govt. of India) says "It is a pleasure to be at DPS, Expressway on Earth Day. It was a memorable performance by the children. The ambience, layout and the attitude of Principal and her entire team are impressive. I am sure the campus will set an example of sustainability and green practices. Great work, Ms Indira Kohli, keep it up! Mr. M.K.S Sundaram (IAS), District Magistrate (Gautam Buddh Nagar) says "Visited the school on the eve of Independence Day (14th November, 2012). The children had exhibited their talent in an immense way. They made everyone proud of the nation through their patriotic skit. My best wishes to the students and staff to scale newer heights in all their future endeavours.

D

COMMITED TO EXCELLENCE
She was a part of the Core team and started Delhi Public School, Vasant Kunj for 14 years thereafter the founder Headmistress of Delhi Public School, Sushant Lok for 5 years and a founder Principal of G. D. Goenka, Ghaziabad. Now she is setting up a school in Delhi Public School, Gautam Buddh Nagar. She has a hands-on experience and skills in developing curriculum to accommodate different learning styles. Mrs. Kohli has a rich experience of facilitating/ coaching students by using interactive discussions and leadership approach to help students learn and apply concepts in subjects. She brings to the school her leadership, commitment, mentoring, guiding and enhancing teachers/ students skills. Adhering primarily to CBSE based central curriculum, the School follows the academic guidelines laid by The Delhi Public School Society, New Delhi. The state of the art school offers contemporary student centric curriculum, plethora of opportunities for over all personality development and exposure to nurturing environment attuned to global standards.

I INDIRA KOHLI
PRINCIPAL

