NET FLUX

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

star of the week

app alert

Top of the Lot
web wow
Introduce your children to the tooth fairy, wake up on time and plan your holiday better. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. Sleep If U Can the alarm continues to ring till you take a picture of a particular object, like say, your toothbrush.

A SCREEN SHOT OF THE GAME

Dance Off

RAKESH NAIR

Snuggling Surprise
Rakesh Nair, a Kerala-born chef in London, has gained fame overnight. Sadly, not for his cooking skills but as the unknowing star of a video with over a million views. The chef of an Indian restaurant, The Cinnamon Club, was on a train when a woman in the next seat fell asleep and tried snuggling up to him.While the world was amused by this accidental PDA, one person wasn't--Nair's wife, Latha.After the video exploded online, Nair is cashing in, all set to give a food demonstration at celebrity chef Jamie Oliver's The Big Feastival.

Did you ever think your favourite movers and shakers on reality show Jhalak Dikhla Jaa could Visa Tooth Fairy have done a little better? Colors, calculates how much the TV channel that money parents should airs the programme, has leave their children launched an online game when they lose a tooth. (Jdjkeepdancing.com) allowing Travel + Leisure viewers to be a part of the dance gives you unique routines. Designed by BBC activities and places to Worldwide Productions, a user explore on a holiday. can choose a professional dancer from the Indian show as well as the funonet UK and US counterATurkish couple exchanged vows via Twitter parts and create to say 'I do' on their iPads.The groom, who a dance works for a news website, came up with the idea. number.

web tips
Parents, here's what you need to know about interacting with your children on social networks. Don't: Admonish them. It's a public forum and it's embarrassing. Over engage. Don't comment on every post your child puts up. Send friendship requests to your children's friends. Wait for them to reach out to you.

Anupam Kher auditioned for a role in Silver Linings Playbook from a small Rajasthan village via Skype.

tweet tweet

app watch

viral video

Ruling the Roost
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on September 11:

Desi SingSong
Create a special playlist for Indian music with the mobile app, Saavn.The app is free and can be used offline. It allows users a stream of Bollywood, Indian and regional South Asian music with content from more than 200 providers.

Messages of outrage over cartoonist Aseem Trivedi's #AseemTrivedi arrest for sedition flooded 1,452,170 social networks.
#Funnybreakupexcuses

Netizens revealed their with partners--from `You support Congress'to `You don't follow me on Twitter' .

396,386 reasons for breaking up

VIDEO OF BAD LIP SYNC SCENE FROM TWILIGHT

#bollywood
805,627

Gossip about latest news from Bollywood--from the #Mysmileis promo of Aiyyaa to Ranbir 59,812 Kapoor wanting to experience a live-in relationship. #PepsiT20 Tweets describing users' 16,726 smiles also trended. Cricket fans killed time playing the Pepsi T20 game online ahead of the ICC T20 World Cup in Sri Lanka.

This week, a hilariously bad lip sync of a scene from Twilight, a mom and son duo grooving to the hit song Gangnam Style, and a caterpillar's continuous attempts to annoy a frog, caught our attention on the Web.
Bad lip sync from Twilight

6 million views
Mom and son dancing to Gangnam Style

4.9 million views
Acaterpillar annoying a frog

*Figures denote number of followers

1.9 million views
*Views from when videos were uploaded

