COMEDY BOOM

Tickle the Ribs and Wait for the Cash
Comedy spells big bucks at the box office. And a full house at stand-up gigs.
y chest has become blouse," says Ajay Devgn to Abhishek Bachchan as the two hang on to a car dangling at the edge of a cliff in the closing scene of Bol Bachchan. What he meant was that his chest was swelling with pride. Whacky, innuendo-laden one-liners like "Twelve o'clock in the night you do one night stand for me" may have butchered the English language but left the audiences in splits. Most importantly, it saw comedy king, director Rohit Shetty, laugh all the way into the golden Rs 100-crore league. Be it edgy, double-meaning dialogues or scenes of rippling muscles tearing shirts, like Salman Khan in Dabangg, high-on-comedy films as well as TV shows are making merry and money. With naughty banter and irreverent potshots at everything from politics to sex and religion to food habits, peppered with a heavy dose of often vulgar inanities, comic heroes are India's new stars. Television, too, is wiping away its tearjerker kitchen soaps for a few loud laughs with shows

n. ni hoo is a a h s i in fh i aakhr that is left o k a a inke m cle)." 'm all "Main hoon inka (I y. I'm his un l Mama other's fami m

Ajay Devgn, 43
Role Reversal Back in 1997, the upright policeman in Ishq who lectured baddies on their moral failings before proceeding to beat them up revealed he had a funny side. Years later, he has turned his image of an action hero on its head with some of the biggest comedy hits like the Golmaal series and more recently Bol Bachchan. Looks Can Lie Contrasts his intense image with ridiculous lines delivered with a straight face, and over-the-top action sequences. On His Plate Son Of Sardar, Himmatwala, Golmaal 4.

m

By Aditi Pai, Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege

"Agar Gabbar gay hota toh Sholay kaise banti? (If Gabbar was gay, how would Sholay be made?)"

like Laughter Challenge on Star One and Comedy Circus on Sony. After all, isn't watching Raju Srivastav wonder "Agar Gabbar gay hota toh Sholay kaise banti?" a happier way to end the day than the scheming saas and wailing bahu? "Every day, when you are looking at Parliament that hasn't worked for 190 days in a row or Kumkum (the protagonist of the serial Kumkum that used to run on Star Plus) who has lost her mother, you can see why comedy is such an easy pick," says Vir Das, whose crackling one-liners about everything from Hrithik Roshan's hairstyle (allegedly affected by the Kargil war) to calling Rohit Bal a "queen" have enthralled and scandalised people alike. Stand-up comic gigs are the new entertainment on a night-out for the well-heeled. There's no censorship here. Cuss words, jibes at politicians and jokes about film stars, references to all things sexual, from orgasms to orgies; all are permitted. It's cheeky, it's risqué, and audiences are loving it. "It has opened people's minds and they are now willing to laugh at themselves and their country," says Charlotte Ward, operations head of The Comedy Store, Mumbai. The UKbased comedy shop made live gigs glamorous after it opened an office in Mumbai in 2010. At first, audiences were apprehensive, especially about being picked on in the front row. Now, people stand by the door waiting to get in so they can be in the front row. Are there no no-go areas for stand-up comics? "We avoid topics like Kashmir that have the potential to divide the room," says Ward. "Stand-up comedy got

"When elders get cozy, don't put your nosey (Jab bade baat kar rahe ho, bachche beech mein bola nahin karte)."
Paresh Rawal, 62
Earthy Humour He had us rolling on the floor with the character of a broke middleclass Maharashtrian man Baburao Ganpatrao Apte in the Hera Pheri films. He followed it with comic roles like the blind Illiyas in Aankhen, confused Gujarati father-in-law Manilal in Awara Paagal Deewana and the stingy father Radhe Shyam Tiwari in Hungama. First Comic Role Hera Pheri. Signature Style Whether it is the funny soda glasses of Baburao in Hera Pheri or the bucktoothed grin of Lilaram in Malamaal Weekly, no one does it better than Rawal in personifying the lighter side of the common man. Funniest Films Hera Pheri, Malamaal Weekly. Roles Ahead Oh My God, Kamaal Dhamaal Malamaal, and Khiladi 786.

Raju Srivastav, 48
Local Flavour Gajodhar bhaiyya to his diehard fans, a character he once essayed, Srivastav has mimicked everyone from Mithun Chakraborty to Baba Ramdev. The Kanpur-born comedian came to Mumbai in 1980. In 2005, Laughter Challenge on Star One catapulted him to instant fame and made him a TV staple with shows like Raju Hazir Ho on NDTV Imagine and Comedy
FOTOCOP FOTOCOP

Bharat Jadhav, 46
Circus on Sony. He has acted in 35 films.
First Comedy Act Haso Hasao in 1985. USP Animated gestures and rib-tickling dialogues. In the Works He is planning to direct a comedy film. Money Matters Gets Rs 3 lakh to Rs 8 lakh per show.

"Mahje data khayche ek ani dakhvayche ek (I have different teeth to eat and to show)."

Tried and Tested Be it the silver-haired, safari suit-clad landlord from Bakula Namdev Ghotale or the ever hungry Galgale from the play Sahi Re Sahi, Jadhav has become a Marathi superstar. Since he debuted in 1992, he has notched up 80 films and nine plays, a majority of his roles being comic. A senseless one-liner from his film Pachadlela, `Baba lagin dhinchak

dhinchak' was even remixed into a hit song, a prooof of the comic hero's popularity.
First Comic Act All the Best in 1992. Trademark Style His toothy smile and rustic accent. Funniest Films or Plays Shrimant Damodar Pant, Bakula Namdev Ghotale and Galgale Nighale.

40

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

COMEDY BOOM
Vir Das, 33
Stand and Deliver After four years of serious acting training at Knox College, Illinois, Das put up an act at the India Habitat Centre in Delhi in 2003 while on vacation. He never looked back, doing stand-up acts across the country--Who Let the Das Out?, Not for Members Only, VIRagra and India's largest selling comedy show, History of India VIRitten. There have been TV shows too, but it was Delhi Belly that brought him to the masses. First Look Brown Men Can't

Hump, a 90-minute solo comedy act in 2002. He was a final year student then.
Style Statement Slapstick and satire. A lot of the material comes from his own life. First Love Despite six films lined up for release, Das does stand-up gigs five days a week. See Him Next in Sooper Se Ooper, Golu Pappu, Amit Sahni Ki List .

hin adi na irl a h s h "Ye ti. This g , ho sak me blow job t n 1s ve has gi nce I am a 2 i and s tury man, I l cen n her ora ive have g sure too." plea
T NARAYAN/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Kunal Roy Kapur, 32
Joke's on Me His claim to fame is his role as Nitin Beri in the 2011 dark comedy Delhi Belly. Kapur says India has a lot to laugh about: "Our joint family system, our accent and our hypocrisy are perfect staple for comedy." He prefers humour in which the characters in the film are the butt of jokes. Director's Cut Directed the satirical mockumentary The President is Coming in 2009. Trademark Style Sloppy big guy who always lands in trouble. Foolproof Formula A comedy of errors and a cat-and-mouse game. Coming Soon Nautanki Saala, Kala Ghoda.

"This is one ugly car.This is what you get when a donkey humps an autorickshaw."

recognition as an art only around seven years ago. Earlier, we were called mimicry artists and used as fillers in music shows. Today, it is a full-fledged industry," says Srivastav, one of India's original comedians in Hindi. The entry of movies like Housefull 2 and Bol Bachchan into the hallowed Rs 100-crore club is proof of the resurgence of laugh riots. "There's a new glamour associated with comedy now. Earlier we needed comedians like Johnny Lever and Mehmood; now the main hero, be it Salman Khan or Ajay Devgn, is not afraid to contort his face and utter funny one-liners," says Rakesh Sarang, producer of the weekly stand-up show Fu Bai Fu on Zee Marathi, which raked in average ratings of 4.2 on Marathi channels. It's not just Khan and Devgn who are giving a comic touch-up to their action hero avatars. Even Akshay Kumar has given up his karate moves to play one of the multiple Jollys in the laugh riot Housefull 2. "Thanks to the comedy boom, people with funny appearances like me started getting lead roles. Stars like Devgn and Abhishek Bachchan are driving comedy to the forefront just like Hollywood has comediandriven films with actors like Ben Stiller, Adam Sandler and Eddie Murphy," says Kunal Roy Kapur, who acted in the laugh riot Delhi Belly, directed the hilarious The President is Coming, and is a stand-up comic in his spare time. Comedy is no longer just a big city fad. Das has taken his History of India VIRitten show to Shimla, Muzaffarnagar, Lucknow, Meerut and Indore. "The Indore show in August this year turned out to be one of the most risqué shows I have ever done," he says. Besides national news, stand-up comics dip into the local story. The money is good. The Comedy Store engages everyone for a fixed price of Rs 10,000 per evening but for corporate shows or events, stand-up comics charge anywhere between Rs 3 lakh to Rs 8 lakh a night. Stand-up comics are even bagging Bollywood roles. "Those who have never been exposed to a stand-up act are now queuing up after seeing me in Delhi Belly," says Das. 

42

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

