UP FRONT

VINEET NAYAR

BE ATRANSFORMER TO BE ALEADER
I
always get nervous when I'm asked to give advice to tions. There is so much in our country that is broken, so much young aspiring leaders. I have really never followed a to be fixed, and people who look at this scenario as an opporleadership model myself. For me, leadership is a state of tunity for change might be the achievers of tomorrow while mind, that of an explorer for whom the unknown is a lot others will just remain dreamers and commentators. "Do you have a deep-rooted conviction?" I usually more exciting than the known. One who is simply not obsessed about getting to the top but about what he would do classify people in three categories. The first kind is after he gets there. It is a state of mind which is not afraid Transformers; they wake up every day wanting to change to stand apart from the crowd, to be different, to step out of the world. The second kind is Lost Souls; they are in the business of taking energy away from people, you sit with them the comfort zone and risk all for what it believes in. I have always wondered why some youngsters go on to and they depress you. But the last kind is the worst; I call become successful leaders, while others who may work even them Fence-sitters. They sit right in the middle and are used harder at achieving leadership roles do not. I don't have the by everybody. If you want to be a leader, you have to become answers but have observed some common patterns and per- a transformer first and have a deep-rooted conviction about haps a good starting point is to ask yourself three questions: something you strongly believe in, which is an integral part "Where is your Point A?" Remember how we learnt how of who you are and is apparent to everyone. Once there were two trees in a village. The one next to to draw lines as kids--we first steadied our pencil at a starting point, or Point A, and then dragged it to the end point, a river had a fat trunk and was green and beautiful. or Point B. Unfortunately, as we grow up, we forget this sim- The second tree stood on an arid patch of land. It was thin, ple rule. We are so obsessed with reaching Point B that we had few leaves and people ignored it. One night the village forget to do a reality check on today, our Point A. You ask experienced a storm and the villagers woke up, assuming any youngster on what he/she wants to become and you will the tree next to the river would have survived and the other tree would have died. But have an answer pronto--a docSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com the opposite happened. The tor, an engineer, a cricketer; but reason was simple. The tree ask him/her where they are next to the river used to get today? The answer for most is water easily and therefore its in the clouds. If you do not have roots were shallow and not an honest assessment of where able to withstand the storm. you are today, do you think you The other tree had deep can get to where you want to roots and therefore it survived. go? The key difference between If you do not have a deepa dreamer and an achiever is rooted conviction, won't you that the achiever knows his be blown away by the first Point A and is thus able to draw advent of adversity? So ask a straight line to Point B. yourself again, what is it that "Do you see opportunities in you really stand for? imperfections?" The loud noise As I said at the very beginaround us today about what ning I have only a few uneasy is broken is both distracting questions and no answers. and all-consuming. Successful Finally it all comes down to you. young leaders are neither disSo pause and shut out all the tracted nor depressed. They are noise that surrounds you till all excited instead, because they you can hear is your heartbeat, see an opportunity in imperfecreminding you of your true calltion. When a diamond-cutter ing and the sound of each looks at the rough diamond, he breath screaming for you to gets excited because he sees an Successful young leaders are neither stand up and lead... Once you opportunity in that imperfecdistracted nor depressed. They are excited hear that sound clearly, you will tion, as does a potter when he instead, because they see an opportunity in not need to hear anything or sees dirty clay. These leaders are like Mary Kom, whose imperfection. When a diamond-cutter looks at anyone again. world was not perfect too, but the rough diamond, he gets excited because he sees an opportunity in that imperfection, as who decided to find opportuniVineet Nayar is vice chairman & CEO, does a potter when he sees dirty clay. ties amongst all the imperfecHCL Technologies

10

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

