Mail

Worlds Apart
AUGUST 20, 2012

After 65 years of freedom, India and Pakistan have become distant neighbours

R A J N E E S H B AT R A ,

Poles Apart
The historical seeds of Partition were bitter, from where only bitter fruits grew ("Worlds Apart", August 20). The relations between India and Pakistan, however, can improve if the two neighbours cooperate with each other. Considering India's stupendous growth in the last two decades, Pakistan can benefit in areas such as trade, infrastructure and other crucial domains if it develops better ties with India. If willing, India can help Pakistan strategically uproot the terrorist outfits in Pakistan as well. Despite the bitter history, it is never too late to plant healthy seeds in order to harvest better relations.
SANJIV GUPTA, Australia

Long Road Ahead
Former Haryana minister Gopal Goyal Kanda relived his worst nightmare when Geetika Sharma committed suicide ("Suicide Politics Claims Minister", August 20). Sharma was an employee with Kanda's now-defunct MDLR Airlines. She has named Kanda and his aide Aruna Chadha in her suicide note. Hired at the age of 17, Sharma caught the fancy of Kanda, who granted her many favours. For Kanda, it is a long road ahead, as the opposition parties are baying for his blood and there is no scope of support from any political quarter.
NAGESH KAPOOR, Kanpur

It is very unfortunate that Pakistani women are subjected to such torture and

Behind many great fortunes there is a crime. Geetika Sharma's suicide should be investigated thoroughly and the guilty should be brought to book. It is essential because many powerful individuals believe they can misuse power and money to harass and influence others for their vested interests. INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 3, 2012

NEW

``

``

The conversation between Gandhi and Jinnah may have been imaginary, but the wounds in the hearts of Indians and Pakistanis are real and are still oozing blood.
Delhi

humiliation on the basis of gender ("Where Every Day is a Battle", August 20). Violence against women and the dark undercurrent of religious extremism come in the way of a country's growth and prosperity. Women need to be given a more dignified place in society and be treated on an equal footing with men. They should not be just mute spectators, but must oppose any unfair treatment that is meted out to them. Not just Pakistan, even in India, many women are victims of honour killing, bride burning, domestic violence, acid violence and rape. Both the countries should wake up to these problems.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

The word feudal ("It Runs in the Family", August 20) is often loosely used to deplore dynastic democ-

Mail
racy in India today. Author Mark Tully suggests that India's democratic dynasties have risen because they suit the current circumstances and that they are modern political hybrids. There is no doubt that dynasties abound in India-- the most obvious being the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty. Indira Gandhi is usually credited with converting Congress into a family business. Powerful dynastic patriarchs such as Mulayam Singh Yadav, M. Karunanidhi, Naveen Patnaik have carved out a niche for themselves. The recent estimates show that over 28 per cent of the current MPs are dynasts. Dynasties seem to be serving the needs of India.
RINKY KHAN, Ambala

35
consignments. Certificates containing details of goods, their value, weight, and names of consigners and consignees, with their addresses, should be submitted to the Railways at the time of booking a consignment. Such certificates may help check scams and identify any procedural lapses during transport of goods.
SUMAN SEN, Kolkata

Conspiracy", August 20). His supporters claim that his arrest in the run-up to the recent bypolls has fuelled their suspicions about foul-play. They feel that the ruling party leaders are trying to send him to a mental hospital or eliminate him in jail and grab his property. Is he a godman or conspirator?
ATUL CHOWDHARY, Allahabad

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
O CT O B E R 1 -1 5 , 1 9 7 7

A Wounded Civilisation
One of the earliest civilisations known to man--Mohenjo-Daro in the Indus valley--is gradually passing through its second, and what may be its final phase of destruction. The ominously steady disintegration of Mohenjo-Daro's carefully preserved and invaluable ruins is, ironically enough, due to lack of international attention and funds for its maintenance and preservation. Situated about 200 miles from Karachi near the city of Larkana, Mohenjo-Daro is one of the most extensively excavated of the Indus sites, apart from being a major source of archaeological knowledge and tourist revenue for Pakistan. As a direct result of the lack of preservation efforts, the 240-acre site is facing the threat of a rapidly rising water table coupled with extensive water-logging and salinity. The second major threat to the site is the changing course of the river Indus on whose banks MohenjoDaro is situated. The Pakistan government made some efforts at saving the situation in 1974, when a controlling authority was set up for the preservation of the Mohenjo-Daro site. The authority, however, has been headless for the last two years, following the death of its original chairman. The preservation authority is slated to be wound up and the 4,000-yearold site will be handed back to the department of archaeology. It will be a sad commentary on our times if Mohenjo-Daro were to be lost to the archaeological world through lack of foresight, funds Qutubuddin and interest.
MOHENJO-DARO--DUST TO DUST?

Captain Clueless
Even though Assam is bleeding, Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi is still vacillating ("Clueless on a Volcano", August 20). He had declared earlier that he would send the refugees home by August 15, but later said that the process of rehabilitation would start after Independence Day. What he calls a volcano, has claimed 78 lives. He seems to be content with announcing a CBI inquiry. The Bodo leadership wants the credentials of the inmates to be verified before they are rehabilitated, as "illegal immigrants" could take advantage. There seems to be little sign of improvement, as the people who had left the camps are returning, following fresh outbreak of clashes.
KUSUM MEHTA, Delhi

Tragic Lesson
The Wisconsin tragedy reveals the ignorance about Sikhs in the US ("`Sikhs are Not Muslims'", August 20). Not only has the community been the target of hate crimes, but also often mixed up with Muslims. Even though six people were gunned down by 40-year-old discharged US army soldier Wade Michael Page, the Sikhs saw it as a "teachable moment", where many would be made aware of their heritage and background.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

Take Them to Task
Three senior Northern Railway officers are in the dock ("Freight Scam Hits Railways", August 20) for allegedly suppressing facts that could expose a case of evasion of state levies in Punjab. Captain Yuvinder Singh Matta, joint director in Punjab's excise and taxation department, has asked them to appear before a court in Bathinda to recover details of all freight bound to or from Punjab passenger trains, since the state joined the VAT regime. They should be dealt with a stern hand. The Railway Act should be amended in order to permit authorities to check

Yes, We Can
America and India are the two largest democracies of the world, yet the US is much better governed than India, where corruption, red-tapism, nepotism and lack of patriotism are the order of the day ("The Banality of Freedom", August 20). Chaos, poor governance, power failures etc have become hallmarks of today's living. The system needs to be overhauled.
GAUTAM BAID, Hazaribagh

Web of Conspiracy
Globetrotting evangelist K.A. Paul has accused the Andhra Pradesh authorities of conspiring to declare him mad and possibly kill him ("Godman Cries

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

10

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 3, 2012

