AnimPACTreature

CHIEF MINISTER NABAM JUKI'S INDEPENDENCE DAY SPEECH

I Promises a new Arunachal
Ringing warning bells for criminals and anti-social elements, Chief Minister Mabam Tuki in his Independence Day speech reiterated that his Government will have zero-tolerance for any anti-social or criminal activity that causes social unrest and breokslaw and order. Speaking on occasion of 66th Independence Day for the first time as the state's 7th Chief Minister, Tuki said, "From this august podium, I hereby send a warning bell to all those anti-social elements not to disturb the sanctity of peace and harmony or disturb the balance of law and order." "You will be outnumbered by law abiding citizens and there would be no place on this earth for you," he cautioned while asserting that the Government will not spare any criminal irrespective of his or her background, position or connections.

T

aking strong exception to frequent bandh calls, Tuki stressed that in a democracy people have the right to protest and express their dissent but they have no right to curtail the right of other citizens. "I am sure that such dissents can be solved across the table through discussions. I call upon my people to stand united against such challenges and urge upon the administration to deal with such situations firmly and tactfully as per rule of law," he said. In another veiled 'warning', Tuki sent clear signals that his government will not give a blind eye to corrupt practices in government offices. He beckoned all to desist from indulging in corruption and stand up against it. He said everyone should

ensure that welfare funds meant for development, bestowed by the Center, are not mis-utilized. "On this auspicious occasion my sincere appeal to one and all is to check corruption, which is hampering judicious implementation of schemes," Tuki iterated while adding that his Government aspires to fulfill the promise of delivering a transparent, accountable and corruption free government to the people. In his vision to create employment avenues to at least 1 lakh youths in the current five year plan, the Chief Minister cited his belief on potentials of the state in tourism, agriculture, horticulture, tea, bamboo and rubber cultivation along with industries and handlooms and handicrafts. He informed tourism potentialities are being explored by identifying projects on priority in existing Tourist Travel Circuits, which have been recently increased from 7 to 11 circuits. Tourism infrastructures have been leased out to private parties besides enhancing skilled and standard services through capacity building trainings. Tuki announced that soon the Chief Ministers Transport Subsidy Scheme would be introduced for educated unemployed graduates by providing subsidy for purchase of tourist taxis in certain viable routes under the "Mukhya Mantri Paryatan Vikas

AnimPACTFeature
Yojna". Under this scheme educated unemployed youths will be given a subsidy of a maximum of Rs. 3 Lakhs for taking up tourism related transport infrastructure. "My objective is to provide a beneficiary with a tourist cab, which will be owned, maintained and operated by the beneficiary alone. For this, he would be properly trained in all fields. Also the beneficiary can double up as a tourist guide taking his income a notch higher," he said. To begin with 200 beneficiaries would be selected for the scheme as a pilot project. Identifying employment avenues and providing beneficiaries with the skill for employment would be the responsibilities of the State Employment Generation Council and the State Skill Development Council respectively constituted under initiatives of the Chief Minister. Further, Tuki revealed the proposal to launch a Chief Minister's Livelihood Mission, his personal initiative to channelize youth power and generate employment. Livelihood School proposes to provide vocational training to school drop outs in the age group of 18 to 35 so that they can earn their livelihood honorably. by continuing to encourage NGOs such as R K Mission, Sharada Mission, VKVs, Don Bosco etc. through enhanced grant-in-aids. The Government also proposes to set up six Model Degree Colleges, of which one each will be at Daporijo in Upper Subansiri, Geku in Upper Siang, Basar in West Siang and Roing in Lower Dibang Valley. Three more colleges - Govt. College Doimukh, Tadar Taniang College, Nyapin and Govt. College, Daporijo - are slated to start from this current academic session. In the health sector the Government is set to guarantee health security to the people by covering all BPL families under the Rashtriya Suraksha Bima Yojana. We are considering introducing Chief Minister's Health Insurance schemes to cover death or injury and treatment of people living below poverty line. Acknowledging the presence of immense talent in sportspersons of the state, the Government has formulated and adopted a pragmatic State Sports Policy that would provide adequate incentives to sportspersons and boost sporting events in the state. As encouragement Tuki announced a cash prize of Rs 25 Lacs for a sportsperson qualifying for the Olympic Games, Rs. 50 lacs for all Bronze Medal winners, Rs. 75 lacs for Silver and Rs. 1 crore for all Gold medal winners in the Olympics. To express his commitment he declared a cash award of Rs 10 lacs for M C Mary Kom, who clinched a bronze in the just concluded Olympics. To promote, preserve and document the rich cultural heritage of the state, Tuki said that a new scheme - "Living Heritage" - would be launched to encourage local artists, artisans and exponents of traditional art forms and establishing a Culture Village and Tourism Haat. Union Ministry of Cultural Affairs has recently approved Rs 36 crores for creation of a regional Cultural Centre (village) at Itanagar. Tuki also revealed his plans for introducing Metro Cable Car besides constructing fly-overs and sky-walks in selected locations in Itanagar and Naharlagun that will facilitate smooth movement of vehicles and pedestrians in the twin capital cities. He has also proposed to have cement-concrete roads in the state capital as well as district headquarters. Other top priorities of the Government are food security, air connectivity, roads including the Trans-Arunachal Highway and those under PMGSY, e-governance, hydro-power, women SHGs, computerization of commercial tax, etc.

"By adopting extensive PPP mode in tourism, education, health, hydro-power and other infrastructure development sectors, we have succeeded in attracting many private investments that will bring infrastructural development and open up employment avenues," he said.
During current financial year the Government has submitted an ambitious proposal for Rs. 314.73 crores to guarantee wage employment to maximum households under MGNREGA while under IAY it is proposed to construct 8339 new houses. "You will be glad to know that Union Ministry of Rural Development has assured to increase the fund allocation for Ariinachal Pradesh for Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) scheme from the present Rs. 45800 to Rs. 75000 per house," Tuki informed. Setting education and health as top priorities of the government, the Chief Minister assured to achieve 100% literacy rate during the 12" Plan period

