Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE TREASURE HUNTER
A different kind of tycoon flourishes in Yasmeen Premji's Mumbai
of its rich history so seamlessly into the story. As she describes it: "Fortune t's just as well the subtitle on the lurked around the corner, a dream cover of Yasmeen Premji's book says away, a scheme away. The city keeps "A Novel", because the first instinct their dreams alive and, in time. Bomafter reading the absorbing tale of bay itself became the dream." It also Lalljee Lakha is to Google the man and shows the birth and growth of a tycoon the remains of the empire he left be- of a sort different from today's Bollyhind. The man is fictional but the city garchs. They made their mistakes, DAYS OF GOLD of Mumbai that dominates Premji's dealing in armaments and opium, but AND SEPIA book is not. Her narrative takes us their heart was where their wallets byYasmeen Premji from the unforgiving desolation of were and both were deep. They built HarperCollins Kutch where Lalljee is an illiterate institutions that continue to educate Price: RS 399 goatherd to a new Bombay that is dis- and enlighten India Shining today. Pages: 419 covering its survivor's streak. As Surprisingly for a book dedicated Lalljee grows from a helper at a kirana to such an obviously macho man, BETWEEN THE COVERS shop to a textile mill owner, trader in there is a great wealth of understandLalljee Lakha is fictional opium, and landlord at large, the book ing and compassion for the lives of but the cityof Mumbai chronicles the history of new India-- women in pre-independent India, that dominates Yasmeen Premji's book spanning Bal Gangadhar Tilak's call when a woman's happiness was not a for swaraj to Muhammad Ali Jinnah's priority either for her or her family. is not.Her narrative fictional request to Lalljee to come to There are several fascinating, and takes us from the unforgiving desolation Pakistan. The story is told in flashback often thinly disguised cameos. Jay, the of Kutch where Lalljee is through Lalljee's favourite grand- maharaja who let a tragic hunting acan illiterate goatherd to daughter Shahina as his formidable cident reduce him to a life of decaa newBombaythat is mansion in Breach Candy is pulled dence with the "queen of the can-can discovering its down to make way for a builder's and the will-will"; Kamala Bai, the survivor's instinct. apartment, but it is so elegant and sim- gorgeous courtesan with the even ple that the crowd of characters who more beautiful 15-year-old daughter, connect, separate, only to reconnect Sitara; the magnificent Sultan of again, doesn't interrupt the flow. Zanzibar. There's food, discreet sex, Everything about Lalljee seems and lots of now very pricey real estate. so real: His unconsummated love for When it ends, with Premji telling us SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com childhood sweetof the footprints Lalljee left behind heart Reshma, his in the city, in a marriage to widow water tank here Sakina, his yearning and a reading room for a son, and his there, in an akhada dalliance with courin a crowded basti tesan Kamala Bai. and in a generous Premji has relied scholarship which largely, or so we are helps many transtold, on accounts of form their lives, it's her mother and almost with a shock mother-in-law, but that one realises only someone who it was just a tale. has truly lived in A truly fascinating and loved Mumbai tale. can weave so much I
By Kaveree Bamzai

NEW RELEASES
ASURA: TALE OFTHE VANQUISHED
ByAnand Neelakantan Platinum Press
In this story of Ravana and his people, the author celebrates the story of the defeated which has been cherished by the outcastes of India for millennia.

I

THE KING IN EXILE: THE FALL OFTHE ROYAL FAMILY OF BURMA
BySudha Shah HarperCollins
A great family saga starring queens and princesses played out in the Golden Palace of Mandalay.

OF BIRDS AND BIRDSONG
ByM.Krishnan Aleph
One of India's foremost naturalists takes the readers through the magical world of birds familiar and exotic.

FUNDAMENTALS OFWILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
ByRajesh Gopal Natraj Publishers
In this mammoth work, the author deals with subjects as immediate as shrinking forest cover and the increasing community pressures on wildlife habitat.

INDIAATTHE OLYMPIC GAMES
ByDeeya Nayar,Priya Krishnan and Sandhya Rao Tulika
An Olympic guide for the beginners with anecdotes and milestones.

THE LIBERALS
ByHindol Sengupta HarperCollins
The story of the middle class consumption revolution unleashed by India's economic revolution of the 90s.

NO ONE HAD ATONGUE TO SPEAK: THE UNTOLD STORY OF ONE OF HISTORY'S DEADLIEST FLOODS
ByUtpal Sandesara and Tom Wooten Rain Tree
The dramatic story of the Machhu Dam disaster and its aftermath.

64

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 3, 2012

