Na tion ANDHRAPRADESH

HYDERABAD'S IRON LADY
KCR's daughter Kavitha is all pumped up to host a body-building competition

NALSAR STUDENTS AT THE CAMPUS

T

elangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) chief K. Chandrasekhar Rao's daughter Kavitha is leaving no stone unturned in her quest to become a political heavyweight. And she is going about it quite literally. The new `iron lady' is busy organising a two-day national body-building competition in Hyderabad starting on January 20. While the 33-year-old says "Mr India 2012 will spread the message of being healthy and fit", political observers think she is gearing up for a bigger political role. "At present my priority is to encourage body-building and popularise it among the youth, especially those from rural areas of Telangana. This activity is not getting any support from the government and I want to change the situation," she says. Kavitha's tryst with the sport

started in 2010 when Lakshman Reddy, a body-builder from Hyderabad, approached her for help to participate in an event in the US. He went on to win the world championship held in Florida the same year. Subsequently, she also helped another body-builder Raju Yadav take part in an international event. This prompted the Indian Body Builders Federation (IBBF) to making her its chief patron in April 2011--the first woman to hold such a position. "In terms of prize money and

KAVITHA AT A PROMOTIONAL EVENT FOR MR INDIA 2012 IN HYDERABAD

KAVITHA SAYS THE EVENT IS FOR PUBLIC GOOD. POLITICAL OBSERVERS THINK SHE IS GEARING UP FOR A BIGGER POLITICAL ROLE.

participation, Mr India 2012 is the biggest body-building event to be organised by the IBBF and its affiliate Telangana Body-Builders Association (TBBA)," says Raghunandan Rao, president of TBBA. He estimates the expenses for the tournament to be around Rs 50 lakh. The prize money for the event this year has been increased to Rs 3 lakh, up from Rs 50,000 last year. At least 300 participants from across the country are expected to participate. Organisers have also roped in Bollywood actor Rahul Dev as the brand ambassador for the event which will also witness the presence of south Indian actors such as Sarath Kumar and Suman. But Kavitha has her critics. "They have been claiming that Telangana is backward and is neglected. If that is the case, she should focus on starting English medium schools for the Dalits and backward classes of the region rather than wasting energy and money on events like Mr India. TRS is controlled by KCR's family and I think now Kavitha wants to have a bigger role in politics. Another question is how is she raising funds for such a big event?" asks Kancha Ilaiah, wellknown author and political scientist. Kavitha denies she is using her political clout to raise money for the event. "We do not have any corporate sponsors. We, including myself and other IBBF members, are pooling in our personal money for the event. Besides, a few NRIs have come forward to help us," she says. On her political ambitions, she adds, "Political positions like being an MP or MLA can help in framing policies. I may look at such a position in the future. But right now, organising the body-building competition is my priority." Now we know what keeps the Rao scion busy when she is not raising her voice for a separate Telangana. by Sreekala G.

A.PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

NALSAR

BONFIRE OFVANITIES
spat between top academics at Hyderabad's National Academy of Legal Studies and Research Law University (NALSAR), rated among the best law schools in India, threatens to tar the institution's image. An email sent by Vice-Chancellor Veer Singh, 67, on December 22, 2011 to Dean (Academic) Amita Dhanda, 56, has sparked a row over alleged sexual harassment and gender discrimination. Singh rejected the December 18 request of Dhanda seeking the services of a full-time assistant registrar, a stenographer and a peon in her office. He allegedly stated that the position of the dean was created "on account of some very personal interests of the former chancellor, a fact which is very well known to everybody''. The former chancellor in question is Justice Nisar Ahmed Kakru, who retired as Andhra Pradesh High Court chief justice on October 26, 2011, and is now chairman of the state Human Rights Commission. Allegedly targeting Kakru, Singh pointed out that NALSAR, instituted by an Andhra Pradesh law, does not provide for the dean's office and that "manipulative practices had been

Two top dons of premier law school are at war.Asexual harassment angle makes it murkier.

A

taken a bit too far", suggesting that days before he demitted office, Kakru extended Dhanda's tenure, scheduled to expire in September 2013, till March 2014. "The chancellor under the NALSAR Act, 1998, has no such authority," wrote Singh, arguing "that there is no such position (dean) at any national law university". Kakru declined comment. Stung by Singh's mail, Dhanda has complained to Kakru's successor, HC Chief Justice Madan B. Lokur, and

"There is no such position as dean at any other national law university."
VEER SINGH, VC, NALSAR

sent an email to NALSAR faculty on how the vice-chancellor's comments border on sexual harassment and gender discrimination. Singh dismissed the accusation as "preposterous and baseless". When approached by INDIA TODAY, the dean declined comment. Incidentally, Dhanda was among those shortlisted for the post of vicechancellor when Singh was selected for a five-year term in July 2008. Singh, known to be a tough taskmaster, is seen by some as authoritarian. On March 2, 2011, Kakru had ordered a probe at NALSAR by a committee comprising ex-Supreme Court judge SSM Quadri and sitting Andhra Pradesh High Court judges Ramesh Ranganathan and VVS Rao. The report, INDIA TODAY has learnt, is an indictment of NALSAR affairs, which Singh is keeping under wraps. When the report is made public, the ills plaguing the 13-year-old NALSAR will surface. Complying with the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court in the Visakha vs State of Rajasthan case on sexual harassment at the work place, Chief Justice Lokur will now constitute a panel to probe the allegations.
by Amarnath K. Menon

44

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

