Feature

I' . , : ::., и и :,, ;
Fhere excellence is the attire, stance is aristocratic and every occasion is an allusion of bigger affair in the future. And when it's Diwan Saheb this big affair needs no introduction. Diwan Saheb, a name that owns the legacy of revolutionizing men's haute couture in India, apart from the traditional and ethnic wear collection is today a tradition followed religiously by men. A lot of people use the terms "bespoke" and "made-tomeasure" interchangeably. They are mistaken. 'Bespoke' is actually a term which dates back to the 17th century. When a customer chose a length of cloth, it was said to have "been spoken for". Hence a tailor, who makes your clothes individually, to your specific personal requirements, is called "bespoke". At first, it is important to discuss with you what type of suit you are looking for and its uses. Then a cloth is chosen to suit your type of style, fit and your activity. More than 20 measurements and figuration details are taken from the customer. The cloth is then cut and trimmed, along with the finest linings and silks available. A single tailor is then given the parts of the garment to sew together, to the final complete suit. Each suit is completely hand-made, even down to the button holes. At Diwan Saheb, the "Customized tailoring" service is exclusively for demanding customers, who have the panache of dressing up to certain expectations. This expectation level

EN'S COUTUR
is mutual, as the customer knows exactly what he is looking for and the tailor also appreciates his knowledge and delivers every stitch with flawless detail. We encounter particular customers who are finicky about detail and possess a fair deal of ideas on stitch patterns and special motif work. Our 'customized tailoring" service is taken care of by traditional craftsmen, fashion designers with fabrics handpicked from some of the biggest names in the apparel industry, globally. Diwan Saheb was founded by Shri. M. L. Diwan and inherited by Surinder and Sudhir Diwan and has today become one of the leading menswear names in India. It is a commitment that the young guns Amit Diwan, a graduate in fashion designing and clothing technology from Manchester, U.K. and Sumit Diwan a business management graduate from University of Sheffield, U.K., are carrying forward with their zeal and enthusiasm.... Apart from its traditional and ethnic wear collection, : Diwan Saheb also offers to the Glitterati, the best of international fashion with all international brands of repute. As Sudhir Diwan puts it, "Though the media has broadened the male fashion scene, our endeavor is to take the present generation towards the richness of tradition & culture to balance successfully the age old hand embroidery of India and at the same time dress our clients to perfection, for their evening dinner and cocktail."

YOUR DESTINATIO1TFOR FASHION AND WEDDING
Mohanlal Sons, established in 1881, is one of the first pioneers of the art of creating designer and formal wear for men in India and creating the very specialized segment of men's wedding couture.
istorically, their Connaught Place flagship showroom rose to fame by excelling in the honed arts of tailoring and stitching drapes. Not surprisingly, they boast of a rich heritage of dressing up the likes of Prime Ministers, Presidents, Chief Justices, Parliamentarians, Cricketers, Actors and Prominent Artists for over a century. Over the years, Mohanlal Sons has perfected the art of customizing the ensemble to fit the body structure, tone and proportion of the individual male body. Besides the size, they also customize the fabric, colour and embroidery of the garment to suit the particular requirement. The end product is the mirror image of the customer's imagination. Here, the master craftsmen can colour- coordinate and customize the groom's outfit to compliment the bride's outfit perfectly for sagai, wedding or reception ceremony. Traditionally, a complete design house for men, Mohanlal Sons has recently ventured for the first time in its 130 year history in Women's Wear. Chitwan Mohan, who has done a diploma in Fashion Marketing from the prestigious Parson School of Design in New York, has launched a boutique Women's ethnic wear collection of designer suits, sarees & lehangas for Mohanlal Sons. Prerna Mohan, a leading interior designer, has designed an exclusive collection of trousseau bedspreads for Mohanlal Sons. These unique bedcovers portray a variety of ethnic embroideries that have existed in India (gota work, moti work etc.) making them ideal for a prospective bride's trousseau collection. Both the Women's ethnic wear collection and trousseau bedspreads are currently exclusively available in the Connaught Place showroom and can be customized. Mohanlal Sons now provides a one-stop solution for all wedding wardrobe requirements for both men and women. They have clothes and accessories, both readymade and bespoke, for trousseau and all occasions - tika, sagai, sangeet, cocktail, wedding day and reception.

H

AnimPACTreatiiire

CRIMSOUNE
1 PERFECT OF STYLE
ashion in India requires perfect blend of Style, Comfort, Fashion I & a Fabric, still keeping it lucrative... Very Rare Combination! Mangla Group, a multi-dimensional textile company discovered the Gap & introduced the idea of 'Smart Casuals' in the form of Crimsoune Club. Taking advantage of 80 years of expertise in textiles, the team designed a complete wardrobe in Men's & Women's 'wear. The product line consists of only 100% cotton garments with an endless library of styles accumulated from world over. The highlights include coolest colors, breathing fabrics, best fits and radiant patterns. To add to this brand uses the finest quality of cotton and special vintage washes to give extraordinary breathing to the line of clothes. In the past 6 years we have explored every part of the world to bring & deliver the best in fashion. Within no time we are all across the map of India, & our thirst continues to capture hearts around the world.

DRESSING IN STYLE
ver the years La Mode has become institution in men's dressing by carving a j unique and distinct brand name for themsete in the men's wear segment and now stand a head above all competition in the segment. The label recognises the need for stylised clothes and thus delivers garments that excel not only in style but also in immaculate finishes. At La Mode huge volume of fabric is directly sources from country's leading mills, get the stitching and fabrication at their own automatic plants, manage distribution on their own, sell from self owned outlets through their own sales team. This is truly for men who like to stay ahead of time and leave their mark in milieu so it makes good sense to don their designs this summer and flaunt both style and quality together. Don't forget to check out the equally wide range of shirts, trousers, Sherwani's, T-Shirts denims and accessories. The newly opened branch at Dwarka, provides you with another opportunity to visit La Mode to up the style quotient of your wardrobe and make it the kind people talk about for years to come and try to emulate. The 3D's of La Mode - Design, Develop and distribute.

P

O

EXQUISITE SYNTHESIS OF TRADITION & FASHION
VINTAGE - WEB CONTENT
decade ago, the world of eyewear underwent a major metamorphosis with the launch of the Vintage Sunglasses which is constantly redefining eye fashion. Vintage, built on an unbending force to challenge conventional style and create better solutions, has generated five brands containing different product models catering to all age groups. Vintage Sunglasses has over the years earned a trusted name in the eyewear industry by constantly striving for innovation and offering products that are unique and always in confluence with the latest trends and the best of the contemporary style. Vintage is an Indian company with international standards based on the fundamental principal of uncompromising performance. We have extended our wings into international retailing in Thailand, South Africa, New York, Colombo and Dubai. Based on the principles of care, trust, quality and style, we have grown to become the fastest growing eye wear brand in India with the vision of being the leader in International market as well. We supply our products to 500 retailers across India through a widely spread distribution channel. We are the only Indian company to introduce 'Grilamid TR90', the best injection frame material in the world and provide lifetime unbreakable warranty on all our Nylon lenses. ^^.,';'и"и

A

O haw Brothers, the pioneer in Kashmir handicrafts came into existence in 1840. Surviving through all the vagaries of time and skill it has come unscathed to serve it's patrons in providing them all the genuine art work by their skilled and dedicated master craftsmen since generations. The extensive experience of over a century is reflected in our product line with the help of which we Б\. have carved a niche in the crowded industry of fashion accessories & home i furnishing. On the podium of the fortitude and novelty we have cornered the major share of domestic and global markets. In the international arena we are proud in BUr having an association with the leading designers, chain of stores and big business A. houses like LIBERTY BARNEYS, NEiMAN и ии' IW,"*1 ' MARCUS, ALBERTO PINTO, JHON * | | *Hии.''и STEFANADIS, JIM THOMPSON, MUGHAL, LE BON MARCHE ,UNGARO MASSIMO DUTTI, LA PERLA, MAX MARA, GIVENCHY, LORO PIANA, ETRO, BOCH, PRADA and many other big names.

