UP FRONT

by KANWAL SIBAL

THE STRONGMAN CRACKS
T
he Russian Constitution allows a president only two public demonstrations in Moscow, with fingers pointed consecutive terms in power. Vladimir Putin was at Putin, puncturing his image of a politician who is president from 2000 to 2008. Highly popular for universally popular in Russia. Hillary Clinton was quick to drive the democratic knife having restored the political and economic authority of the state as well as national self-respect after the disar- into Russia's midriff by calling for free and fair elections, ray of the Yeltsin years, he could have obtained another eliciting a sharp warning against interference from term through a constitutional amendment with wide pub- Putin himself. Blaming the US for encouraging street lic support. He foreswore expedience to avoid weakening mobilisation against the election results overlooks the the institutional basis of the fledgling Russian democracy, genuine sense of alienation of the middle class voters from but the logic of power eventually trumped the force of the existing frozen political system, but the US and the UK principle and, as a first misstep, Putin manipulated his would relish Putin's political discomfiture, with their succession by putting in the Kremlin his protege Dmitri media amplifying voter discontent. The Russian Government has handled public protests Medvedev and himself became prime minister for four more years of power, in violation of the spirit, if not with uncharacteristic flexibility, aware that repression may escalate the street challenge--the Tunisian and the letter, of the Constitution. Putin became unpopular with the West when he began Egyptian examples weigh with governments now. Putin closing the doors for outsiders to manipulate Russia's do- has acknowledged the decline of Government's popularmestic politics in the name of democracy and control its ity; some mollifying poll reforms will be implemented to vast natural resources under the cloak of the market econ- shield the March presidential polls from controversy. Putin's second misstep was to reveal in September, omy. The antipathy for him in the US and the UK has been especially high because he has scorned their sustained while announcing his presidential candidature, his pact with Medvedev in 2008 about exchanging places in barbs at his supposedly retrograde policies. As Prime Minister, Putin's image-building as an out- 2012, which signalled to the voters that they did not dedoor and sporty leader was supposed to further bolster his termine decisions on key ruling positions. Under the popularity with the youth, but implementing promised re- amended Constitution Putin will now be president for six forms in the bureaucracy and the justice system and curb- years, and potentially for six more. Somewhat down, Putin is by no means out. The divided ing corruption and the power of the security establishment have lagged under his watch. Large sections of society, es- opposition has no viable candidate to pit against him. His pecially the young and enterprising, have therefore felt as- opponents would feel gratified if he is cut down in size by SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com failing to secure 50 per cent of phyxiated by the present system. the votes in the first ballot and The 2008 global financial criis pushed into a second round. sis hit Russia particularly hard, This would be hardly material with a negative 7.8 per cent once he is president, particugrowth rate in 2009. Large curlarly if, aware of voter imparency reserves and high oil prices tience, he implements more have cushioned the downturn, purposefully his agenda for but slow growth (4 per cent in Russia's resurgence which the 2010 and about 4.3 per cent in West wants to contain. 2011), coupled with economy's Putin has built a strong lopsided dependence on commstrategic partnership with India. odity exports, the stagnation of We have no reason to share the the manufacturing sector and West's aversion to him. Vladimir failure to propel technological Putin again in the Kremlin is innovation, have blotted the perbeneficial for India-Russia relaformance of Putin's government. tions. We have no geopolitical The December 4 Duma stakes in the ups and downs of elections have reflected the the democratic process in public's negative mood, with Somewhat down, Putin is by no Russia, which is a concern prithe vote share of United Russia, means out. We have no reason to marily of the Russian people. the ruling party, falling from share the West's aversion to him. 64 per cent to a little under 50 Putin again in the Kremlin is beneper cent. Allegations of poll Kanwal Sibal is a former rigging have provoked largescale foreign secretary ficial for India-Russia relations.

12

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

