The Arts KOCHI BIENNALE

SLUGFESTON ARTFEST

Kochi Biennale looks uncertain after allegations of corruption against organisers
spat between two camps of artists is threatening to derail the Kochi Muziris Biennale (KMB), tipped to be the largest public art event in the country, scheduled for December 2012. It will showcase works by some of India's best artists as well as those from abroad. It will present films, paintings, sculptures, new media and performance arts. The event has been included in the 37 biennales organised globally by the International Biennale Foundation. A group of artists, led by sculptor Kanayi Kunhiraman and art teacher C.L. Porinchukutty, has levelled corruption charges against the organisers. They want a probe into how money is being spent by the Kochi Muziris Biennale Foundation (KMBF), a charitable trust, formed to organise the KMB. Artist Achuthan Kudallur, 66, says, "Such shows have been always been organised by public institutions." The critics' main targets are Bose Krishnamachari and Riyas Komu, two prominent Mumbaibased artists from Kerala organising the KMB. "These two have made the biennale a private affair. There is utter lack of transparency," alleges Yusuf Arakkal, 66, a well-known Bangalore-based artist from Kerala. The previous Left Democratic Front government, which mooted the idea of the KMB, granted Rs 5 crore for

A

the event in December 2010. In May 2011, the United Democratic Front (UDF) government came to power and promised another Rs 5 crore. The UDF has now put the disbursal on hold. "We want the biennale to happen. But we have kept our promised grant of Rs 5 crore pending until the charges are examined," says Culture Minister K.C. Joseph. The state will bear one-third of Rs 75 crore needed for the event, while the rest will be raised from sponsors. The KMBF explains Rs 3.5 crore of the first grant was spent on renovat-

THE RENOVATED DURBAR HALL IN KOCHI

ing the Durbar Hall--owned by the Kerala Lalit Kala Academi and venue for the event--while the remaining amount went for office expenses. "We will submit a detailed account to the government," says Krishnamachari, the trust's art director. But critics are unimpressed. "How can one spend Rs 3.5 crore to renovate one hall? I suspect corruption," says Kudallur. Critics also say too much is being spent on the event. Rejecting the idea, M.A. Baby, culture minister in the LDF government, says, "Rs 75 crore is not too much for this programme." "The Biennale is a major step for"There is utter lack ward for Indian art. I am grieved by the attacks that have been made," of transparency. Why says Ranjit Hoskote who curated the should public money Indian Pavilion at Venice Biennale in be granted for 2011. Artists in Kerala and across what is merely a India fear for the mega event. "They private show?" (organisers) should have been more YUSUF ARAKKAL, transparent. But that does not make Prominent Kerala artist irrelevant the Kochi Biennale which will be a big boost for Indian art," says "We will soon submit artist Giji Scaria. Adds art historian detailed accounts to the Geeta Kapur, "Two important artists government for from the state have set aside their time to fulfil a dream many of us have every paisa we nurtured, tested and failed to reahave spent." lise." With artists donning the war BOSE KRISHNAMACHARI paint, Kochi has a fight-to-the-finish Organiser, Kochi on its hands over the year. Biennale
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

60

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

