So ciety KARNATAKA

LEFTOVERS OFFAITH
By Sowmya Aji

HISTORY

THE BURDEN OF BATTLE
The 1761 Panipat war cost the Marathas Rs 92 lakh
he Marathas spent Rs 92.23 lakh on the third battle of Panipat in 1761 when they took on Afghan king Ahmed Shah Abdali. The amount translates into a whopping Rs 1,500 crore by present standards, reveal documents pertaining to the war, in which the Marathas were on the losing side. Pune-based scholar Pandurang Balkawade has trawled through 15,000 documents over the past 10 months in the Pune Archives and stumbled upon papers which reveal the numbers. He claims it is for the first time that details of the military expenditure of an Indian ruler have come to light. "I never intended to find the balance sheet, but I found papers which led me to it," he told INDIA TODAY. Noted historian Vishwas Patil, who has written the book Panipat on the battle acknowledges the study and says, "It is for the first time that the balance sheet of an Indian ruler's battle has been traced. I do not think the figure of Rs 92.23 lakh is an exaggeration." Giving details of the epic battle, Balkawade says the Maratha army had 65,000 constabulary, 30,000 infantry and 50,000 workers including spies and workers. The Punebased scholar plans to get his research published in 2012.

Madey Snana, where Dalits roll on food left unfinished by Brahmins, has not only split the state Cabinet, it has pitted traditionalists against the rationalists
lower castes, the practice is disgusting and unscientific. I have sought a report on the matter, but I am clear on the issue. The social welfare department will formally write to the muzrai (temples and endowments) department, demanding a ban,'' he told INDIA TODAY. His senior colleague, V.S. Acharya, a Brahmin who hails from the Dakshina Kannada district, maintains that Madey Snana has been misrepresented as an inter-caste problem. Echoing the sentiments of several pro-Brahmin organisations and Sangh Parivar leaders, he says: "It is a religious practice that has gone on for centuries. It is the people's belief, nobody is forced to do this. Why should it be seen as anti-Dalit? Even Brahmins take a vow and roll on food, the government should not interfere in such things.'' Matters came to a head this year after the Dakshina Kannada Deputy Commissioner (DC) N.S. Chennappa Gowda announced a ban on the practice. He took this decision after protests by litterateurs and activists. But the day before the Madey Snana was scheduled, the DC was armtwisted into lifting the ban, under pressure from the government, Sangh Parivar organisations and the Dalits. A Scheduled Tribe known as the Malekudiyas, who are

T

n the IT powerhouse of Karnataka, in a district with 88.62 per cent literacy according to Census 2011, a group of Dalits rolls over leftover food eaten by Brahmins every year in the belief that all troubles and ailments will be cured. This year, on November 29, an estimated 25,000 people rolled over the "spit'' of Brahmins as the district administration watched helplessly after attempting to ban the event. The ritual, practised for centuries, has put Karnataka's BJP government in a cleft stick, with Cabinet ministers at war with each other, amid a full-fledged social movement demanding a ban on the "demeaning practice''. Called Madey Snana (Tulu for a spit bath), the ritual takes place in NovemberDecember each year, on the occasion of Champa Shasti or Subramanya Shasti, at the Kukke Subramanya shrine in the BJP stronghold of Dakshina Kannada district. The nine-headed snake idol is worshipped as Lord Subramanya and the shrine itself can trace its ancestry back to a 4,000-year-old snake fertility cult. Actor Aishwarya Rai Bachchan and cricketer Sachin Tendulkar were among the temple's celebrity visitors. Social Welfare Minister A. Narayanaswamy, a Dalit, is furious at the practice. "It promotes untouchability. I don't care which caste rolls on the leftover spit of the Brahmins. Irrespective of whether Brahmins themselves do the rolling or it is the

I

Photographs by KPN

said to be the original discoverers of the Lord Subramanya idol, insisted that Madey Snana be allowed, or they would not participate in any temple event scheduled as part of celebrations. The ritual was allowed to take place. A social activist from Mysore, K.H. Shivaram, was beaten up in Kukke town on November 30 for staging a protest against the practice. Religious leaders like Dharmastala's Veerendra Heggade and Pejawar mutt pontiff Vishveshatheertha said there was nothing wrong with the practice. Astrologer Kabyadi Jayarama Acharya, a staunch proponent of the practice, contended that the caste colour given to the issue was wrong. "The Brahmins who eat there are considered the representatives of Lord Subramanya himself, and their spit is

"It's a religious practice that has gone on for centuries. Nobody is forced to do this. Why should it be seen as anti-Dalit?"
V.S. ACHARYA, Karnataka minister

that of the Lord. When I was 16, I myself rolled on the food and got my skin ailment cured. Lord Krishna's son Samba, by his wife Jambavati, was cured of leprosy after rolling on leftovers, as stated in the Skanda Purana. All castes roll on food and believe their problems will get solved. It is a psychotherapeutic solution that also has its roots in ayurveda. It should not be banned without some scientific basis,'' he told INDIA TODAY. Karnataka's litterateurs and backward class activists point out that the "scientific basis'' may have been true several centuries ago, when the shrine was a snake pit. "The mud from the snake pit was said to have healing capabilities, so perhaps that is how the practice began. But it later took the shape of a Vedic ritual and came to be dominated by upper caste people. Some of the in-between castes, like the Lingayats and the Vokkaligas, escaped having to do the ritual by asking the Malekudiyas to represent them. Today, it is nothing but an affront to the dig-

DEVOTEES AT THE KUKKE SUBRAMANYA TEMPLE IN DAKSHINA KANNADA DISTRICT

nity of human life. There is no question of debate on this issue; the ritual has to be banned,'' litterateur and activist K.Y. Narayanaswamy said. The BJP, which successfully stitched together a Brahmin-Lingayat-Dalit combination, along with some Vokkaliga support in the last Assembly election, is faced with a volatile situation, as its supporters are quarrelling amongst themselves on the issue. The opposition parties are unrelenting in their demand for a ban on the public humiliation of Dalits through this practice, but Chief Minister D.V. Sadananda Gowda has to deal with conflicting views within his own Cabinet. Gowda himself belongs to the backward Vokkaliga community and also hails from Dakshina Kannada district. He told INDIA TODAY: "I am inclined towards banning this practice myself. But I have a lot of people to convince on the issue, so it may take some time.'' 

BALKAWADE

by Kiran Tare

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

56

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

