Nation

DIPLOMACY
surveillance of the seas around its territorial waters, particularly in the light of the foray made by the Chinese navy into the Indian Ocean. Ordinary shore-based radars have a limited range due to the earth's curvature. Australia's OTHR, developed with US assistance, bounces radio waves off the ionosphere to detect targets at extended ranges. Its $1.8 billion (Rs 9,000 crore) price, is less than what India paid for a second-hand Soviet-era aircraft carrier, the Admiral Gorshkov. "Australia most likely did not want to sell the radar technology for fear of upsetting China," reasons a senior official. The removal of the uranium irritant has rejuvenated the moribund strategic partnership inked in 2009. Smith emphasised maritime cooperation as the focus. "We are Indian Ocean Rim naval countries and we should utilise that. As India rises as a power, the potential of the Indian Ocean Rim also rises. So strategic and practical cooperation depends on what we can do on the navy-to-navy front," Smith said. His discussions with Antony and navy chief Admiral Nirmal Verma were about building maritime cooperation. Australia has so far held only one naval exercise with India: in 2007 where it joined warships from the US, Singapore and Japan. Both countries are expected to formalise a series of bilateral annual naval exercises. As India acquires aerial platforms like the C-17 and the C-130J aircraft, which Australia also operates, the potential for air force exercises increased, Smith said and emphasised that the relationship was not directed at China. He, however, echoed the Indian stance that China's disputes in the South China Sea were not bilateral to countries of the region but concerned the global community. "The more India interacts with countries like Australia, the more China will recognise that the world sees it as problematic," says G. Parthasarathy, former high commissioner to Australia. A view China is unlikely to share as it watches IndoAustralian ties with keen interest.
by Sandeep Unnithan

KANGAROO HUG
Australia warms to India and agrees to sell it uranium. But it won't budge on the radar that our navy covets.
ANTONY (RIGHT) WITH SMITH IN DELHI

REUTERS

ustralia's Defence Minister Stephen Smith flew into Delhi just two days after the ruling Labour Party's historic December 4 vote to end the uranium export ban on India. Australia which holds nearly half the world's uranium reserves, had earlier declined to sell, citing India's refusal to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Smith backed India's candidature to the Security Council, spoke of maritime cooperation and of India being one of the world's three great powers with China and the US. But Australia will not sell what India really wants: Over the Horizon Radar (OTHR). Underlining the sensitivity of the strategic radar which can detect targets over 3,000 km away, Smith called it "an Australian developed capability" which "we value very highly", effectively ruling out its sale. "I'm sure India has certain capabilities which it has developed which it does not intend to share with anyone

A

ON THE ANVIL
Removal of the uranium irritant has paved the way for greater India-Australia military ties.  Naval exercises between Indian and Australian warships.  Air force exercises using common platforms like the Lockheed-Martin C-130J and Boeing C-17 transport aircraft.  Special forces exercises between paratroopers.
else," he said soon after meeting Defence Minister A.K. Antony. Indian officials say they inquired about the possibility of obtaining OTHR technology from Australia at the ministerial level some years ago. They were, however, politely refused. The Indian Navy's maritime domain awareness project calls for real-time

54

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

