INDIA-PAKISTAN MATCHES ARE A MONEY-SPINNER

Sp orts

CRICKET

BOARD GAMES
n October, the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) cancelled a planned home series with Pakistan and opted for a tour of Australia followed by the 12-day-long Asia Cup tournament instead. Broadcaster Nimbus Communications, which had inked a Rs 2,000-crore six-year deal in 2009 with the BCCI for domestic cricket rights, objected and demanded a refund of Rs 250 crore. The reason was simple: the proposed India-Pakistan series in March, the first in five years, would have been a money-spinner. "An India-Pakistan series delivers advertising revenues up to Rs 45-50 crore for a one-day international (ODI) and Rs 40 crore per Test," says Sashi Sinha of Lodestar, a media-buying company. Nimbus had expected to earn around Rs 450 crore from the five-ODI and three-Test series with Pakistan. The BCCI pulled the plug on the Pakistan series because of the possibility that the Government would not give it a go-ahead. Nimbus officials had asked the BCCI brass to clear the uncertainty but it did not respond. On December 12, the BCCI Working Committee cancelled Nimbus's contract, saying the channel had defaulted on a Rs 50-crore payment, part of the pending payment of the six-year contract. The board also blamed Nimbus

Nimbus lost its cricket broadcast rights because it asked the BCCI for a refund
the Bombay High Court and got orders on December 15 staying the encashment bid by the board. As things stand, BCCI will have to look for a new broadcaster. Among big-ticket international home fixtures slated in the near future are an IndiaEngland series in October 2012 and an India-Australia series a month later. Thawani refused to comment, saying the matter was sub judice. Senior BCCI official Rajeev Shukla, who attended the December 12 Working Committee meeting, also refused to comment. Another senior board official, Ratnakar Shetty, told INDIA TODAY that BCCI stands by its decision but refused to answer whether the board should have returned Rs 250 crore to Nimbus. "The cancellation happened because Nimbus didn't pay (Rs 50 crore). I have nothing more to say on this," he said. BCCI insiders claim that the board was also unhappy at Nimbus's repeated "accusations" that its revenues were adversely affected by top players being routinely rested for home fixtures against weaker teams. The slugfest is likely to continue. And it may even get murkier if Nimbus presses for damages from the world's richest cricket board.
by Shantanu Guha Ray
AFP

I

for promoting an international hockey tournament on its show Extra Cover, which ran during the five-match ODI series against the West Indies. BCCI members claimed during the December 12 Working Committee meeting that it had received numerous complaints from people about Nimbus trying to promote hockey during a cricket broadcast. Nimbus countered by saying that the hockey discussions lasted only five minutes during each Extra Cover programme and its contract with the board doesn't prevent it from promoting another sport. The BCCI went silent on the hockey issue but reminded Nimbus that it had asked twice about the Rs 50 crore due from the broadcaster before it cancelled the contract in the Working Committee meeting. Nimbus Chairman Harish Thawani & CEO Yannick Colaco came to Delhi but couldn't meet BCCI members to clarify their position. On December 13, BCCI attempted to encash Nimbus's bank guarantees totalling Rs 1,600 crore, the balance remaining at the end of the first season in 2010, despite itself admitting that only Rs 50 crore was due. BCCI had overlooked clauses which stated that they would be valid only till expiry of contract or its termination, whichever was earlier. Nimbus immediately moved

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

