Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N BOOKS REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S THE HIGHS AND THE LOWS

SOUTHERN DARLING
Mallika Sherawat, 30, is Munni in the Tamil remake of Dabangg, Osthe. More than the phonetic similarity with Malaika, the makers decided on her after going through a whole host of names, including Katrina Kaif and Bipasha Basu. Though she may not have been the first choice, the lyrics of the song (translated are) "My dear darling, Mallika is calling you". We are quite sure that Mallika hummed the catchy tribute to her all the way to the bank to encash her cheque of a cool Rs 1.25 crore.

LIFE IN THE GLAM LANE
MONA KAPOOR After a stint in reality TV, the loveable Jassi is back to doing what she does best, TV soaps, with Bas Itnii Si Baat on Sony TV. YOUNG ACHIEVERS Ten Indians have made it to Forbes' list of top under-30 go-getters, including Kunal Shah and Vikas Mohindra. A.R. RAHMAN Only the Archaeological Survey of India would deny an Oscar-winning legend a chance to perform against the backdrop of Taj Mahal in Agra. VEENA MALIK While the media was looking for her, she was looking for rest, having checked into a hotel and slept through the chatter.

Different Spin
Geeta Basra, 27, breaks the lean spell with an item number Ghaziabad Ki Rani Hoon Main, in Anand Kumar's Zilla Ghaziabad. With only one other film since her debut in 2006, Dil Diya Hai, opposite Emraan Hashmi, it is easy to forget that she is an actor. The last film she was seen in was The Train back in 2007, again with Hashmi. Then there is a certain cricketer whose name she's associated with. But now that she has the Munni Badnaam singer Mamta crooning for her and some serious hip-shaking to do, it may be easier to swat away those wedding rumours.

Big Move
Amitabh Bachchan did it,Shah Rukh Khan took over from him and then Amitabh Bachchan took it back.Yes,we're talking about Kaun Banega Crorepati.Popular Kollywood star Suriya, 36,will be anchoring the show on Star Vijay.If Big B has class and Shah Rukh has charisma,Suriya is known for his warmth.The iconic game show was first aired in 2000 on Hindi television.It has taken 11 years for its official Tamil counterpart to come about.


FOTOCORP

Compiled by Nishat Bari

72

Volume XXXVII Number 1; For the week Dec 27, 2011-Jan 2, 2012, released on Dec 26, 2011

and Shilpa Rathnam

