Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Second Chances
They may look underfed,but they have nerves of steel.After a debut in FALTU, former beauty queen,Puja Gupta,26,has bagged the lead role in Krish DK and Raj Nidimoru's zombie movie Go Goa Gone.The film also stars Saif Ali Khan,Kunal Khemu and Vir Das. Former Kingfisher model Shaurya Chauhan has been roped in for the second lead in Krrish 3. Shaurya made her debut with Mumbai Salsa in 2007 but became popular with her daredevil stunts on the reality show Dadagiri.We hear the most dangerous stunt she will perform in Krrish 3 is kissing Hrithik Roshan.
SHAURYA PUJA
FOTOCORP

WELCOME BACK
Tabu, 40, is hard to please. Which is why she stays away from Hindi films. Not this time. She's signed on with Shaitaan director Bejoy Nambiar for a `quirky, colourful and very unlike Tabu role'. Nambiar says "she was floored with the narration" of the film, David. Isha Sharwani, paired opposite southern star Vikram, forms the rest of the cast. Till then, Tabu fans will have to content themselves watching her playing mommy to Pi in Ang Lee's Life Of Pi.
YOGEN SHAH

THE HIGHS AND THE LOWS

MAN WITH THE VAN
One of India's most successful businessmen, Mahindra and Mahindra Managing Director Anand Mahindra has acquired 4,23,269 followers on Twitter. Recently, he called for suggestions for his company's new van and UMESH GOSWAMI got some rib-tickling responses. TAPO-VAN If you can meditate in it SA-VAN One suited for rainy weather VAN-LOKPAL For the masses G-VAN A super-van for the super hero YO-VAN If it's very good looking PAHAL-VAN If it's a macho pick-up van

AAMIR KHAN Actor Aamir Khan lends support to a campaign started by the Association for Democratic Reforms, working for voting for clean candidates in the forthcoming polls. LINDSAY LOHAN Troubled actress Lindsay Lohan is in talks to star as beloved Oscar winner Elizabeth Taylor in the TV movie Elizabeth & Richard: A Love Story for Lifetime channel.

Singh in the Ring
Cricketer Harbhajan Singh believes in verbal duels. We know that.Now,though,he will have a ringside view of bouts of another kind.He's all set to play host in Ring Ka King--Wrestling Ka Mahayudh,a show on Colors that brings together 30 wrestlers from across the world,including Luke Gallows and Sir Brutus Magnus.Now that he's out of the Indian team for bad form,Singh has nothing but time on his hands till IPLkicks off in April.But must he use it to chat up celebrity wrestlers?
66

Whoops Hollywood's Indian babe du jour Freida Pinto will present an award at the Annual Golden Globe awards a second time, the only Indian to do so. Oops
In a recent interview,Shah Rukh Khan said he wished he had made Ra.One better. Everyone else agrees.
I

Volume XXXVII Number 4; For the week January 17-23, 2012, released on January 16

Compiled by Nishat Bari and

Avantika Sharma

