Her itage

SKULLS
SKULLS FOUND IN ANNIGERI IN DHARWAD DISTRICT IN AUGUST 2010

BONES OF CONTENTION
Annigeri skulls become a political flashpoint after attempts to link them to the Lingayat community

T

wo different reports prepared using carbon dating, one Indian and the other American, have caused a furore in Karnataka. They both attempt to calculate the age of around 600 human skulls found in August 2010 at Annigeri in Dharwad district, a vibrant centre of activity in Karnataka's history and culture. The first report submitted by the Institute of Physics in Bhubaneswar in May 2011 used Carbon-14 or carbon dating technology and stated that the skulls were 638 years old, give or take 60 years, placing the deaths at around 1370 A.D. The institute used its technology on the skulls directly. The second report, submitted in November 2011, was prepared by the

private Beta Analytic Laboratory in Miami, US, and used a small 10g bone sample sent by the Dharwad authorities. Their carbon dating methodology has indicated that the skulls are about 180-200 years old, and bear no signs of violence, placing them somewhere around 1810-1830. The dual dates have led to a verbal feud between scholars which has the potential to be socially and

M.M. KALBURGI SAYS THAT THE SKULLS ARE THOSE OF FOLLOWERS OF A SECT CALLED VEERA MAHESHWARAS.

politically damaging. A set of scholars led by eminent researcher, critic and former vice-chancellor of Hampi Kannada University M.M. Kalburgi is of the opinion that the skulls are of a sect of Shiva followers called Veera Maheshwaras who, he says, were the predecessors of a sub-sect of Karnataka's single largest community, the Lingayats. "These Veera Maheshwaras are the predecessors of the Veera Shaiva cult, who later got amalgamated into the Lingayat community. The Lingayat philosophy is based on ahimsa and is anti-temple, but the Veera Maheshwaras and Veera Shaivas were a brutal people who believed in idols, rituals and temples," Kalburgi, himself a Lingayat, told INDIA TODAY. Kalburgi's theory has its roots in the JainaShaiva battles in the region in the 14th century. He claims the poetry, picture-sculptures and rock inscriptions of the period back his theory. According to him, the Veera Maheshwaras had a ritual of destroying Jain temples and killing thousands of Jains before beheading themselves as an offering to Shiva. The theory has angered many Lingayats who resent being portrayed as having links with such a brutal sect. Their objection has found an outlet with the second report putting the age of the skulls at 200 years. The state's archaeological department is also keen on accepting the second report as the Bombay Gazetteer mentions a drought in the region 200 years ago which caused large-scale deaths. "Kalburgi is wrong. Those skulls are 200 years old and a drought caused all those deaths," says litterateur and researcher M. Chidananda Murthy, who is also a Lingayat. The Dharwad district administration is in a fix as the Lingayat community is the largest in the region. Deputy Commissioner Darpan Jain has sent samples to Miami for retesting, in the hope of establishing the precise age of the skulls.
by Sowmya Aji

58

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

