BYWORD

by M.J. AKBAR

CITY OFWAILING WALLS
he most complex word to explain is surely normalcy. however, participate, awaiting instead another tide to The standards of 7,000 years flutter over the beauti- shift the destiny of unborn children. A century is a mere fully-lit battlements of Jerusalem. The sun sinks; the page in a long history. Palestinians lost their part of Jerusalem in the 1967 war. temperature plummets; the decibels fade: it has become a city of silence. The living trip warily around the dead, who Since then, the defeated have been in search of alibis and are exalted in prophets' tombs, or massed in graveyards, victors have been in search of peace. If the first is delusion, or echo within memory and prejudice in competitive, then the second is destabilising. Attrition debilitates one tiny nerve a day, but eventually it leaves both sides unnerved. combative narratives. Israel might be able to deal with Palestine, but how long Jerusalem is the theatre of the final judgment for Jews, who will either descend to gehenna (Arabic: jahannum) can it deal with the world? It can't build electronic walls down the hill, or pass through God's gate of mercy above. against London and Paris. I picked up Haaretz, Israel's Christians lament the betrayal of their saviour, Jesus, not leading newspaper, established in 1919, just after the merely by Judas, whose guilt drove him to suicide, but also Balfour Declaration that set the stage for the creation of by Peter, who choked whatever anguish he may have felt. Israel in November 1948, on Tuesday, January 17, for They mourn the crucifixion and celebrate resurrection. breakfast reading. Here is a mix of the day's news. In Muslims glory in the ascension of Prophet Muhammad to London, Britain's Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg conheaven from the rock on the mount at the spot where demned Israeli settlements on Palestinians' land as "deliberate vandalism". In Paris the Foreign Affairs Committee Solomon built his great temple. If faith was not enough, Jewish' Crusader and Arab of Parliament had published a report accusing Israel of empires have left their mark on stone. Dinner conversa- using water as "a weapon serving the new apartheid". tion creeps through the intricacies of claim and survival, 450,000 Israeli settlers, it pointed out, used more water possession and legitimacy, construction and decay, before than 2.4 million Palestinians. Vandalism. Apartheid. These it gets lost in the labyrinths of ultra orthodoxy, Salafist were words being used not by the Muslim Brotherhood but exclusion, aggression, response and the diminishing core by friends of Israel. The enemy, in the meantime, had switched generations. of secular liberalism. Fear, pride, bitterness and the excitable phantoms of sus- Hackers based in Saudi Arabia, with net names like Group XP and Nightmare Force, had exposed picion hammer away at Jerusalem's huSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com details of thousands of Israeli credit manists. Time has not been kind; it has cards, blocked access temporarily to El created new barriers in the city famous Al, the national airline, and engineered for walls. Today's divisions, marked in cethe crash of the Tel Aviv stock exchange ment and electricity, cut through emowebsite. The young Arabs behind this tions like frozen laser beams. Sunrise technological warfare promised much through a red haze over east Jerusalem more, even as Israel's tech-security elite brings light, but not much clarity. The scrambled to build yet more walls, this horizon is lost in the Judean desert, time in cyberspace. On the edit page of among the Jordan hills, battlefields of a the same day's Haaretz, columnist war in all its creative facets. Yitzhak Laor said all he needed to say in Within the city, a turn of a street dethe headline over his short, sharp piece: fines the difference between the first "Arabs have never been equal under the world and third. But the first is not law". Many would find such news good always a modern world. The last time reason for not reading a newspaper. But I saw the Wailing Wall of the Temple, there is an uplifting part of the story. devotees mingled; this time they were Fear, pride, bitterness Israel has a free press, guarded vigiseparated by gender, testimony to the and the excitable lantly by Israelis with a strong liberal rising grip of ultra orthodox Jews conscience. It is such a welcome fact in upon the holy city. Their numbers have phantoms of suspicion a dictator-rich neighbourhood where a been estimated at some 2,40,000 in a hammer away at whisper has often been the only instance population of 7,00,000; roughly the humanists. Time has not of free media. same number consider themselves Conflict is always dangerous to the secular Jews. The rest are largely, but been kind; it has created survival of a liberal. But it is only not solely, Muslim Palestinians. They new barriers in the city when the liberal voice commands that live in Jerusalem because they are defamous for walls. peace will obey.  termined never to leave. They do not,

T

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

