The Big Story

INDIAARTFAIR

ZEN AND THE ART OF INFINITY

A. BALASUBRAMANIAM 40
LEARNING CURVE Bachelor's in fine

arts from Government College of Arts, Chennai; studied printmaking at EPW Edinburgh, UK, and at Universitat fur Angewandte Kunste in Wien, Austria. BROAD CANVAS Works range from installations to those on paper, wood. SHOW'S ON Ongoing solo exhibition at Talwar Gallery, Delhi. Solos in New York, Massachusetts and a group show at Ecole des Beaux Arts, Paris. PRICE RANGE Rs 1.5 lakh-50 lakh

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Mithu SEN 39
EARLY DAYS Master's in painting from Kala Bhavan, Santiniketan, followed by a postgraduate programme at the Glasgow School of Art, UK. QUIRKY PALETTE Works are unique for their mix of eroticism, poignancy, vulnerability and the macabre. STORY SO FAR Winner of the 2011 Skoda Prize of Rs 10 lakh. Has an upcoming solo at Eli and Edythe Broad Museum in Michigan in November. HER WORK COSTS Rs 2 lakh-50 lakh

ON THE CUTTING EDGE

Big Across
By Georgina Maddox

BORDERS
teeth, hair, flowers and kitschy objects. In another room of the museum, she is making a sculptural work: a fragile broken spine constructed from the iron heads of pickaxes painted bright red. Not only will Sen be showing at the KNMA, she also has a solo in November at the Eli and Edythe Broad Museum in Michigan, US, for which these and other works--like her large format paintings on handmade paper, illuminated by light boxes--will be travelling across borders. The winner of the 2011 Skoda Art Prize--a prestigious award of Rs 10 lakh, that is generating as much excitement as the art fair itself--Sen has moved from strength to strength with exhibitions in Singapore with Louis Vuitton and the Zachêta National Museum, Warsaw, in Poland. Prices of her works have shot up from a modest Rs 40,000-Rs 50,000 to Rs 4 to 8 lakh. Her larger works now fetch up to Rs 50 lakh, all bearing the unmistakable stamp of eroticism, poignancy, the macabre and fluidity of gender roles. It was not always like this for Sen, who has faced discrimination because

BALASUBRAMANIAM WITH HIS WORK`EMBRYO' AT THE TALWAR GALLERY IN DELHI (LEFT); MITHU SEN AT HER FARIDABAD STUDIO WITH HER WORKS

Big money. Stunning ideas. International appeal. Meet the new su perstars of the art market.
of her unusual work. "International curators would not invite me because I was not `Indian' enough," she says. She did a tongue-in-cheek mural of a bleeding Taj Mahal at the Zachêta Museum, Warsaw, in 2011. Call it coincidence but her international presence has increased this year. She's not alone. Five rising Indian stars have shown how easy it is to straddle the world, transporting themselves and their work across continents. In another part of Delhi, Alwar Balasubramaniam, 40, is engaged in installing his works at the tony, 3,000

ithu Sen, 39, sips herbal tea as she stretches out on the overstuffed couch at her apartment in Delhi. It's been a long night for her. Sen has been working on a whimsical piece to be showcased at the Kiran Nadar Museum of Art (KNMA), in Noida, as a collateral event during the India Art Fair, beginning on January 26 in Delhi. It consists of a roomful of alphabets, written in fake synthetic hair on its walls. It's typical of her style. Her mixed media work stars diembodied forms, highlighting

M

sq ft Talwar Art Gallery for a solo exhibition, `Nothing From My Hands'. Balasubramaniam, who is based in Bangalore, has been described as a Zen artist whose works explore the notion of infinity. His trademark fibreglass sculptures often emerge from walls and appear to just hang in space. "My work usually focuses on the spaces between the object and the air around them. What is the so-called nothingness of being," says the artist, whose work will also be on display during the India Art Fair. His 6 foot diameter sphere titled `Embryo', made of spokes from bicycle wheels, has a larger cousin, a 10x10 work that is currently on display in Washington, D.C., as part of the Philips Collection. The ball of concentric circles is made of the same bicycle spokes that `Embryo' is constructed from.

His work is eye-catching and jawdropping. Catch an eight foot thorny spiral made of rusting metal titled `Deadline'. Or a sculpture titled `Knot', a fibrous being that has skin and contours that appear to breathe with an inner energy. This is similar to his 2009 work titled `Oomph', a metal sculpture that referred to energy in a visually symbolic manner. There is also a section of his subtle hidden forms that emerge out of walls, hinting at a whole being inside but showing only a part of themselves. They tease and play with the viewer, encouraging him to imagine the rest. Balasubramaniam loves working out of his suburban studio in Bangalore, but his international presence has been growing since he was part of a seminal exhibition titled `Indian Summer' at the Ecole des

60

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

The Big Story
Beaux Arts, Paris, in 2005. This was followed by a solo exhibition at Talwar's New York gallery in 2007, after which he has shown at prestigious exhibitions like `On Line: Drawing Through the Twentieth Century', at The Museum of Modern Art, New York, in 2011 and `Contemplating the Void', at the Guggenheim Museum, in New York, in 2010. Shilpa Gupta, who is at two booths, Chemould Prescott, Mumbai, and Galleria Continua from Italy, will be showing her neon work that spells out the words `Today Will End'. It's a prophetic work that comments on the ephemeral nature of life and time. That's a theme she enjoys. `Vision', an art work to be shown at the India Art Fair, emulates an eye-test chart and comments on how we use 90 per cent of our subconscious mind while viewing our lives. Gupta, based in Mumbai, is busy preparing for a solo exhibition at the Museum voor Moderne Kunst, Arnhem, where she plans to showcase a work titled `Bell-jar'. This consists of a library of stainless steel books by authors who have written under pseudonyms to either hide their gender as women, like George Elliot and the Bronte sisters, or their religious identity, like Ali and Mino. "It reflects on the idea of hidden authorship and the kind of discrimination that stems from it," says Gupta whose work focuses on the marginal and discriminated sections of society. Her interactive videos, websites, photographs, sound and public performances subversively probe ideas such as desire, religion, and notions of security on the street and on the imagined border. Another work she's preparing is for the Arnolfini Arts Centre and Gallery in Bristol, England. The exhibition curated by Nav Haq emulates the 118.5 mile-long wire fence that is a border between India and Pakistan in north-west India. Gupta made a big splash at the 2011 art fair, when it was called the India Art Summit, with a gigantic work made of microphones, titled `The Singing Cloud'. Showcased at the Vadehra Art Gallery booth, the work was picked up by the Louisiana Museum in Denmark for Rs 90 lakh. SOI 40 From global to local is perhaps rare for most artists but for New YorkGOING DUTCH Studied at Rijksakadbased, Bihar-born Satyakam Saha, 38, emie van Beeldende Kunsten,Amster"it is a homecoming". Saha, born in dam, then at University of California at San Diego after completing his Master's Bhagalpur, spent 11 years in New York from M.S. University,Vadodara. after he was awarded the Milton and Sally scholarship in 2002. This enabled NOSE FOR NEWS Current passion involves working on images culled from him to study at the New York Studio of reportage of man-made disasters. Drawing and Painting in 2003-2004, after which he has shown with GLOBETROTTER Featured at the Venice Biennale. Has had solos in Sydney, Engendered, a transnational arts orgaAmsterdam, Mexico City. nisation, at the Lincoln Center in New York, at the Twelve Gates Gallery in PRICE RANGE Rs 5 lakh-50 lakh Philadelphia and at the New Jersey Center for Arts. He has IN TUNE also held an exhibition at the Art WITH THE Basel Fair, where his works, then TIMES priced at Rs 4 lakh, sold out. Saha's body of work has been described by noted American art critic Kathryn Myers as luminous abstractions of shape and colour that emulate the Yin and Yang or the spousal pair of ShivaShakti in an abstract but elegant form. He uses mostly fabric and paper stretched on wooden armatures that are lit from within with LED lights. Saha is now showcasing his sculptural installations at Engendered's new art space in Shahpur Jat, Delhi, at an exhibition titled `Can You See Me?', again a collateral event of the India Art Fair. The Yin-Yang work is rendered in evocative incandescent fabric SOI WITH A FALLING FIGURE FROM HIS INSTALLATION lit from within. THAT WAS SHOWN AT THE VENICE BIENNALE Saha points out that being in India has its advantages. "It's exciting to be in this cutting edge, alterna- a presence at home is totally essential. The Kolkata-born Soi moved to tive art space in India. I am glad that my India debut is happening with Amsterdam to study at the RijksakEngendered that brings with it the in- ademie van Beeldende Kunsten, after ternational feel of the New York art completing his undergraduate and scene to Delhi. In the US, where I was postgraduate degrees in visual arts the Maharaja Sayajirao working as an artist-architect, I could from not concentrate full-time on being an University in Vadodara. He then moved artist. I can only do that here in India to study at the University of California which makes it economically more at San Diego, US, and has had several solo and group exhibitions, including a viable," he reveals. For itinerant artist Praneet Soi, 40, group exhibition curated by art critic who is showing at the Vadehra Art and curator Ranjit Hoskote, at the presGallery booth at the art fair, living tigious Venice Biennale. He has also across borders may have enhanced his had solo exhibitions in Sydney, experience of being Indian but having Amsterdam and Mexico City.

Praneet

TOWARDS PERFECT HARMONY
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

SATYAKAM SAHA 38
EARLY ETCHINGS Studied architecture at The School of Planning and Architecture, Delhi, and attended the New York Studio School of Drawing. IN BLACK AND WHITE Multimedia works are experiential and interpret history, global affairs and philosophy through the forces of Yin and Yang. BIG DRAW Shows at Lincoln Center, New York; Twelve Gates Gallery, Philadelphia; and Centre for Arts, New Jersey. HIS WORK COSTS Rs 50,000-15 lakh

SHILPA GUPTA 35
MUMBAI LINK Studied sculpture at the Sir J.J. School of Fine Arts. WIRED WONDERS Works with digital films, online sites, simulations, video games, electronic and kinetic sculptures, sensor-based installations photography and sound-scapes. Her works comment on nationhood, violence, terror and human rights. SOLO EFFORT Has three forthcoming shows: Mumbai's Chemould Prescott Gallery in January, the Arnolfini Arts Centre and Gallery in Bristol, England, in March and the Museum voor Moderne Kunst, Arnhem, in March. PRICE RANGE Rs 2 lakh-90 lakh
SAHA WITH HIS LIGHT BOX IN DELHI (ABOVE); GUPTA (RIGHT) WITH HER WORK`TOMORROW WILL END'AND OTHER PIECES IN HER MUMBAI STUDIO

BRUSH WITH DIGITAL

62

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

The Big Story

INDIAARTFAIR
"I think that the centre has shifted and it is no longer just New York, Paris or Berlin that are the nodal spots for art. Artists are now global citizens and they are taking the excitement with them when they travel," says Soi who recently held his solo, `Notes on Astaticism' at the Vadehra Art Gallery. Soi's work has moved from the abstracts he painted on canvas in his student days to figurative work that is inspired by newspaper headlines. He has transformed his smallformat drawings and paintings into evocative installations inspired by the Fluxus movement, an anti-art ideology of the 1970s that turned everyday objects into art and encouraged a do-it-yourself aesthetic. Soi's work is an interesting combination of these two disparate schools of thought--one leans heavily on the formal tenets of Modernist painting, while the other is a radical art movement that eschews conventional ways of defining art. Soi created special `astatic machines', wooden trolleys with large wheels. These machines were mounted with overhead projectors, upon which he placed the line drawings that he culled from media reportage of man-made disasters, violence and disruption. The distorted bodies and forms could then be projected onto the walls of the gallery, both at the Arsenal in Venice and at Vadehra. "I wanted the works to be interactive and let the viewer choose the angle and size of the drawings," says Soi whose installations now span a gamut of creative expression. His current work for the art fair will be drawn from his small format paper sculptures--rather conservative after the sprawling epics that he unveiled at his solo shows. A showcase for the work of these five artists, among others, the India Art Fair is expected to tease the tastebuds of international collectors and buyers. The real gourmet meal may well happen when these artists travel with their works to galleries across the world. It can only get bigger. 

CRITICS'CHOICE
Three experts choose subcontinental artists poised for the big league

Roshni VADEHRA
Vadehra Art Gallery, Delhi
FAIZA BUTT, 39 LONDON Fuses gender, violence and politics with style and imagery. A finalist for the Sovereign Art Foundation Prize, the UK-based Pakistani artist uses the pointillist technique. Her work adorns the cover of H.M. Naqvi's novel, Home Boy. RASHID RANA, 44 LAHORE His exhibit at the Musee Guimet in Paris made a splash. He uses new media to create an allusion to torn ideologies. Sample this--a veiled woman juxtaposed against pornography. PRANEET SOI, 40 AMSTERDAM A contemporary aritist in demand from Australia to Lithuania. Was one of the five artists selected by curator Ranjit Hoskote for the first Indian Pavilion at the Venice Biennale.

Tasneem Zakaria MEHTA
Managing trustee, Dr Bhau Daji Lad Museum
SUDARSHAN SHETTY, 51 MUMBAI Uses painting, sculpture, installation and new media. Draws his inspiration from the quotidian life of Mumbai. Humour and irony underscore the artist's message. N.S. HARSHA, 43 BANGALORE Straddles a variety of genres, mediums and includes large figurative paintings, miniature drawings and installations. Manipulates traditional miniatures to create compositions that play with the idea of the absurd. GIGI SCARIA, 39 DELHI Works with a variety of mediums including painting, photography and video. Gigi Scaria's work draws attention to the painful truths of migrants and displacement.

Ranjit HOSKOTE
Art critic and independent curator
ALLAN deSOUZA, 54 SAN FRANCISCO Works in photography, digitally manipulated prints, video and video installation. His subjects range from an investigation into community, an attentiveness to his diasporic heritage, and an adroit politicisation of beauty. PRANEET SOI, 40 AMSTERDAM Soi works with large-scale murals, miniatures, sculpture and slide-projection installations. Fuses the aesthetic with the political in his work. GAURI GILL, 42 DELHI The medium doesn't restrict her. Delves into photojournalism. Her series-length work makes sophisticated references to anthropological and ethnographic methodologies.
by Olina Banerji

64

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

