CRICKET DOWN UNDER

WasimAkram
No Nets for Nawab
Rahul Dravid says there is no rift between M.S. Dhoni and his deputy Virender Sehwag. But the two are barely talking to each other, on and off the field. A day before the third Test in Perth, Sehwag faced only six AP balls in the nets before calling it a day. India lost the Perth Test by an innings and 37 runs and Sehwag scored a duck in the VIRENDER SEHWAG first innings and 10 in the second. That did not stop him from taking wife Aarti and four-year-old son Aryavir out shopping the very next day. He better be careful of excess baggage, especially with the family help booked into a separate room at the hotel.
AFP

Captain Clueless

GUEST COLUMN

D

id Indian captain M.S. Dhoni, 30, get himself banned for the fourth Test to start at Adelaide? During the third Test at Perth, umpire Aleem Dar kept reminding Dhoni that India were two overs behind schedule. To no avail. Contrast this with Australian captain Michael Clarke, 30, who may be on a winning streak, but is not done yet. He wants a 4-0 whitewash and is paying individual attention to every player's needs. Dhoni rarely communicates with his teammates and spends most of his time in the hotel room with wife Sakshi. At the nets, he is often seen doing what he loves most: smiling and bowling. He is happiest when flanked by best friends Suresh Raina and Praveen Kumar. Unfortunately, neither is part of the Test team. Dhoni wants to retire from Test matches in 2013, citing fatigue. Well, that's how the Indian cricket fan feels too.

"India's loss a subcontinental shame"
Poor Indian show in Australia will affect Asian solidarity in world cricket
s someone who has seen Indian cricket from very close quarters in the last 10 months or so, I am stunned at the way India have gone from bad to worse in Test cricket overseas. I can understand that India were jolted by injuries to key players and looked under-prepared in England, but there can be no excuses for the abject failure in Australia. Perth should be an eye-opener for Indian cricket. Seven straight overseas Test loses should send the BCCI a clear message: there is something seriously wrong in the way India is playing cricket and a team that was recently world No. 1 cannot afford to be kings merely at home. India's abject surrender is a subcontinental shame. I landed in Karachi on January 17 for a short break from my TV commentary assignment in Australia and friends have been taunting me because I once said India have their best chance to win a series in Australia this time. For the Asian block to remain strong and united in world cricket, performance on the field is crucial. At the end of the day, the world loves champions. Financial muscle or power politics in boardrooms are advantageous only when your team does well on the cricket field. Alas, India haven't been able to do that in Australia. Pakistan have lost Test matches in Australia, too. When I was part of the national team, we lost a series 3-0, but at least we managed to play till the fifth day. The Perth debacle is therefore hard to digest. PETER SIDDLE The criticism aimed at the Indian team is completely justiCELEBRATES fied. M.S. Dhoni is talking about phasing out the senior players AFTER TAKING and that's exactly how the entire world feels. The onus is now on DHONI'S WICKET the Indian selectors, who have to take some brave decisions. Rahul Dravid, VVS Laxman and Sachin Tendulkar have been legends but past laurels don't win you matches. You need to accept reality and move on. The conditions at Perth and Sydney exposed the physical inadequacies of an ageing cricketer. Hot and humid conditions can be physically taxing and at WACA, at least three senior Indian batsmen were simply too tired to move their feet and tackle a moving ball after fielding for almost two days at a stretch. For a cricketer who is nearing 40, these are signs that tell him to move away from the intensity of international cricket. There have been questions about Dhoni's captaincy. Personally, I think he is a good ODI captain and has definitely not been "cool" in Test matches. The extent of annihilation overseas has taken the sheen off his "cool" demeanour. Actually, his inability to motivate the younger players has surprised all of us in the commentary box.Vinay Kumar is a classic example of how a rookie has missed his captain's skills to motivate him. How many times did Dhoni encourage the young pacer when he was up against a rampaging David Warner? The only man who would `speak' to the bowler was Sachin Tendulkar. India needed to make a lot of noise on the field. The team's body language was cold and selfish. Indian cricket is in a spot of bother. I can't see anyone to replace Dhoni as Test captain and the coaching staff is definitely not doing a great job. While I expect the BCCI to review Duncan Fletcher after at least 12 months in the hot seat, Eric Simmons needs to work hard on the ethics of the young bowlers. It is a dream for any quickie to bowl at Perth. But when I saw Vinay Kumar clock just 120 kmph in his first over, it was disappointing. He seemed to be warming up in a Test match scenario. Was he playing a Ranji match against Kerala? The least he could have done was warm up before he bowled the first ball. Simmons needs to look into these small details. India need to look ahead. It means they have to focus on the ODIs. Adelaide is a good place to test the players who will play the ODIs. That means Rohit Sharma must get a look in. Let the phasing out of the seniors begin. Wasim Akram is an ESPN-STAR Sports commentator

A

MAHENDRA SINGH DHONI

Healing Touch
Lachy Patterson, the Australian cricket team's missing media manager, is back in action. Patterson and his wife Louise lost their twin girls before the Boxing Day Test in Melbourne. During the match, the Australian team members wore black armbands. The 32-year-old, who was hired by Cricket Australia five years ago, took charge before the third Test in Perth.Journalists from India and Australia offered their condolences.

Finally, Some Practice

FIND OF THE SERIES
After the first Test in Melbourne, Umesh Yadav, the 24-year-old coal miner's son from Nagpur, said: "Australia ko khol ke rakh dunga (we will tear the Australians apart)." He kept his word. In the last three Tests, he has scalped 13 wickets, including a five-wicket haul in Perth. He is spending a lot of time with his mentor and former Indian pace bowler Subroto Banerjee, who is in Australia now. If only he had some support from the famed Indian batting line-up.

O

n January 17, for the first time during the tour, the entire Indian team was seen at net practice at the Western Australian Cricket Association (WACA) ground in Perth, even though it was optional. The lethargic body language was gone. No one was resting in the shade. The pacers were taking the requisite 15-20 strides before bowling at the nets and the batsmen were padded up, unlike in the past. One thing was unchanged though. Coach Duncan Fletcher did not speak much, merely observing the players from a quiet corner.
AFP

Family First
Zaheer Khan is waiting for the Australian tour to end, but for a different reason. Khan and his on-off girlfriend, dancer-actor Isha Sharvani, 27, have decided to tie the knot by end-March. Daughter of Australian composer Devissaro and Indian dancer Daksha Seth, Sharvani's family is currently based in Thiruvananthapuram. Both families recently met and finalised wedding plans.
ZAHEER KHAN WITH ISHA SHARVANI

SACHIN TENDULKAR AND RAHUL DRAVID PRACTISE AT THE NETS

Love Bite
M.S. Dhoni's wife Sakshi, 23, not only got a "Mahi"tattoo on her neck, she also posted pictures on her Facebook profile. Indian cricket's first lady has been travelling with Dhoni since the beginning of the tour Down Under and the couple is inseparable off the field.

QUOTES

OF THE

WEEK

"You die, you die.You don't see which is the better way to die." M.S. DHONI, on whether a whitewash in Australia will hurt more than the one in England. "Practise." RAHUL DRAVID, on being asked how he planned to celebrate his 39th birthday. "I am going to tell Sachin to try some other sport if he loves defending." SOURAV GANGULY'S advice to Sachin.
68
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

JYOTI KAPOOR/ indiatodayimages.com

HIT WICKET
Viewers in Western Australia, who switched on their TV sets to watch the Aussies romp to an easy win at the WACA on Day 3 of the third Test, were in for a shock. Channel 9, the official broadcaster of the match, decided to air a special surfing event instead of the match because they wanted a crowd at the stadium.

SAKSHI SPORTS A MAHI TATTOO ON HER NECK

by Samip Rajguru and Abhinav Punshi

FOTOCORP

