Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

WHAT'S THAT IN YOUR GLASS?
Ancient herbs in modern packaging are increasingly available over the counter. Raise a glass every day. THE WONDER PLANT
The plant that finds mention in the Rig Veda as ghritakumari is now famous as aloe vera, a pharmacy and beauty salon staple. Not just for its cooling and healing properties but as a detox age-defier and an immunity booster. There are about 320 conditions--ranging from weight loss, skin and hair care to respiratory disorders, diabetes, heart disease, hypertension and cancer--that aloe vera is being used to treat. The fleshy leaves of the plant contain six antiseptic agents, antimicrobial proteins, over 21 amino acids, seven vitamins, three types of carbohydrates, along with minerals, enzymes and fibres.

COLOUR ME RED
Forget hair oils. The ubiquitous hibiscus or jaba blossom is now being touted as the ultimate power herb. The dried petals give off great colours when boiled in water. Three cups a day can lower blood pressure, as shown by a 2008 Tufts University US study. Rich in vitamin C , it is efficient in treating indigestion, respiratory problems, heavy menstrual flows and muscle spasms.

THE BRAIN TEASER

THE LADAKH GOLD
The flame-coloured Seabuckthorn berries of the Himalayas, popularly called Leh berries, were first written about 2,500 years ago in Tibetan books on medicine. Rich in vitamins and anti-oxidants, they are now being recognised as "super foods" capable of fighting stress-induced cell damage, the root cause behind serious diseases. Research shows that the berries bring down C-reactive protein, a risk factor for heart diseases, in blood.

MULBERRY MIRACLE
Indian mulberry (Citrifolia), commonly called noni, has emerged as a miracle fruit. The juice, rich in anti-oxidants, can flush out toxins from the body, stimulate the immune system, regulate cell regeneration, increase stamina and endurance. Used for centuries to treat impotence and infertility, there is fresh evidence that it can beat depression, too.

Brahmi in tetrapacks is the latest in urban health shops. For centuries, the herb has been used in ayurveda as a memory and concentration enhancer. Now, scientists say the herb can calm the mind and bring down stress.As a result, Brahmi is also being used to lower blood pressure in hypertensive people. It rejuvenates nerves and brain cells and plays a crucial role in cognitive disorders linked to ageing.


Compiled by Damayanti Datta
59

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

