Na tion

INTERNET

INDIA'S WAR ON CYBERIA
Google and Facebook refuse to give in to a paranoid Government that wants to gag them
KAPIL SIBAL
Photograph by SHEKHAR YADAV, Photo Montage by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Playing Net Nanny
Government tightens the noose, while the web world gets more critical

AGE ROW

SEPTEMBER 5, 2011
Kapil Sibal tells Internet service providers to pre-screen content.

MATTER OFDISHONOUR
Gen.V.K.Singh has dragged the Government to court damaging the civil-military relationship in the defence ministry.
ganisational interest". The Government, which has maintained a studied silence until now, is unlikely to sack the army chief. It will fight the matter in court. Its defence rests on Attorney General (AG) Goolam Vahanvati's opinions, which advised the Government against recognising the 1951 date. The AG says General Singh did not object when May 10, 1950 was used for his last three appointments as corps commander, army commander and finally army chief. The Government can also announce the appointment of the next army chief, most likely Eastern Commander Lt-General Bikram Singh. Lt-General PTI K.T. Parnaik in the Northern Command and Lt-General S.R. Ghosh in the Western Command are also on the succession shortlist. The trajectory of General Singh's petition could determine which of the three commanders becomes the next chief, a post that has been diminished ANTONY (LEFT) WITH SINGH DURING THE ARMY DAY CELEBRATIONS over the past few lenged the Government decision to months through an individual's perstick with May 1950 as his date of sonal crusade. There are implications to a sitting birth. If he wins, he gets to complete a three-year term as army chief, retir- chief fighting the Government in ing in 2013 instead of May 31 this court. His personal records, which year. One of his two lawyers, Puneet the defence ministry would want to Bali, says it's a matter of "his pride, examine, are held by departments directly reporting to him. "It will lead integrity and honour". In his petition, General Singh to further bad blood between the says he accepted 1950 as his birth army and the civilian bureaucracy in date, in 2006 and again in 2008, "in the defence ministry," says Major the organisational interest". At the General Nilendra Kumar, former Army Day press conference, he judge advocate general. called it a "personal issue in the orby Sandeep Unnithan n the 64th Army Day, army chief General V.K. Singh hosted his customary tea party for the who's who of the Government. Invitees at his sprawling bungalow near South Block included President Pratibha Patil, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and UPA Chairperson Sonia Gandhi. The contentious issue of his date of birth appeared to have been settled as he posed for the cameras with Defence Minister A.K. Antony. It was an elaborate ruse. The next day, January 16, General Singh became the first sitting service chief to drag the Government to court. His petition in the Supreme Court chal-

NOVEMBER 28, 2011
Service providers say it's impossible. Sibal gives them one week to decide.

O

D EC EM B E R 5 , 2 0 11
Service providers tell Sibal they cannot come up with a solution.

DECEMBER 21, 2011
Delhi-based journalist files petition in lower court against 21 websites.

JANUARY 10, 2012
Google and Facebook approach Delhi High Court for relief.

J A N U A R Y 16 , 2 0 12
Delhi High Court threatens blocking of websites, "like China" . policy of non-interference, even if content posted on their services is found to be obscene or objectionable. The judge responded by saying this policy won't work in India. Google and Facebook are now preparing their defence on the basis of IT laws, claiming that they are not liable and covered under protection clause for Internet intermediaries. According to IT laws, the Internet intermediary is not obligated to undertake a pre-screening exercise or proactively monitor third party user-generated content, available on its platform. Search engines merely index information available on the Internet. The Government says that the protection is not unfettered and that they have to respond to genuine complaints about objectionable content. But Sunil Abraham, executive director of the Bangalore-based Centre for Internet and Society, a civil liberties advocacy group, says it will be difficult for the courts to ignore IT laws. "The laws provide immunity to the Internet companies and they have a strong defence,'' he says. On those laws will rest the fundamentals of a liberal democracy. 

By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

G

oogle India and Facebook caught Communications and IT Minister Kapil Sibal by surprise when they took the Government head-on. On December 23, 2011, Metropolitan Magistrate Sudesh Kumar's court in Patiala House, Delhi, asked them to remove objectionable content. The same day, 2012, they appealed against the verdict in the Delhi High Court, saying they could not do so. On January 10, Sibal told his officials that the `arrogant' companies needed to be taught a lesson. On January 13, he gave formal sanction to press criminal charges against them in court. His aim was not to ban them like China, say informed sources, but to intimidate them into falling in line and removing objectionable content. But when on January 16, high court judge, Justice Suresh Kait, told the search engine and social networking site that "like China, we too can block sites", social media's fears over censorship became all too real. At the heart of the dispute are the IT

laws. Section 79 of IT Act, 2008, provides protection to intermediaries like Google and Facebook, which only provide a platform for posting content. But IT Rules, 2011, orders companies to remove any content that the Government objects to within 36 hours of receiving a written complaint. It is because of the discrepancy in the 2008 and 2011 laws that complainant Vinay Rai did not use them and instead referred to the provisions in the Indian Penal Code (IPC). The case involving objectionable material of a religious nature on 21 websites was filed by Delhi-based Rai, a journalist and editor of Urdu publication Akbari, under Sections 292 (sale of obscene books), 293 (sale of obscene objects to young person) and 120 B (criminal conspiracy). Google and Facebook said they could not monitor content before it was posted on websites. Google's lawyer N.K. Kaul told the court that "the issue relates to a constitutional issue of freedom of speech and expression and suppressing it was not possible as the right to freedom of speech in democratic India separates us from a totalitarian

regime like China". Hariharan, lawyer for complainant Rai, said that Google was misleading the court by claiming that Google India does not control or benefit from platforms like YouTube or Blogger. He said that every click on a Google-owned website gets it revenue. Facebook lawyer Siddharth Luthra told the court it was impossible for the social network to pre-screen or monitor everything and that users should instead be held responsible for content they post. The Google lawyer added that the search engine only takes you to the website. "What happens after that is beyond a search engine's control,'' Kaul said. He said censorship using block words could be disastrous. Citing the example of two words, `sex' and `virgin', which people could find offensive, he said that the Government could inadvertently block other useful things too. For example, the word `sex' figures as a gender even on government documents like a voter ID list or a passport. Similarly, `virgin' could refer to airlines and territory in terms of tourism. The companies in question also told the court that they have a global

52

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

53

NEW

NEW

