BYWORD

by M.J. AKBAR

THE YEAR OF LUDICRE
W
hat precisely is the difference between ridiculous the new year) established in 2011. It is well known that and ludicrous? With their inter-changeable syllables Press Council Chairman Justice Markandey Katju's heart they even sound like each other. Philology is not very is in the right place, and his high intellect worthy of those helpful. One word has a root, ridicule; but there is no who have achieved a place on the Supreme Court bench. `ludicre' in English. Why? Since language does not have a But his mind does like an occasional walk in space. He has Pope whose word is law, we will never get an answer. My said, in his new avatar as conscience-keeper-cum-godfaown view, that ridiculous is pathos and ludicrous is bathos, ther of hacks, that journalists can be unread, tasteless and is probably no more than a literary conceit dredged up enjoy a bit of opium in the office. In his ideal world, cricket and Dev Anand's death do not constitute frontpage news. to justify the inexplicable. Since lists are a congenital part of year-end rituals, one By such Olympian standards he has a lot of work ahead, feels obliged to offer some sort of homage to custom. A short so let us wish him a happy new year. But his campaign for a Bharat Ratna to Mirza Ghalib list of two will do: the most ridiculous, and the most ludicrous. A rummage through politics poses a problem. There and Saratchandra Chattopadhyay is ludicrous. One of my is simply too much to choose from. It doesn't seem worth great personal regrets is insufficient knowledge of Urdu, the effort. The harvest is so much better outside the realm and ignorance of Persian: the two books I would carry to the proverbial desert island are the complete works of of pomp, power and pretty sordid levels of corruption. Nothing I have heard in the deathbed year of 2011 was Shakespeare and Ghalib. Ghalib's poetry is eternal, but his more ridiculous than Sourav Ganguly's command to our views did not always belong to the narrative of the modcricket team in Australia on the "Agneepath Series": ern India. Ghalib lived through 1857. He watched 23 Be Fearless! After which he added a paean to his own Mughal princes being hanged and fellow Dilliwallahs fearlessness. That was both cheeky and thick. Long being massacred by merciless British columns. Ghalib was before he retired, Ganguly began to play cricket with his more interested in a pension from Queen Victoria, as is neck: his neck was far more agile than his bat against evident from his diary, Dastambuy, than a war for indethe rising ball. On more than one occasion Ganguly devel- pendence. This does not diminish his poetry, but it does raise questions about his politics. oped mysterious back aches at the CHANDERDEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com Justice Katju has read a million sight of a green pitch on the first more books than any silly journalist, morning. Whenever the world's quickbut perhaps he has not come across ies were short of a laugh all they had Joya Chaterji's masterly Bengal to do was watch a video of Ganguly Divided (Cambridge University Press, trying to get out of the way, and the 1996). He would surely have noticed party could begin. a speech that Saratchandra, an unGanguly had class, but he lacked doubted literary genius, made in 1926. courage. No one is perfect. Virender There isn't space for the full text, but a Sehwag has courage by the bucket, and few sentences establish the flavour-- talent by the pail, but when it comes to and trust me, I am leaving out the more judgment you need to measure it by a gruesome bits: "The truth is that if tablespoon. That is him. Take it or leave Muslims ever say they want to unite it, and we take it, happily, for the joy at with Hindus, there is no greater hoax. Sehwag's presence far outweighs the The Muslims came to India to plunder sniffle at his departure. On the other it, not to establish a kingdom... Unity hand if you want an example of the can only be realised among equals... ludicrous, you can watch the rate at `Hindu-Muslim unity' is a bombastic which hair is reappearing on Sehwag's slogan... Hindustan is the homeland of head. Since we don't watch Sehwag Nothing I have heard the Hindus." Et al. Saratchandra's to study the pace of hair transplants, in the deathbed year of India was not the India that Mahatma it doesn't matter. (Incidentally, what 2011 was more ridiculous Gandhi lived and died for. do Australians call the Agneepath than Sourav Ganguly's The past has its glories. The past Series? Probably the XXXXpath Tests; has its dilemmas. The past has its misthe Xs are of course code for a fourcommand to our cricket takes. The past has its rage. letter word called `fire'.) team in Australia on the Shall we reserve the Bharat Ratna We may have to search elsewhere, "Agneepath Series": for those who fought for a future in however, for the heights of ludicre which every Indian is an equal? (what the heck: let's coin a word for Be Fearless!

JANUARY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

70

