OF TH EK NO W N

US Elections
is on its way to becoming the world's largest econto address the challenges which America faces. POOR SHOW omy. Like India, the United States needs good Second, it should be apparent to all Amerirelations with China. Also like India, we wrestle cans that the growth in our economy and our The US has a with the questions of how China will use its future prosperity depend on major investments debt of $15 power­­to shape a cooperative world order or in our social and physical infrastructure. We trillion. When assert itself in the pursuit of narrowly defined must invest in the information technology age, Obama took national interest­­or both. 2012 will not yield satrestore our transportation network, develop office, it was just isfactory answers to these questions. new energy models and sharpen our education $10.6 trillion. In the global commons, the year ahead shows and health systems. We have not decided how little prospect of progress. Reaching understandthe nation will finance the investments we need A staggering ings over world trade and the environment are nor assigned roles among the public and private 48 per cent of elusive goals; in fact, enthusiasm for bold moves sectors for the task of reconstruction. Without all Americans to address environmental degradation is erodsubstantial reinvestment in the near term it will are either considing. In a recession plagued North America and be difficult to achieve long term growth and ered to be "low Europe there is little backing for bearing the improve our competitiveness, not to mention the income" or are costs involved. quality of American life. With borrowing costs as living in poverty. More broadly, instead of dealing with world low as they will ever be and with massive unemand domestic challenges, the political resolve of ployment in the construction sector, the United The average governments in Europe and North America to States has both an opportunity and a responsiamount of time address international issues or face up to domesbility to invest in its infrastructure. Franklin that a worker tic imperatives is weakening in the face of Roosevelt taught American that ending the stays unempersistent economic adversity. Incumbency is a downturn in an economy hinges on investment ployed in the US liability as anyone facing elections in this counin the nation's future. is over 40 weeks. try knows. And in Europe, statesmanship is at a Third, the United States has a responsibility premium and strategies are elusive. to the world economy. As the Eurozone slips There are fewer But the most important question Americans towards systemic crisis, we are reminded that payroll jobs in face in 2012 is economic. It comes in three forms. our financial system is tied to Europe's banks the US today First, Americans must deal with their domestic and public finances and these in turn drive than there were economy, its five-year recession, poor prospects European economic performance and therefore back in 2000 for renewed growth at anytime in the near global growth and prosperity. Sitting passively in even though 30 future and the appalling consequences for those the theatre of the G-20 and booing the players is million have who have lost jobs or are trying to enter the job not a wise option. A delicate balance between been added to market. Many of our most important institutions European institutional reform, the mobilisation the population. are weakening in the face of economic adversity, of European state finances, vigorous European our educational endowment among others. In Central Bank action, and international financial community after community, budgets for this vital endeavour support, coupled with growth strategies, are the necessary inare being slashed. We face the prospect of a lost decade for gredients in a strategy to deal with the crisis. As 2012 nears, the economy and for so many Americans who have lost their no consensus has emerged over such a strategy. The underjobs. There is no agreement among America's political lead- taking is enormous and complex but it is critical to Europe's ers on a way forward, especially on the role government future and to the world economy, including hopes for growth should play. Obama's proposals to stimulate the economy are in the United States and India. foundering in our national legislature and our Senators and Sadly, the present American presidential campaign Congressmen have been unable to agree on how to manage has avoided serious discussion of important issues. In fact, the budget deficit and government's revenue and spending the debate we are witnessing is unedifying and the choices requirements. The American political house is more divided we will face in November are unpalatable. Campaigning than ever, with scant hope a presidential election will resolve for his election in 1992, Bill Clinton famously remarked our differences and give our new president a clear mandate that the contest with George H.W. Bush was about the economy. Clinton's prognosis was true then; it is even truer today. Restoring economic prosperity is about rebuilding America's strength and its ability to influence world events and further this nation's interests. Without economic muscle, the word of the US counts for little--at home or abroad. And without economic strength America cannot be a useful partner for its friends, including India. The economy is the central challenge of 2012.
Frank Wisner is a former US ambassador to India

FE AR

Obama's Challenge is from the DOWNTURN
2012 promises little good news for the US, both at home and abroad. In a year when it elects the next president, the challenge is to regain its economic clout.
By Frank G. Wisner

hen the New Year dawns, Americans will awaken to troubling prospects. The year ahead promises little good news. Abroad, the United States faces dangers as it tries to extricate itself from its decade-long engagement in Afghanistan. There is little chance the Taliban can be defeated on the battlefield and hopes for achieving a political settlement are faint. America also faces a daunting task in managing its deteriorating relations with Pakistan. The United States confronts a relentless decline in that state's in-

W

Arab Awakening and could begin to tell us if the new Arab order will be dominated by Islamic political forces, Arab military establishments, or civil society. At the same time the region's political map is being redrawn, the price of oil will remain high, fuelling inflation and taxing the pocket books of consumers world wide. The rise of Chinese power and China's economic policies will preoccupy the United States in the year to come. The issues have already found their place in the presidential campaign. Behind the overheated rhetoric lies the fact that China has emerged as a leading world power and

stitutions, its internal security and its economy. Pakistan presents the most difficult of policy choices­­should we try to stay the course, adjust our policies to the harsh realities of living with a government and a military establishment which simultaneously support and oppose American objectives. Americans are ill-adjusted to living with ambiguity and their patience has worn thin. Americans also must deal with the constant threat of terror which is not likely to abate in the year ahead, despite successes in dealing with some of terror's more prominent organisers. The United States has to cope, as well, with the consequences of its 30-year estrangement from Iran and the possibility that by calculation or misjudgment, Iran's clerics and America's leaders, the latter goaded by Israel, will find themselves at war with frightening consequences for the region and the world and no resolution of the issues which pit us against each other. The year 2012 will also write the next chapter in the

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

JANUARY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

61

NEW

NEW

