Signature
B O T T O M

by DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

POVERTY OF SOCIALISM
overnments that meddle in markets rarely deliver prosperity. They redistribute poverty G instead. The ruling Congress-led coalition is no different. Its two flagship legislations, the Food Security Act and the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, will wreak havoc on two crucial markets: the market for food and the market for jobs. The genuinely urgent goals of alleviating hunger and providing gainful employment will be set back by decades. The food security legislation makes it mandatory for the Government to sell highly subsidised rice, wheat and coarse grain to 63.5 per cent of India's population through government-owned fair price shops. The first distortion of incentives takes place at the fair price shop. The owners of these shops see the obvious opportunity for price arbitrage. The Government procures wheat at Rs 12 per kg from farmers but sells it at Rs 2 per kg through fair price shops. A dishonest shop owner makes a killing by selling the Governmentsupplied wheat in the open market at a price between Rs 2 and the open market price. The latter is bound to be higher than the Government-set cost price of Rs 12 per kg. After the diversion, the poor only get access to a limited amount of the worst quality cereals that remain unsold. The open market provides no succour. The prices there are higher than they were before the food security legislation. To meet its legal obligation, the Government has to purchase at least 50 per cent of the total cereal production. That restricts supply to the open market and sends prices soaring. It costs Rs 96,000 crore a year ($19 billion) to hurt the poor like this. The Government could spend the same amount investing in irrigation, in rural roads and in supply chain infrastructure like storage. That kind of intervention would not distort markets. It would, however, boost output and productivity and ensure that Indian farmers, also India's poorest, can feed themselves without Government support. The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act makes it legally mandatory for the Government to provide 100 days of employment every year to one member of every rural household. The approximate wage for a day's work is Rs 100. Annual income from the programme for an individual is Rs 10,000. By another calculation it is Rs 30 per day, below the poverty line of Rs 32 per capita per day defined by the Planning Commission. It costs Rs 40,000 crore a year ($8 billion) to keep the beneficiaries of the programme under the national poverty line. The collateral damage is larger. The rural employment guarantee programme pushes up minimum wages, deterring potential employers from hiring cheap labour. Those looking for a proper 365-day job lose out to the 100-day beneficiaries. The Government could easily spend Rs 40,000 crore a year educating Indians. That would not distort the labour market while making people eminently qualified to get a proper job. It is one of India's great ironies that industry and even agriculture prefer to employ relatively expensive capital rather than relatively cheap labour. The formal organised sector of the economy only employs 7 per cent of the workforce. That percentage is unchanged since 1991. But no government has bothered to reform India's archaic labour laws which disallow hire-andfire, sending 93 per cent of the workforce into the relative poverty of informal employment. Clearly, the bankruptcy of socialist ideas, and the abject poverty of their reality, has not dawned on the antiquated Congress party.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

IT IS ONE OF INDIA'S GREAT IRONIES THAT INDUSTRY AND EVEN AGRICULTURE PREFER TO EMPLOY RELATIVELY EXPENSIVE CAPITAL RATHER THAN RELATIVELY CHEAP LABOUR. THE FORMAL ORGANISED SECTOR EMPLOYS 7 PER CENT OF THE WORKFORCE.

S I G N P OSTS
UNITED Ambani brothers, Mukesh and Anil, for late Dhirubhai Ambani's 80th birth anniversary in Junagadh district of
MUKESH AND ANILAMBANI

Gujarat. "I am happy with the progression of both brothers. This shows that they are together," mother Kokilaben Ambani said. BANNED Six Indian women athletes, including ace 400-metre runner Ashwini Akkunji, for one year for doping, by the National Anti-Doping

Agency. With the London Olympics beginning on July 27, the ruling is certain to prevent any of them from qualifying for the Games. DIED Renowned director, actor and screenplay writer Satyadev Dubey, after a prolonged illness. Dubey, 75, was known for plays like Pagla Ghoda,

Adhey Ahdure and Andha Yug. DIED Former Karnataka Chief Minister S. BangarBANGARAPPA appa, on December 26 in Bangalore following a brief illness. He was 79.

24

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

