Na tion LOKPALBILL
ANNA HAZARE SUPPORTERS AT THE MMRDA GROUND IN MUMBAI

ANNAFALLS INTO MUMB AI TRAP
Poor turnout forces Anna to abandon his fast. Poor floor management in Parliament stymies constitutional status for Lokpal.
By Kiran Tare and Shafi Rahman

hen Anna Hazare announced in August 2011 that the agitation for the Jan Lokpal Bill could go on for 10 years or even 20, little did he know that his home state would provide a reality check. Presence was depressingly thin the first day of his fast at Mumbai's MMRDA Ground, forcing him to shelve a proposed Jail Bharo Andolan and concentrate on the long term. But Hazare has not abandoned his mission. He has shifted his battleground from high density metros to political space. He will campaign against the Congress and Sonia Gandhi in the five poll-bound states, starting January first week. Maharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan could claim credit for stopping Team Anna in its tracks. He showed the high command, which had bungled the two Anna fasts in

W

Delhi, how to spike a protest. He created an atmosphere of fear, telling Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Umeshchandra Sarangi to announce that Hazare would be booked for any inflammatory speech. He refused to give any concession in the daily rent of Rs 2.5 lakh for the MMRDA Ground. And he spread word that any young person who went to jail in protest would be denied a passport and face problems in getting a job. The big stick worked. Team Anna also made mistakes in strategy. First, Mumbai-based NGO Jagruk Nagrik Manch insisted on the MMRDA Ground, 20 minutes by bus from the nearest railway station, for the fast. A source close to Hazare says that he had made up his mind on fasting at the more centrally-located Azad Maidan but Team Anna forced him to change his mind, hoping for a bigger crowd and greater media attention at MMRDA Ground. Hazare's supporters, mostly from

the lower middle class, could not participate in the agitation. "I can feed my family of six only if I earn at least Rs 500 a day. I can't do that if I sit there for four hours," said Rajesh Kamble, a rickshaw driver. Social media users also stoked fear among youngsters, suggesting that they could have problems if they participated in the Jail Bharo Andolan. Blogger Harini Calamur was the most vocal: "For all the youngsters who in your idealism want to break the law and get to prison, a small reminder: if you go to jail, you may end up with a criminal record. That record stays for ever and ever and ever." Though volunteers of India Against Corruption declared that more than one lakh people had registered for the Jail Bharo Andolan, Hazare had to abandon the agitation fearing a washout. Team Anna's strategy was mostly driven by Arvind Kejriwal. A day before the fast he called on a group

of Muslims and sought their support. His act did not go down well with RSS supporters, who turned their back on the agitation, unlike in Delhi's Ramlila Maidan. It was again Kejriwal's decision to launch an anti-Congress movement in the poll-bound states. Hazare had insisted only on appealing to people not to vote for those who opposed the Jan Lokpal Bill. While Team Anna faltered in Mumbai, the Government bumbled in New Delhi yet again. The Lokpal Bill was passed in the Lok Sabha with a comfortable majority. But the

CHAVAN SHOWED THE HIGH COMMAND, WHICH HAD BUNGLED THE TWO ANNA FASTS IN DELHI, HOW TO SPIKE A PROTEST.

Government's floor managers failed to ensure the passage of a constitutional amendment by two-thirds majority which would have given the Lokpal constitutional status. The Government needed 288 out of 432 MPs for it; it managed to get only 251 votes though UPA's strength in the Lok Sabha is 277. The Congress had put four leaders--Telecom Minister Kapil Sibal, Parliamentary Affairs Minister Pawan Kumar Bansal, East Delhi MP Sandeep Dikshit and MP from Chittorgarh, Rajasthan, Girija Vyas-- to ensure presence of party members and allies during the vote. They failed to keep the Congress flock together. K. Sudhakaran, MP from Kannur, was in Kerala to attend the funeral of a relative. Patan MP Jagdish Thakur was away attending the funeral of his son-in-law. Lakshadweep MP Hamdullah Sayeed left Parliament early "assuming" voting would not happen. Dinsha Patel, the minister of mines, was busy with his granddaughter's wedding on December 27. Four other MPs from Gujarat also skipped the vote to attend the wedding in Ahmedabad. UPA also lost the votes of A. Raja and Suresh Kalmadi, both of whom are currently in Tihar Jail. Parties which support the UPA from outside made it easy for the Congress. The BSP and SP, with a combined strength of 43 seats, played according to script and walked out in protest. The Congress says the BJP betrayed it despite an assurance of cooperation to make the Lokpal a constitutional body. "We have seen the true face of BJP. It was committed to constitutional status for Lokpal in the standing committee," said Congress President Sonia Gandhi. The BJP claimed it never gave any such assurance. "There was no deal with the Congress,'' says spokesperson Prakash Javadekar. To prevent a repeat in the Rajya Sabha, Pranab Mukherjee met Leader of Opposition Arun Jaitley on December 28, seeking his party's support for passing the Bill. By then, though, the damage had been done.
with Bhavna Vij-Aurora

28

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

