BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE TEMPTATIONS OF REGRESS
he story is funny, but not that much fun. On the first power, not just a voice raised against "Christian imperialFriday, rage was free. The Pakistan government, ism". Media will amplify the slogans. The subaltern debate mixing business with pleasure, declared a holiday so will command the attention of history. A nation state evolves through process. Change does that young men could vent their anger against a virulent and scandalous film on the Prophet of Islam, made by an not sprout instantly into a full-grown tree. Even democracy obscure American crook, who has now been re-arrested for as we understand it today took at least two centuries of breaking the terms of his probation after a bank fraud change to reach where it has, even if we brush aside the conviction. The collateral violence on symbols of sin, like British assertion that it all started with the Magna Carta in cinema halls in Karachi and Peshawar, not to mention a few the 13th century (the Great Charter that whittled down vehicles along the way, elicited little more than a shrug. Boys the absolute power of kings and gave barons some rights). will be boys. To be fair, one of the theatres, in Peshawar, did When India decided to adopt adult franchise, in Gandhi's have a reputation for showing porn to the starving hun- Congress Scheme for a future country written in 1931, dreds. Its owner was a minister, who immediately did French women could not vote. Democracy is much more than a chance to vote every penance by announcing an award of a substantial amount four or five years. It is a set of freedoms built around for the head of the filmmaker. American embassy and consulate officials were more equality, individual and collective, as in the exercise of any apprehensive about the subsequent Friday, September 29, faith, or it is nothing at all. The Arab Spring could not institute overnight: It must for the police tend to relax during a repeat performance. The turnout was not as high after Friday prayers, but they mature into the full four seasons to achieve stability. Much did turn out to shout slogans promising death to various of the Arab region slipped from Ottoman imperialism to eternal enemies. And then, suddenly, instead of frenzy, as if British neocolonisation, where princes elevated from oasis in response to some unseen signal, everyone in the crowd to throne were given absolute power as reward for a stratebegan to melt away. A puzzled journalist asked why. The an- gic alliance with the West. This pattern was partially swer cleared a great fog. They were all heading home to broken in the 1950s, but the military officers who promised watch television, for Pakistan was playing in the T20 World socialism only led their nations into dynastic tyranny. The glimmer of change is visible, but there Cup tournament that afternoon. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com is some way to go. So, can celebrations begin? `Cricket Pakistan was created from a differdefeats God' is a pretty neat headline as ent dynamic, and remains a work in well. Perhaps we can hold the glee. This progress--or, as it often seems, a journeat story obscures a larger picture. ney in regress. It is still grappling over There should be no illusions. A signithe meaning of an Islamic state. Where ficant length of the Muslim street across do you draw the boundaries as extremthe globe has bought the narrative that ists push excess in the name of Islam America and its European allies are deinto all aspects of governance and all termined to dominate the Muslim world corners of society? The ulema's search in an agenda that resonates back to for a "pure" (Pak) state has only ended faith-based crusades a millennium ago. up creating a sub-set of minorities: American and Nato military boots on Barelvi, Deobandi, Shia, Qadiani, Muslim ground are a visible fact. The Memon and heaven knows how many soft, NGO face of western intervention is other sects who are as loyal to their own dismissed as duplicity. brand as they are to the common faith. Critics gleefully note that NGOs spend The questions of a post-colonial age 80 to 90 per cent of their funds on themThe questions of a will not be easily resolved. Turmoil will selves, which is largely true. post-colonial age will not often camouflage itself in more rational But whether in Libya or Egypt or be easily resolved. Turmoil headwear. Theocrats, with a mass base Pakistan, there is a parallel message and popular institutions, will promote being conveyed by the aggressive will often camouflage itself themselves in the guise of idealism, crowds to their own government: They in more rational headwear. even as a dwindling band of liberals will be in charge of the national agenda, Theocrats, with a mass base squabble and compromise in the comand they will calibrate the response to and popular institutions, will plexities of the short game. But this is provocation as well as determine the promote themselves in the not a fast T20; it is life-and-death Test shape of the country's politics and polity. guise of idealism. that will span the coming decade. This is part of the internal debate for 

T

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

