Signature
R O U G H

KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

POLITICS AS LIFE, NOT LIFESTYLE F
arooq Abdullah was a hugger. Omar is a shrugger. That sums up the difference between two generations of a political family. It is also two differing styles of working. The era of the full-time, handclasping, back-slapping politician is gone, replaced by young men and women who believe in work-life balance, weekends off, and three vacations a year (more if you are Rahul Gandhi). The distinction between public space and private time is entrenched now, and young politicians feel they have every right to guard their "alone" time. So Akhilesh Yadav will make a virtue of going home at 6 p.m. to play with the children. Milind Deora has no qualms flaunting his guitar playing skills at Blue Frog, and Anurag Thakur is happy to spend as much time in cricket stadiums as in his constituency. Politics has gone from being a life to a lifestyle. It allows you access to Central Hall in Parliament, as much as it eases your entry into the latest, swishest restaurant. In contrast, Jawaharlal Nehru's struggles with the demands on his time by wife Kamala's illness were public knowledge. Running a household was an alien experience and when he did it for the first time in his life taking Kamala to Geneva for treatment, he was miserable. The succeeding generation that modelled itself on him tried to live life according to the same principles: Practising full-time politics, taking time off only to read and write extensively. Politics consumed them, 18 hours a day, often at the cost of their families. But now that the instant Facebook post has replaced the laboured diary entry and TV theatrics have been substituted by the cut and thrust of parliamentary debate, the nature of politics has altered. Technology has liberated younger politicians, giving their constituents the illusion that they can access their MPs 24x7 even though the voice at the other end is recorded and the Twitter account is managed by an army of legislative assistants carefully chosen for their foreign university pedigree. The janata durbar is giving way to whistlestop tours, with managed crowds and predetermined agendas, with the home increasingly out of bounds for constituents. It's less messy perhaps? When Akhilesh started the weekly janata durbar at his Lucknow home after taking over, he was deluged with complaints, going up to even 8,000 once. The durbar was quickly restricted to twice a month. Narendra Modi had his own solution to the problem of interaction: Host a Google chat, get a star to anchor it, and take selected questions. But voters are no longer satisfied by a feudal wave of the hand or a paternal assurance. They want instant resolution. As the story goes, in the early days of recording machines, the late BJP leader Pramod Mahajan installed one at his Delhi home, with a message in his own voice, only to face an avalanche of protests from people back in Maharashtra who said he was deliberately avoiding them--he was at home and still not picking up. Now a New Generation politician's smart assistant will access your problem and even offer a position paper on it, all without disturbing the Dear Leader, who is probably busy indulging his latest passion. 
SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

YOUNG POLITICIANS FEEL THEY HAVE EVERY RIGHT TO GUARD THEIR "ALONE" TIME. AKHILESH YADAV WILL MAKE A VIRTUE OF GOING HOME AT 6 P.M. TO PLAY WITH THE CHILDREN. MILIND DEORA HAS NO QUALMS FLAUNTING HIS GUITAR SKILLS AT BLUE FROG, AND ANURAG THAKUR IS HAPPY TO SPEND AS MUCH TIME IN CRICKET STADIUMS AS IN HIS CONSTITUENCY.

S I G N P O STS
WON The Delhi Half Marathon, by Kenyan Edwin Kipyego, on September 30. It took him 1 hour, 55 seconds to cover 21 km. DIED Brajesh Mishra,

India's first national security adviser, on September 28. Mishra, who was suffering from a heart ailment, died at his Delhi home. He was 83. ATTACKED Lt-Gen Kuldip Singh Brar, who commanded Operation Bluestar, in central London on September

30. Brar said it was an assassination attempt. DIED Eric Hobsbawm, the distinguished British Marxist historian who had a profound influence on the Indian Left, on October 1. He was 95. DEBUTED Indian football captain Sunil Chhetri, in

the Portuguese second division league for his side Sporting Clube de Portugal against SC Freamunde on October 2.
CHHETRI

KIPYEGO

16

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

