Con troversy

JALMAHAL
PHOTOS: PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR

JALMAHALFUTURE ON HOLD
THE JAL MAHAL (LEFT); A DRAIN BLOCKED ALLEGEDLY DUE TO CHANGES IN THE LAKE BASIN

Supreme Court will decide on a glitzy project around Jaipur's historic monument that critics say endangers Man Sagar lake. The high court had halted it in May.
By Rohit Parihar

T

he Supreme Court will now determine the future of Jaipur's Man Sagar lake and the famed 17th century monument in its middle, Jal Mahal. The construction of a seven-star hotel and market complex spanning 100 acres of land around the monument was struck down by the Rajasthan High Court on May 17 after three PILS claimed that the Ashok Gehlot government went out of its way to approve the project, on a 435p acre area estimated to be worth Rs 15,000 crore, at an annual lease fee of Rs 2.52 crore. A bench of Chief Justice Arun Mishra and Justice Mahesh Bhagwati called it a "breach of public trust" and "a case of illegal siphoning off of valuable property of several thousand crores". Petitions against the Jal Mahal project had been filed by K. P. Sharma, an environmental researcher, the Dharohar Bachao Samiti and the Heritage Preservation Society. Project developer Jalmahal Resorts Private Limited (JRPL) and the state government have appea-

led against the Rajasthan High Court verdict in the Supreme Court. The case has drawn the who's who of the legal fraternity into it: Soli Sorabjee and Manish Singhvi for the state government; Harish Salve, Gopal Subramaniam, Ranjit Kumar and Vivek Tankha for JRPL; and Prashant Bhushan for the activists opposing the project. On May 25, a vacation court continued the high court ban on new construction but stayed the order on reversing the damage already done. On May 25 and July 7, a division bench posted the case for routine hearing, while continuing the stay on the high court order. On September 4, a Supreme Court bench of Justices P. Sathasivam and Ranjan Gogoi adjourned until September 20 the hearing on an appeal against a criminal case and arrest warrants against Vinod Zutshi, who headed Rajasthan Tourism Development Corporation when the project contract was signed in 2005, and Navratan Kothari of JRPL, who was represented by lawyer Abhishek Manu Singhvi. The case against them was or-

dered by a Jaipur trial court and upheld by the high court. Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot's government had repeatedly emphasised since 1999 that the project was essentially meant to conserve the lake and the monument with some space earmarked for recreation. As things turned out, the government seemingly looked the other way as JRPL rolled out plans for massive commercial construction by reducing the lake size. The second phase of the project has yet to begin but the Rajasthan High Court, in its May 17 verdict, had observed that work in the first phase, where 15 acres of submerged land was reclaimed and the lake's water level reduced to get another 85 acres of the lake bed, has already damaged the Man Sagar's ecosystem. The lake area has also been shrunk to ensure that commercial establishments planned in the second phase--including two 435room hotels, 200 shops, a multiplex, mall, convention centre, bar and a wedding court--are safe from water. "Man Sagar, which used to be a sewage dump in 2003, today carries more water. The water level was decided keeping in mind the sustainability of both the lake and Jal Mahal," counters Arvind Jain, JRPL'S legal adviser. But on August 21, the court's appre-

hensions were vindicated when just 177 mm of rain flooded Jaipur and outlying areas. The change in the lake basin in the first phase appears to have affected the water flow and alignment of two crucial drains, Brahmapuri and Nagtalai. As a result, the lake water began flowing in the reverse direction on August 21, the first time in four centuries. The flow razed most of the lake embankment along the Jaipur-Delhi road, submerging it eight feet under water. The road leading to Amer Fort was cut off from the walled city and thousands of houses were flooded. The high court order said various respondents had tried to mislead the court by saying the Union environment ministry had approved the construction when no permission was sought. Gehlot faces allegations of having been unduly accommodating towards the company, owned by Mofatraj Munot, billionaire promoter of the Kalpataru Group, his friend of three decades. Munot's partner Kothari, a Jaipur-based jeweller, is also said to be close to Gehlot. "I was in no way involved in the signing of the agreement," the Chief Minister had reacted to the May 17 verdict. But the government's benign attitude towards the developers is evident even before the financial bids

were opened in December 2003. KGK Enterprises, which later became JRPL on November 10, 2004, was allowed by the government on October 17, 2003, to compete even though it had no prior experience in such projects. On December 3, 2003, Gehlot allowed the financial bids to be opened, which went to KGK Enterprises. The loosely worded 99-year-old sale-cum-lease deed signed in November 2005 during BJP rule mandated JRPL to spend just Rs 1.5 crore on conserving

ASHOK GEHLOT FACES CHARGES OF BEING TOO GENEROUS TO JRPL, OWNED BYHIS FRIEND MOFATRAJ MUNOT.

GEHLOT

Jal Mahal, over and above the Rs 2.52 crore annual lease fee. JRPL was exempted from paying Rs 65 crore stamp duty. The government also took it upon itself to treat sewage water supply into the lake for Rs 35 crore. On October 10, 2007, the BJP government rejected JRPL'S plea to increase the development area from 11,500 sq m to 32,185 sq m to build two hotels of 435 rooms. Vasundhara Raje lost power in December 2008 and with Gehlot back, not only were the lease terms kept, but also the state government also allowed JRPL in 2009 to increase the development area. The Rajasthan High Court on May 17 said the lease money wasn't enough to meet "even a fraction of the state government's obligation" towards the project. "The state gifts its valuable property and keeps spending on it to let a private party enjoy steady earnings forever," alleges Ajay Jain, Jaipurbased advocate who wants the project scuttled. "No government money has been siphoned. The project was through a global tender and its financial benefits would far outweigh the claims of loss to the government," insists JRPL'S Arvind Jain. The verdict on this clash between heritage and commercial interest lies in the hands of the Supreme Court. 

56

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

NEW

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

NEW

