Leisure
BOOKS FA S H I O N CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

GOLD CLASS
Anjali Patil, 24, impressed with her performance as the domestic Rohini in Prashant Nair's Delhi In A Day. The Nashik girl will soon be seen again, as a Naxalite in Prakash Jha's Chakravyuh. She has signed three more films with the director. A gold medal-winning performer, she is trained in direction from the National School of Drama.
BHATT

Cross The Line
In the trailer of Tamil film Rendavathu Padam, Vijayalakshmi Agathiyan, 30,steams up the screen in a clingy white dress,crossing her legs seductively like Hollywood star Sharon Stone did in Basic Instinct.After playing a homely girl in most films,she has a negative role in the film directed by C.S.Amudhan.The decision to cross the line was deliberate.

Three Days, Three Parties
KAPOOR

YOGEN SHAH

Going UP
Hema Malini for a honorary doctorate from the Singhania University in Udaipur, Rajasthan. Cost of the non-subsidised cooking gas introduced last month, by Rs 127 per cylinder, to Rs 883. Lata Mangeshkar's popularity. She received birthday greetings from Pope Benedict XVI on turning 83.

Little Big Help
After launching several famous careers Mahesh Bhatt, 64,now through his films,M steps in front of the camera to help yet another aspiring filmmaker.He plays himself in debutante director Sanjay Amar's Future Toh Bright Hai Ji that has Aamir Basheer and Sonal Saigal as leads.He shot for an hour for a scene where he is having a telephone conversation with a brilliant but struggling writer and calls his appearance "a flash on the screen" .
RISHIKA AND SWANEET

RAMPAL

Three parties kept Bollywood on its toes last weekend,starting with Ranbir Kapoor's 30th birthday celebrations on September 27 at producer Manmohan Shetty's Juhu bungalow.It was put together at the last minute but his special ladies-- Deepika Padukone, Katrina Kaif and Anushka Sharma,all turned up.The party then moved to Jodhpur for the wedding of Eros CEO Kishore Lulla's Rishika, to Swadaughter,R neet on September 29,and finally to Delhi for the relaunch of Arjun Rampal's nightclub LAP.Whew.


AFP

Going DOWN
The morale of cricket fans after the Indian team's ouster from the ICC World Twenty20 in Sri Lanka. Karl Lagerfeld's fans, now that he has fashioned a bag out of hula hoops for French label Chanel. The price of iPhone 4 and 4S as Apple prepares for the India launch of its latest offering, the iPhone 5.

Compiled by Nishat Bari and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

Volume XXXVII Number 42; For the week October 9-15, 2012, released on October 8
64
INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

