Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

SMARTWOMEN DON'TTRAVELALONE
Young NRI rediscovers India and herself through the battered but beloved Railways
By Kaveree Bamzai

AROUND INDIA IN 80 TRAINS
byMonisha Rajesh Roli Books Price: RS 295 Pages: 243 BETWEEN THE COVERS The bookis exhausting but in an odd,refreshing way.We could have done with less of knowing what goes into Monisha Rajesh's stomach and what leaves it,but it is impossible not to share her sheer enthusiasm.

e love our NRIs. We adore their posh accents, their euros and dollars, their interest in our economy, our movies, our arranged marriages, and even our food. It was a matter of time before they wrote on our trains, a subject hitherto restricted to the English who believe they have a better claim to them. So welcome Monisha Rajesh, London-based journalist of the unerring eye and limitless words, back in India to reclaim her history. Ignore for a bit her familiar story of re-acquainting herself with Chennai--its smell "a heady mix of diesel, waste and noxious fumes" and its "bundle of bodies asleep by the roadside". Pay no attention to her nipping back and forth to the loo in panic as she embarks on her journey, set aside her sociological analysis of why Indians like big weddings (to showcase their wealth, dummy), and roll your eyes freely at her encounter with hijras. Focus on the trains, the stations, the many passengers, and the in-between stops. That's where the book comes alive. Rejoice in the descriptions: Prabhaker, with his Gymkhana Club waiter attire and blowdried bouffant on the Himsagar Express who turns out to have wandering hands, or Colonial Cath on the Indian MaharajaDeccan Odyssey who complains about the beggars staring at her as she picks on her vada pav at breakfast. The stations are equally lovingly detailed: A man in a pinstriped shirt and trousers pushing his friend in a broken-down motorcycle up a track near Mathura Junction and a driver stretching and scratching at Mumbai's CST tracks. The cities are uncovered with charm: The backstreets of Ahmedabad selling everything from boxed underwear to frilly dresses; the peeling

W

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

paint and crumbling walls of a Diu hotel where our writer and her companion, appropriately called Passepartout, have calamari pasta and fried meaty rockfish; the generous throng of pilgrims at the Golden Temple in Amritsar where she shares a stranger's rotis. She has fun at a Vasant Vihar party where she meets an aunty in tights and Louboutins and an uncle whose nipples are visible through a black net shirt, and so do we. She watches a catfight between a Punjabi lady, "like a pudding in a purple salwar kameez", and a wiry, darkskinned hawker in a local train in Mumbai and enjoys the slapping, hair-pulling and jabbering. She waltzes through the Osho ashram in Pune and amuses us with their autoracism and freefor-fornication HIV test-on-arrival. She takes off on a bus farting black clouds up the hill in Shimla for the price of a Kit Kat. And has a flaming row with a man who doesn't allow her to enter the Jagannath temple in Puri. Inevitably she has a fight with Passepartout, an engaging Norwegian with whom she quarrels intensely about religion and cricket (what else?). And inevitably again she enrols in a Vipassana course at the fag end of the journey and spends a significant amount of time telling us why silence is the most beautiful sound. The book is exhausting but in an odd, refreshing way. We could have done with less of knowing what goes into her stomach and what leaves it, but it is impossible not to share her sheer joy. A little more editing (Amir Khan posters?) and a little less eating (barfi at 8.30 in the morning?) but hey, if we can forgive Rajesh for being an NRI, we can forgive anything. By the end of her book-journey India is no longer a stranger to her. And we have to admit, it is less of a stranger to those of us who live here as well. 

58

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

