Na tion
By Asit Jolly

HARYANA

ushma Bhadu had no inkling she was sparking a revolution when she stopped covering her face with a ghunghat (veil) this July. Elected sarpanch of her village, Dhani Miyan Khan, in June 2010, the 32-year-old mother of three patiently informed her husband that the piece of fabric, obligatory for every Haryanvi bahu (bride), was hindering her work. A week after lifting it, on July 22, 2012, she publicly discarded the "infernal" veil at a conference of women panchayat members, girl students and anganwadi workers from 25 neighbouring villages. "The ghunghat no longer works for me. It holds me back and stops me from fully participating in my family, or things that concern our village. But most importantly, it robs me of my identity as a person," Bhadu declared, enunciating wisdom that belied her meagre education: She dropped out of school in Class VII. From the fringes of this `women only' event, on the premises of the Dhani Miyan Khan Primary School, men from the village looked on with trepidation. Such an act of wilful defiance was unprecedented anywhere across the steeped-in-tradition, Bishnoi-dominated belt called Bagad, that straddles Haryana's Fatehabad, Hisar and Sirsa districts. But the young sarpanch had evidently touched a painful nerve in the women present on the occasion. "It was like a flood," recalls her 35-year-old husband Bhagwan Das. Scores of old and young women stood up and cast aside their ghunghats, vowing never to let the customary piece of cloth "hold them back again". At first, Das felt a great relief that his wife was no longer alone and could not be singled out for ridicule. "I now feel tremendous pride in what she seeks to do," says the cotton farmer, who had never understood the logic of the straightjacketed traditions of his Bishnoi community. The change is already palpable in the tiny hamlet. As you near Dhani Miyan Khan on the bumpy ride from Fatehabad, there is something different about the colourfully clad women

S

`THE GHUNGHAT N O LONGER WORKS FOR ME. IT HOLDS ME BACK'
Dhani Miyan Khan in numbers
Population

Rural women throw off the veil to empower themselves. Will the rebellion spread?
Even before she discarded her ghunghat, sarpanch Bhadu had evidently been hard at work. She successfully chased down a Rs 10-lakh grant to build a training centre in sewing for women, and roped in Punjab National Bank to sponsor training programmes. "We (she never uses the singular) also got funds from the state government to build a water-boosting system to augment our household supplies," she says with pride. The young sarpanch, who failed to complete her schooling, ensures that every child in her village goes to school. The Rajkiya Prathmik Vidyalaya, which should be upgraded to a middle school by 2013, has a zero dropout rate since she became sarpanch. Mahinder Singh, 37, and his colleague Chhotu Ram, 40, both teachers at the school, are avid supporters of Bhadu's move. "This is historic. When it spreads across Haryana, everyone will remember it all began right here," says Singh, arguing that ghunghat is a feature of patriarchy and has little to do with real tradition. "Have you ever seen ghunghat-clad depictions of Sita or Draupadi?" he asks. Another member of the Dhani Miyan Khan panchayat, Birma Devi, 35, says doing away with the veil will open avenues for young women and girls in a society where purdah traditions have a vice-like grip. According to her, Bishnoi daughters-in-law were even expected to cover their faces in the presence of their mothers-in-law or an older sister-in-law. "We were told the ghunghat was a way of showing izzat (respect) to our elders. Actually, it only served to subjugate," she says. Rainuka Dagar, 44, who heads the Gender Studies Unit at Chandigarh's Institute for Development and Communication, says the women of Dhani

842

(416 men and 426 women)

0 to 6 years
44 boys; 51 girls

7 to 16 years
80 boys; 75 girls School Attendance

Miyan Khan "have registered a significant note of dissent, in a society where lives of women are precarious". She says the notorious khap system, where honour killings are summarily ordered by kangaroo courts, has led to `life chances' of women being among the worst in the world. Dagar believes that in challenging the veil, Bhadu has in fact challenged the state to step in and protect its women more actively. Curiously though, there hasn't been a murmur of appreciation from the state government, more than two months after the ground-breaking proclamations in Dhani Miyan Khan on July 22. This despite the fact that the mahapanchayat also publicly shunned female foeticide and instituted rewards for whistleblowers who expose families resorting to sex determination tests; and has put in place scholarships for poor girls wishing to pursue higher studies.

100%

with zero dropouts The village bucks overall trend of more males to females in the district of Fatehabad:

A FEMININE TOUCH IS EVIDENT EVERYWHERE IN THE VILLAGE: PAVED STREETS WITH LIGHTS THATWORK,AND EVERY HOME WITH POWER AND WATER SUPPLY.
Krishan Swarup, 66, a veteran social activist, sees Sushma Bhadu's initiative as "an assertion of monumental significance". He says unlike in urban spaces where women often contend with subjugation that is not apparent, "in Haryanvi society, the mere act of throwing off the ghunghat is 50 per cent of the battle won". But the war, he says, can only be won with the sustained backing of progressive voluntary groups and the government. For the moment though, the sun shines brightest on the little hamlet of 426 women and 416 men. The future looks good too. Kamlesh Rani delights in reading out the numbers for the zero-to-six age group in their village: "We have 51 girls and 44 boys." Maybe the days of the khap panchayats are truly numbered. 

1,000:861,
SUSHMA BHADU (RIGHT) WITH OTHER WOMEN OF DHANI MIYAN KHAN VILLAGE
ANIL DAYAL

and the state of Haryana:

1,000:877
told we're there to enquire about the women who have shed their veils. "It is not easy," she says, narrating how men from neighbouring settlements mock the women of Dhani Miyan Khan. "Ab to tumhe chhoot mil gayi hai, kuchh bhi kar sakti ho (Now you have all the freedom, you can do anything)," they call out derisively, often adding unprintable suggestions of what the "kuchh bhi" could be. "But we are not about to give up. Catcalls and jeers are a man-thing. If we give in, they will find something else," she smiles again. Inside the village, a feminine touch is evident everywhere. The streets are all paved, neatly laid over with interlocking concrete blocks, the streetlights work, and every home has a power and water connection. The drainage is open, but free of any blockage or the mosquito-infested cesspools one finds in adjacent settlements. Dhani Miyan Khan, which shines like a well-kept home, was awarded the 2012 Nirmal Gram Puraskar for its sanitation.

riding home on bicycles, or others urging bullocks pulling carts laden with bales of cotton. For the first time in years, nothing stands between their happy faces and the waning afternoon sun. Confident without her veil, Kamlesh Rani, 30, brings her brand new self-start scooter to a halt to enquire if we need help with directions. The young anganwadi worker responsible for Dhani Miyan Khan and two contiguous villages--Chaplamori and Salamkhera--lights up when

46

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

