Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N BOOKS E Y E C AT C H E R S

WHAT WAS SHE THINKING?
Manisha Koirala, 42, used to be such a pretty woman, but she is intent on obliterating that memory. Only Simi Garewal goes all-out white like that and even she wouldn't pick something as ghastly as this anarkali zipped up to her chin. Unless Koirala is playing the ghost in Ram Gopal Varma's Bhoot Returns and this is her costume.

Quiet Entry
The drums aren't exactly sounding to announce the entry of Priya Anand, 26, into Bollywood. After all, everybody has eyes only for Sridevi in English Vinglish, even though it is Anand who nudges her to learn English in the film. The Chennai girl is used to sharing space with other actors right from her 2009 debut with Tamil film Vaamanan where she co-starred with Jai and Lakshmi Rai. She may be overshadowed but a standing ovation at Toronto International Film Festival isn't a bad start.

Going UP
Salman Khan's income. He has paid an advance tax of Rs 8 crore in September, which makes him Bollywood's highest taxpayer this year. The figure is up from the Rs 5 crore tax he forked out last year in the same period.

Vs

Going DOWN
Mahesh Bhupathi's popularity. The slugfest between him and President of All India Tennis Association (AITA) Anil Khanna over a two-year ban on him playing for India has cost him public sympathy. Accusing the AITA of divide and rule was probably a bad idea.

CAMPBELL

RANJAN
FOTOCORP

Old Against New
Model Anushka Ranjan, 22, and Los Angeles-based actor Pinky Campbell, 30, are both on their way to the big screen. Ranjan, the daughter of Indian Television Academy founders Anu and Shashi Ranjan, is supposedly in talks with Sajid Nadiadwala and Ramesh Taurani for her debut. A stab at the Miss India title, modelling at fashion weeks and a clutch of acting courses complete her resume. But Campbell, who is being courted by Vikram Bhatt, is an old hand. She debuted in 2001 with Dev Anand's Censor and did a bunch of small roles in Hollywood like Spread with Ashton Kutcher and Lawrence Trilling's Group Sex. Who will stand out?


FOTOCORP

Compiled by Nishat Bari

72

Volume XXXVII Number 40; For the week Sep 25-Oct 1, 2012, released on September 24

