Cover Story
Photographs by YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

ENVIRONMENTMINISTRY

GREEN TERROR
For three years, the Jairam-Jayanthi regime has jinxed development with an obstructionist approach in the environment ministry. Green hurdles must go if Manmohan Singh's born-again reformist zeal has to make any headway.
By Devesh Kumar and Prachi Bhuchar

JAYANTHI NATARAJAN

JAIRAM RAMESH

he wood panelled office in Delhi's Paryavaran Bhawan is now a `no-go' zone. Its reigning green queen, Jayanthi Natarajan, once a daily fixture on television shows as Congress spokeswoman, presides in imperious silence. Over the last 15 months, as minister for environment and forests, she has successfully stalled every attempt by the Prime Minister to make her fall in line with his reformist vision. In July, the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) wrote a letter to her ministry recommending a set of measures to set the ball rolling for faster approvals. The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) was unmoved. On July 22, the Prime Minister declared at a seminar in the Capital that a proposed National Environment Appraisal and Monitoring Authority would revamp the process of

T

granting environmental clearance and remove "the hated licence permit raj". MoEF said nothing. On September 22, in an interaction with a Delhi newspaper, Planning Commission Deputy Chairman Montek Singh Ahluwalia admitted that "the method of clearances of environment and forestry is arbitrary, non-scientific and non-transparent". The green curtain did not even flutter. Over the past three years, the `J' factor has jinxed development in India. Jayanthi Natarajan and Jairam Ramesh, her predecessor between 2009 and July 2011, have succeeded in making MoEF the single biggest stumbling block to India's growth story. Finally free of policy paralysis, the Government now faces an even bigger threat from within: Green terror. All in the name of preserving the environment. According to Coal India's annual report for the year 2011-12, as many as 179 coal blocks were awaiting clearances. Forestry clearances for diverting 28,771 hectares of land were yet to be granted, upsetting the Government's power generation plans. The story is the same across roads, steel and defence, making it impossible for India to achieve its target of attracting an investment of $1 trillion in infrastructure between 2012 and 2017. Good politics is thwarted, big business is frustrated, and the UPA Government looks unlikely to achieve its much-needed, election-required growth rate of 8 per cent. The red tape has become a green noose and it is strangling development. As Adi Godrej, president of the Confederation of

18

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

19

Cover Story

ENVIRONMENTMINISTRY
REUTERS

Indian Industry, says: "Anything that takes months on end to be cleared is too much. We must learn to clear things very, very rapidly. And by rapidly I mean in a matter of weeks, not months or years." Natarajan clearly has a different notion of time. She not only guards her turf zealously, but has sought to expand the ministry's purview, demanding at a conference on September 28 that it also be allowed to grant bio-diversity clearances. Every time a simple way out has been suggested, she has chosen the difficult option. In May 2012, for instance, an EGoM headed by the then finance minister, Pranab Mukherjee, cleared the Mahan Coalfields at Singrauli in Madhya Pradesh. Natarajan argued against the project, saying it fell in the no-go area, but Mukherjee eventually prevailed. Or so he thought. The file is still pending with the inflexible empress of ecological correctness. She has proved impervious to reason. In March this year, a panel headed by former National Advisory Council (NAC) member Madhav Gadgil, in its report submitted to MoEF, recommended that the Western Ghats, which straddle three states--Karnataka, Maharashtra and Kerala--be delineated into "go/nogo" zones. The chief ministers of the three states protested. PMO pitched in, arguing in support of lifting the ban on developmental activities in the Ghats in consultation with the states. The Planning Commission favoured a meeting of the chief ministers and MoEF to discuss the report. The chief ministers readily agreed, but Natarajan resisted, saying her ministry officials could not be spared for the meeting. In March, she rejected another environmental reform, e-biz, a move initiated by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion to facilitate single window clearances for persons wanting do business in India. Everyone tried to persuade MoEF to change--PMO, finance ministry and the Planning Commission. Natarajan would not be deterred. Her predecessor, Jairam Ramesh, was no different: In 2010, an EGoM set up under the chairmanship of Pranab Mukherjee asked MoEF to drop the go/no-go classification of forest land. It was dropped, only to be repla-

GREEN MINISTRY SEES RED
Environmental clearances have been withdrawn for big-ticket projects this year

Adani Group's Mundra Port
September 18, 2012 MoEF appoints an expert committee under environmentalist Sunita Narain to check for violations in the Mundra Port of Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone.I Alleged offence Construction before environmental clearance (EC) was granted. Coastal Regulation Zone rules were violated.

Impact Trade activity at India's largest private international port that caters to Europe, Africa, America and West Asia could get choked. Adani's market share was expected to go up from 5 per cent to 10 per cent in the next 5 years.

Goa's Iron Ore Mines
September 11 , 2012 MoEF cancels environmental clearance of all the 90 mining leases. The mine owners are asked to apply for fresh clearances. Alleged offence Clearances for mines were based on wrong facts submitted by the state government, not verified properly by MoEF staff. The mines were functioning without permission from the National Board of Wildlife.

Impact Mining in 3,702 sq km area, which accounts for 5-7 per cent of the state's sea-bound trade of iron ore, is halted. It would have added 50 million tonnes of iron ore to the export basket from India every year.

``

It's my personal view that the method of clearances for environment and forest is arbitrary, non-scientific and non-transparent."
MONTEK SINGH AHLUWALIA, Planning Commission Deputy Chairman, on September 22

``

NCC Limited
MANMOHAN (RIGHT) WITH MONTEK SINGH AHLUWALIA

An independent regulator will soon revamp the process of granting environmental clearance and help protect the ecology without bringing back the hated licence permit raj."
MANMOHAN SINGH, Prime Minister, on July 22 months even though rules suggest they should be cleared within 45 days. In some cases, files have been held up for four months. "She has failed to dismantle the new restrictions and regulations put in place by her predecessor," says an official, adding, "Far from simplifying procedures, she is bent upon complicating matters by staking claim to decision on new areas." There is also a perception in political circles that both Ramesh and his successor have been playing to the pro-environment lobby, which has the blessings of Congress President Sonia Gandhi, who also heads NAC. The suspicion gathered strength when Ramesh cancelled the forest clearance granted to Vedanta Aluminium Ltd to mine bauxite at the Niyamgiri Hills in Lanjigarh in August 2010 and environmental clearance in July 2011. Two days after the forest

ced by `violate-inviolate' distinction. Experts say that there is no difference between the two classifications, only one of nomenclature. "Since the days of Ramesh, the ministry has tended to lean in favour of the need to protect environment, keeping development at bay," says a PMO official, adding, "We have been pushing MoEF to streamline its procedures, but to no avail." The ministry remains undeterred, and has scoffed at attempts to clip its wings in the garb of faster approvals. The finance ministry has suggested that a National Investment Approval Board be put in place to speed up clearances for big projects that are pending but MoEF is not blinking. Corporates doing business with the ministry complain that files vetted by the ministry-appointed Expert Advisory Committee are held up for

clearance was withdrawn, Rahul Gandhi visited Lanjigarh on August 26, 2010. "I am your sipahi (soldier). I will carry out your wishes in Delhi," he told the cheering crowd, comprising mostly tribals. The pro-environment tilt, Congress members argue, gels with the party's efforts to woo the aam aadmi. Their personal styles may be different--Jairam, he of the heavy hair and the light wit, played to the crowds; Jayanthi's priority remains the party. But both know their constituency is not the Prime Minister. Natarajan, sources say, is answerable to Sonia and is dismissive of ranks in between. In an informal chat last year with INDIA TODAY, she said, "I don't feel the need to tell people what I am doing. My job is that of leading this ministry and that's that." Ramesh, the more voluble of the two, is more confrontational. As environment minister, he clashed with almost every Cabinet minister during his two-year tenure and even locked horns with PMO over hydro projects in the North-east. The rage against the green licence raj will not be contained any longer. In an interview to an English daily on October 3, K.V. Kamath, chairman,

May 24, 2012 The National Green Tribunal (NGT) cancels EC for a 2,640 MW coal-fired power project at Sompeta, Andhra Pradesh.I Alleged offence Violation of Clause 7 and 8 of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification, 2006, along with Environment (Protection) Act (EPA), 1986, for wrongly showing wetland as barren land. Impact Proposed investment of Rs 14,000 crore is in limbo. Its power generation capacity (3,600 MW) would have powered Mumbai for a day.

IL&FS Tamil Nadu Power and Chettinad Power
May 23, 2012 NGT rejects clearances for two major thermal power projects. The environment ministry and other authorities asked to prepare a cumulative impact assessment of the project. Alleged offence Violations of EIA Notification as well as EPA.

Impact Projects that could have generated power up to 4,800 MW are stuck. It would have lit up all of Delhi for a day in peak summer.

Jindal Steel and Power Company
April 20, 2012 NGT revokes EC for coal mining, washery project in Chhattisgarh. Alleged offence Violation of Clause 8 of the EIA Notification of 2006 for faulty public hearings and giving fake `no-objection' certificates. Impact The coal mining project would have helped the company reduce its reliance on Coal India and on more expensive imported coal, thus providing cheaper power.

Posco India
March 30, 2012 NGT suspends EC granted for a 12-million-tonne steel mill at Jagatsinghpur, Odisha. MoEF told to conduct a fresh review.I Alleged offence None of the provisions of the EIA Notification of 2006 was complied with when clearance was sought.

Impact This project has been stuck since June 2005. If it had been implemented, the project would have created nearly nine lakh jobs over 30 years.
by Shravya Jain

20

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

Cover Story

ENVIRONMENTMINISTRY

VEDANTA, INTERRUPTED
Green troubles have haunted the company's Odisha projects from the beginning

March 23,2005 A Central
Empowered Committee questions MoEF on validity of EC. The ministry directs Vedanta to halt construction work.

mends diversion of forest land. While the case is pending in Supreme Court, the refinery begins work by sourcing bauxite from its Chhattisgarh mines.

not to give the go-ahead until the Niyamgiri tribals give their consent.

voice of tribals was being suppressed," says the Congress general secretary.

August 24, 2010 Jairam
Ramesh cancels mining in Niyamgiri Hills for violation of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, Forest Conservation Act, 1980, and Forest Rights Act, 2006.

April 18, 2012 Jayanthi
Natarajan cancels the preliminary nod given by MoEF to Vedanta for expansion of its aluminium refinery. MoEF'S EIA division had allowed it to hold public hearings despite incomplete facts in the company's EIA report. As of now, the mining project stands cancelled and the company plans to shut its aluminium refinery from December. It has invested Rs 10,000 crore in the refinery so far.
by Shravya Jain

1997 An MoU is signed between London-based industrialist Anil Agarwal's Sterlite Industries (India) and the Odisha government for its refinery and bauxite mining project in Lanjigarh. September 22,2004 The
company is granted environmental clearance (EC). The approval letter stated that the project did not involve diversion of forest

land. However, the company's application for forest clearance was already with another division of the ministry.

February 2006 The
Supreme Court gets involved in the matter, asks MoEF's Forest Advisory Committee (FAC) for recommendations.

December 11, 2008 MoEF
grants an in-principle clearance for mining in forest land.

November 2004 Odisha's
forest department sends Vedanta a show-cause notice for encroaching on village forest land. Activists and tribals of the Niyamgiri Hills also start petitioning for closure of the mining project.

April 28, 2009 MoEF clears
the mining project despite widespread opposition from activists and tribals.

June 2006 Based on Wildlife
Institute of India's report that mentions the negative impact of bauxite mining but includes a Rs 42-crore plan for mitigation of impact on wildlife, FAC recom-

February 9, 2010 Amnesty
International releases a report accusing Vedanta of human rights violations and asks the Government

TRIBALS PROTEST AGAINST VEDANTA IN BHUBANESWAR

August 26, 2010 Ramesh's move gets the backing of Rahul Gandhi, who flies to the Niyamgiri Hills to tell tribals that their voice reached New Delhi. "Some say MoEF's decision to temporarily withdraw clearance to Vedanta is anti-development. It's not. Here, the

Infosys and non-executive chairman, ICICI Bank, echoed India Inc's anger. He felt that recent moves made by the Government had built up expectation, but land and environment issues were holding up infrastructure development. "This needs to be addressed if the investment has to come back," he said. FICCI Secretary-General Rajiv Kumar says there is only "one workable solution. Do away with the licence raj system of clearances and, instead, punish corporates for violations of the law, should that happen". He says it's like getting a driving licence: "Once you get it, you don't have to get clearance every year. There are a set of traffic laws which are given to you when you get the licence. If you violate any of the laws, you will be punished. Environment laws should be applied similarly." If only it were that simple. It is not. The complex web of clearances required by the Government includes approvals from a series of organisations at different stages in a project's lifetime. Consider the tortuous journey of just two companies:  In 2007, MoEF cleared Korean steel giant Posco's integrated steel project at Jagatsinghpur district in Odisha. With a proposed investment of $12 billion (Rs 52,000 crore), it was billed as the single largest FDI project in India. In 2010, then environment minister Ramesh cancelled environmental

clearance given to it on the grounds that the company had not submitted a comprehensive Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) and had wrongly informed the ministry that there were no tribals living in the project area. Their rights were, he claimed, being violated. In January 2011, he again gave it conditional approval, asking the company to fulfil 60 conditions. A full clearance was finally only granted in May 2011, but in March this year, the National Green Tribunal (NGT), a judicial body appointed to take up green cases, ordered suspension of work on the ground that none of the provisions of the EIA Notification, 2006, had been met by the company. Now, MoEF has appointed a committee headed by former civil aviation secretary K. Roy Paul to examine the clearances given to the project.  The Rs 3,000-crore Lavasa township project, near Pune in Maharashtra, is also a victim. In November 2010, Ramesh pulled up the developers for violating the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The environment department of Maharashtra gave the final clearance to Lavasa in March 2004 under the Maharashtra Hill Station Regulation of 1996. Work on the township started soon after, even though they secured the first permission for construction from the state government only in August, 2007. MoEF says

that Lavasa should have approached it for environmental clearance as parts of the area covered by it are above 1,000m altitude and the project cost more than Rs 5 crore. Work at the fledgling hill town was subsequently halted and it was only a year later (this time under Natarajan) that it was granted conditional environmental clearance in November 2011. This conditional clearance allowed them to continue building, even as these cases wait to be heard. This had an adverse effect on the company and even after partial clearance was given last year, work has been done in fits and starts. Much time and money have been lost. Sources say Lavasa Corporation has also defaulted on loans and some banks are now looking at it as a nonperforming asset in the quarter ended March 2012. The project is far from complete, and remains a pawn in the hands of successive ministries.

STYMIED BYTHE SYSTEM
India Inc has to contend with a maze of clearances
Businessmen planning to set up new projects have to secure three clearances--environment, forestry and wildlife. Each of them is guided by a law passed by Parliament. In the case of environment clearances, the guiding law is the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. In 1994, the government

issued the EIA Notification, which identified the rules which would facilitate the environmental clearances. These are revised from time to time. Forestry clearances are granted under the provisions of Forest Conservation (Amendment) Act, 1988. And in the case of wildlife clearance, it is the Wildlife Protection (Amendment) Act, 2006, to revoke clearances. The regulatory rationale, experts contend, was put in place to strike a balance between developmental needs and environmental concerns. The ministers take refuge in provisions of the laws to put a spanner in projects. MoEF and, of late, NGT, have cited violations of sections of the EIA Notification, 2006: Section 7 (i) (iii), which makes out a case for public consultation with the locally affected persons, Section 7 (1) a and (III), which deals with public hearing and Section 8 (vi) of the notification which talks about "deliberate concealment and submission of false or misleading information or data which is material to screening or scoping or appraisal or decision

SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

SONIA GANDHI WITH FARMERS IN DELHI ON OCTOBER 2

ADI GODREJ, President, CII

``

The trouble these days is that there is a lot of delay in environmental approvals by not just the environment ministry, but also at the state level."

BIBEK DEBROY, Professor, Centre for Policy Research

``

No one is objecting to the need for environment and forest clearances but the procedure is currently without a clear time-frame."

22

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

23

Cover Story ENVIRONMENTMINISTRY

RAJIV KUMAR, FICCI Secretary-General

``

Do away with the licence raj system of clearances and, instead, punish corporates for violations of the law, should that happen."

``

If the Environmental Impact Assessment division has recommended that a project be given clearance, then who is the minister to decide otherwise?"
three kinds of clearances have to be taken out of its jurisdiction and placed under an appellate environmental body, which will follow the guidelines of the Government," he adds. "The judiciary has generally leaned in favour of green activists in all its judgments in recent times," says a senior Planning Commission official. "Between the judiciary and the ministry, projects are facing huge delays," the official adds. India Inc is seriously concerned. But there seems to be no redress. From weekly, even bi-weekly press conferences and briefings by her predecessor, Natarajan has retreated into a shell. A former environment ministry official says, "The ministry has definitely become more opaque. The glass doors that Jairam put in are gone. No one, especially not journalists, has any access to the area where the minister sits. And those are just the symbolic bits. Even NGT has noticed this closed manner of working and recently penalised MoEF for not putting up minutes of the meeting of the ministry-appointed Forest Advisory Committee, which is a statutory advisory body that decides on forest clearances for pending projects." INDIA TODAY sent detailed questionnaires to both Ramesh and Natarajan for the story. Neither responded on phone or email. No one knows better than the UPA Government that its fate is tied to the state of the economy. Manmohan Singh's recent reformist announcements have raised investor sentiments. The slide in growth from over 8 per cent just two years ago to around 5 per cent this year may have been arrested. However, to get back to 8 per cent and more, the Prime Minister needs to lift the green shroud threatening to bury his reformist agenda. And for that, he needs to confront the enemies of development within his own Government.
with Shravya Jain

MUKESH KUMAR, COO, Vedanta Aluminium
NATARAJAN WITH MEMBERS OF THE INDO-TIBETAN BORDER POLICE IN ALLAHABAD

AP

on the application". The Forest Conservation Act's Clause 4.18 has emerged as a potent weapon to cancel forest clearances "for non-furnishing of essential information". Rights of forest dwellers, enshrined in Forest Rights Act, 2006, have also come in handy for MoEF to stop projects--especially when activists step in.

RAISING THE BAR
Judicial activism piles on the agony
Judicial activism on environmental issues has further complicated matters for the Government. In 2010, the Government decided to set up five dedicated courts to vet the clearances granted by MoEF and dispose them off expeditiously. The tribunals themselves had been established under pressure from the green brigade, which alleged that environmental and forest clearances were granted on tenuous grounds. The national green tribunals were supposed to take a non-partisan view on the approvals given to fresh projects. While the main bench of the tribunal, headed by a

retired Supreme Court judge, is located in Delhi, the other tribunals are based in Bhopal, Pune, Chennai and Kolkata. Each tribunal has two members--one judicial and one technical. They have, in retrospect, added to the delays, as the Posco example illustrates. In April this year, NGT cancelled the licence awarded to Jindal Steel and Power Company's coal mining and washery project at Raigarh district in Chhattisgarh. It has a total production capacity of 5.25 million tonnes of coal. The project had been cleared by MoEF in 2009. NGT ruled that the company had conducted "false" public hearings and submitted fake NOCs. "Unfortunately, what has happened is that a few environmental lawyers and activists have decided to challenge every clearance granted by the ministry. NGT has been giving stay orders without going into merits and proper consideration," claims Prodipto Ghosh, distinguished fellow, The Energy and Resources Institute and former MoEF secretary. "To my mind, NGT really has to be transformed from a judicial body to an appellate regulatory body. The

24

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

