Na tion KARNATAKA

Yeddyurappa and Gowda want to lead BJP. RSS has other ideas.
pitched battle is on within the Karnataka unit of BJP for the post of the state president. It is between RSS and the party old guard. The post is crucial, as the person occupying it will control the distribution of party tickets for the next Assembly polls, due in May 2013. For the last two months, Deputy Chief Minister K. S. Eashwarappa has concurrently held the post of state BJP president, but in line with the BJP motto of one-man-one-post, he needs to step down. Not that he is unwilling. Eashwarappa also holds two portfolios, of revenue and rural development. BJP cadres admit this leaves him with no time for party work. The party, however, is dithering on electing its next state chief, as it faces severe factionalism, making the situation volatile. "We've tried to postpone the appointment, and maintain balance among all factions. Who will end up as the president will depend on factors which force the appointment," a BJP ideologue told INDIA TODAY. Two former chief ministers, B.S. Yeddyurappa and D.V. Sadananda Gowda, are operating behind the scenes to drum up support for their own candidature. Despite corruption charges and jail terms, Yeddyurappa retains a strong and vocal supporter base. Gowda insists his earlier "sacrifice" of the chief minister's post at the behest of BJP'S national leadership should be "rewarded" with the party president's post. Both Yeddyurappa and Gowda have held the post earlier. Party sources told INDIA TODAY that RSS was not in favour of either. "Yeddyurappa and his support base among Lingayats are essential for the party's hopes in the upcoming polls. But with newer cases hanging over Yeddyurappa's head, RSS is unwilling to take a chance with him. His coterie has ensured such cases are filed against Gowda as well, to keep him out. RSS

War of the BJP Factions
was a bit more inclined to have Gowda," a party leader explained. RSS and BJP sources admitted that senior Sangh leader Prabhakar Bhat Kalladka--whose word is law in the BJP stronghold of coastal Karnataka --was pushing for a candidate from his area. "Kalladka can't control Yeddyurappa. He can control Gowda --a leader from the coast who is dependent on RSS goodwill to get elected. But with cases against Gowda as Ananth Kumar, were made the state president. That's why Kateel's name has come up," a BJP minister noted. This may silence Gowda, who depends on RSS goodwill to get elected, but Yeddyurappa will not accept it without a fight. He held meetings with Arun Jaitley in New Delhi, and reportedly said if it's impossible for him to be the president, one of his supporters-- Murgesh Nirani or Shobha Karandlaje--should get the post. Jaitley is

A

YEDDYURAPPA

GOWDA

KALLADKA

KALLADKA'S SUGGESTION OF KATEEL'S NAME AS STATE PARTY PRESIDENT MAY SILENCE GOWDA, BUTYEDDYURAPPA WILL NOT ACCEPT IT WITHOUT A FIGHT.
well, he, too, is out," a Sangh officebearer explained. The severe infighting has given RSS the opportunity to foist a near-unknown for the prestigious post. Kalladka, through state BJP Organising Secretary Santhosh, suggested the name of first-time Mangalore MP Nalin Kumar Kateel, catching everyone by surprise. "Kalladka wants to retain control of ticket distribution, and flow of funds. That would not be possible if Yeddyurappa or an old BJP hand, say national General Secretary

EASHWARAPPA

said to have assured Yeddyurappa on this, but the party is still trying to buy time, as no one wants to get caught in the middle of an RSS-BJP battle. Yeddyurappa has upped the ante by touring the state's drought-hit areas as a demonstration of his popularity. Gowda and the anti-Yeddyurappa lobby hit back with statements against him, but Kateel has maintained a studied silence. BJP workers, though, are unhappy the leadership issue is left hanging with polls round the corner. by Sowmya Aji

46

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

