BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THUNDER FROM THE EAST
n the afternoon of Tuesday, September 18, when a ence. Till then, the mood in the Prime Minister's Office was deceptive calm over Delhi had begun to sink into actually one of self-congratulation, with much talk of Mamata torpor, TV channels floated a story that the men in as a package of disposable bombast. The flip side of overescharge of the Congress machine had yet again deflated a timating your worth is that you inevitably underestimate othMamata Banerjee insurrection, this time over the diesel ers. No one is a patsy. Life has changed. Congress hasn't. At the moment of writing, Dr Singh and Mrs Gandhi price hike and FDI in retail. Politicians will plant a few weeds in the information jungle when they can; it is less under- have a choice: They can either save their Government with genuflection through a partial rollback, or protect the standable when media begins to fertilise weeds. But the real problem is not a mistake, which can hap- Government's credibility. This might be the ultimate pen in any vocation. Our capital's elite gets it wrong because Hobson's choice, since governance is a mirage without it is in the grip of those who look at Calcutta from Delhi, credibility. Mamata has left open a technical window while real power has shifted to the grasp of those who look through which she can return to Government, but rhetoric at Delhi from Calcutta. Pranab Mukherjee was ubiquitous on the airwaves indicates that the relationship will never be to UPA because he was that rare politician who could absorb fully repaired. Marriages do survive their crisis moments, the view from both directions. In UPA 1 the Prime Minister but too much spouse-battering is taking place in this one. Even if UPA manages to scramble the necessary numbers and Mrs Sonia Gandhi outsourced political management to Mukherjee; he brought the ship of state through some during a problem in the next session of Parliament, it will historic storms because he never forgot his compass. be a fluctuating advantage, purchased on daily barter. It Neither Dr Manmohan Singh nor Mrs Gandhi seem to could be a demand-a-week story. Taunts are already in fully comprehend the extent to which they have alienated the air. Bihar CM Nitish Kumar used an eloquent term, allies as well as potential partners. Where an ego needed jugaad, or the ability to "manage" through suitable comsome massage, it was rubbed the wrong way. Where a pensation, to describe this aspect of Congress core compefinancial commitment could have been made with grace, tence. An opposition leader can joke; it doesn't seem quite it was made with a growl. It takes unique ability to as funny when you are in office. No decision made by an manoeuvre Mamata Banerjee and Marxists into an uncertain government carries credibility; even a popular alliance, albeit unacknowledged, gesture invites the sneer that it is SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com against the Centre; or force Karunabeing done for partisan benefit. nidhi to join a protest against his Congress General Secretary own Government; or turn CPI(M) Digvijaya Singh was frank enough to admit that the only realistic option and BJP into partners in parliamennow was a General Election. One wontary inquiry committees over the ders if he is also optimistic. Congress 2G scam. Gurudas Dasgupta, the is facing not only the opposition from veteran Communist leader, actually traditional foes but also isolation from thanked Mamata Banerjee on traditional friends. Mamata Banerjee, primetime television. Karunanidhi and Sharad Pawar have The Congress weakness is due not announced a first round of talks to the rancour of parties but the alienthrough their trusted nominees. You ation of voters, fed up with unprececan be confident that they will not dented corruption and sustained meet to discuss T20 cricket. inflation. Congress politics now reIt is always one stone that sets off volves primarily around the 750-odd an avalanche. We do not yet know if men and women who are Members of Parliament. Other parties are more FDI in retail will change the face of worried about the 700 million who are India's economy. What is certain is voters. When Mamata Banerjee that it has changed the face of India's It is always one stone that sounded out her base, she heard the politics. My sympathies go out to sets off an avalanche. We do overwhelming view that the price of the many MPs who had been proassociating with Congress now far outmised a place in Government in the not yet know if FDI in retail weighs the cost of leaving UPA. next reshuffle. It is not the errant will change the face of India's minister who is in danger, but the If the Congress had been more obeconomy. What is certain is Government itself. To appoint new servant, it would not have been that it has changed the ministers today would be an invitashocked when the Bengal ultimatum face of India's politics. tion to a Barmecide's feast. was delivered through a press confer

O

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

