Mail

End of Stability
OCTOBER 1, 2012

Mamata Banerjee's threat puts the UPA Government in a precarious position and looks set to stall the Prime Minister's reforms agenda

The Congress leaders have displayed an utter dearth of insight as well as foresight. Indeed, it seems to be the beginning of the end for the party.
NEEHARIKA SINHA,
Allahabad

Breathing Its Last
Trinamool Congress's decision to withdraw its support at the Centre has not only caught the Congress party off-guard, but has reduced the ruling alliance to a minority on the floor of the House ("The Beginning of the End", October 1). The Congress now has to depend on the outside support of temperamental "allies" like the Samajwadi Party and the Bahujan Samaj Party for its survival. UPA should have administered periodic reformative pills to the countrymen in phases instead of suddenly prescribing a surgery to cure the ailing economy. Also, prior to increasing the diesel price and approving FDI in multi-brand retail, it should have enlightened the common man about the benefits of the proposed progressive steps apart from keeping its

ANIL DAYAL

Fight for Justice
The story of the death of Gagandeep Singh Bains is extremely soul-stirring (`His Friends Killed Our Son', October 1). One has to praise the courage and conviction of his parents who had to struggle a lot to convince people that their son's death was actually a case of murder. After two years of relentless efforts, they have finally managed to convince the police to reinvestigate the case as murder.
MANDEEP KAUR, Bangalore

The parallel investigation launched by the Bains family takes them a step closer to bring to justice the alleged killers of their son. Young Gagandeep's death raises doubts about other murder cases that might have been written off as accidents as well.
LEELA NAWANI, Chandigarh

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

``
allies in the loop.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

``

The title of your cover story on UPA 2 now looks like a bit of an over-reaction given that it has survived quite well for now. The best thing is that it has now managed to get rid of the Didi menace, which was like a heavy chain around Manmohan's ankles.
K. PASTAKIA, Delhi

The Government is literally on life-support system now, thanks to Trinamool Congress's walkout. It seems to be sorely missing the negotiating skills of Pranab Mukherjee. The political manoeuvring skills required by the ruling party to counter not only the Opposition, but also the allies, calls for a seasoned expert. Handling fence-sitters as well as

Mail
bureaucrats will require a lot of persuasive skills. UPA must act fast because time is slowly running out.
AMITABH NIGAM, Delhi

35
endeavour to protect the forest from illegal felling was appreciated by the then prime minister and help was extended to the activists. It is expected that some arrangements would be made by the Government to protect this forest comprising rare trees.
RANJIT SINHA, Delhi

centres of today.
R. MAHENDRA RAJ, Malaysia

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
N OV E M B E R 1 6 - 3 0, 1 9 7 7

Future of Science
The fact that Sir Leszek Borysiewicz, the 345th vice-chancellor of Cambridge University and one of the world's top immunologists, wants more research partnerships and scientist interactions with India is truly laudable and is a feather in the cap for Indian medical research ("Man with a Tall Dream", October 1). Being a visionary, Borysiewicz seems to have realised that the significant potential of Indian scientists is often underutilised for want of adequate resources.
NALINI VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Thiruvananthapuram

Saving the Dal Lake
Srinagar's famous Dal Lake is dying. A recently published study predicts that both the Dal and Nagin lakes in Srinagar may be no more within the next 80 years--if nothing is done to check the present rate of pollution. The study, which considered the environmental preservation of Jammu and Kashmir, has been conducted by the botany department of Kashmir University. According to the report, the continuing pollution of the two freshwater lakes is caused by the increasing intake of fertilisers and pesticides from surrounding paddy fields and orchards. The Dal Lake, spanning an area of 8 km from north to south and 3.5 km from east to west, is in imminent danger of being transformed into a swampy marshland. The botanical study, financed jointly by the University Grants Commission and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, warns, "If the present state of affairs continues, the lake will be lost within the next 80 years and what remains will be a small spring in the lake surrounded by vegetable farms and swamps." If that happens, one of the great splendours of the Kashmir Valley will be lost forever. It is the natural flora of the region--and in particular the plant life in and around the lake-- that is responsible for the Dal's decay.
by Shyam S. Sharma
A PEASANT DEWEEDING DAL LAKE WATERS IN A TRADITIONAL MANNER

The Prime Minister is clearly facing the brunt of coalition politics. He is unable to push his reforms agenda due to opposition from Mamata Banerjee and others. Lack of unity in UPA may destabilise the Government. In the absence of an efficient alternative, the fall of the Government will be unfortunate since the country might have to pass through another phase of long uncertainty.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Up in Arms
All defence deals must be carried out in a transparent manner and should be subjected to public scrutiny. No one has the right to squander away exchequer money and fill their pockets in the process. People involved in such shady deals are detrimental to the country's security. Those guilty must be brought to book and sternly dealt with.
VIKAS T., Durgapur

Save the Greens
Nayna Nargolkar's efforts to protect her forest is not merely an environmental issue now but has translated into a personal struggle to keep hold over land that rightfully belongs to her ("In Defence of Her Realm", October 1). The wicked attempts at damaging her valuable trees and wrongful stakes of claim to her property are threatening to undo the good work begun by her late husband and carried forward so diligently by her. We should, in fact, do all we can to support such efforts.
N. SINHA, Allahabad

Time to Act
Rahul Gandhi's Uttar Pradesh election defeat seems to have adversely affected his political strides as he has chosen to remain in oblivion ever since ("The Last Hope", October 1). But with the beleaguered Congress party continuing to look at him with great hope, it is time that Rahul takes charge. First and foremost, he needs to attend to issues faced by Amethi residents on a priority basis. Also, he needs to develop close relations with allies. Rahul must make immediate efforts to build up an acceptable image as a party leader.
R.D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

Pricey Pets
It is amusing to see people's increasing fondness for exotic animals ("Lizard for Sale. For Just Rs 50,000", October 1). Despite the exorbitant prices and the high maintenance cost, people are keen on keeping them as pets. The Indian market too has responded splendidly to the trend by catering to every possible requirement of such petlovers. But it makes us wonder how pets survived in the years of yore without the trendy gourmet, spas and grooming

The struggle of Nayna Nargolkar is comparable with the Chipko movement of 1970s. At that time, the

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

