SIMPLY DELHI

Interview
Q. What do you gather inspiration from to lead ahead others? A. I am self-driven and give my absolute best every time I sit behind the wheel. Competition pushes me to go beyond my comfort zone and cross boundaries. Q. In 2010, you shifted to stock car racing but switched back to F1. Anything particular about F1 that brought you back? A. F1 is the pinnacle of motorsport--always ultra-competitive. The chance to compete in the National Grand Prix brought me back to F1. Q. How would you describe competition on the race track? A. Intense and ferocious--after all F1 is the pinnacle of the sport and the world's best drivers compete in it. Q. What has been your most memorable moment and why? A. My debut in the Australian Grand Prix in 2005 has been the best moment till now. It cannot be described. It was unbelievable.
 by

"Setbacks only made me stronger"
Narain Karthikeyan, 35, is the first Formula 1 motor racing driver from India. He competed in the A1GP and the Le Mans Series, followed by his debut at the Australian Grand Prix in 2005 with Jordan and has currently signed up with the Hispania Racing Team (HRTCosworth) for the 2012 series. Simply Delhi catches up with the champion to trace his journey on the track. Q. You're father is a former national rally champion, can you share your childhood days and tell us what led you into racing? A. The influence of growing up in a motorsport-rich environment was huge. I came across Formula 1 in the late 80s and since then, my goal was set. It was a long journey peppered with struggles, but ultimately I managed to become a Formula 1 driver. Q. Trace your professional journey for us. A. My journey started in the 90s, when I started racing in Chennai-- the only race track at the time. Simultaneously I went to Europe to race in the junior formulae--which I won. In 1998, I participated in the British Formula 3--the stepping stone to F1 those days. After winning races in F3, I got to test the Jaguar F1 car in 2001 but eventually made my F1 debut in 2005.

Marcia Rodrigues

GIREESH GV

s-32

SIMPLY DELHI  OCTOBER 2012

