Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

AN AMERICAN PASTICHE I
n another world, in another time, it was a campaign in which the biography of the candidate blended seamlessly into the larger narrative of national destiny. His life story, breathing so many cultures and stretching to the mean streets beyond the American Dream, was a redeeming parable of otherness--and a lesson in the possibilities of the audacious. In one of America's rare moments of political catharsis, he was the prophet on the stump, and the cultivated sonority of his speeches would make even the oldest of clichés such as "change" and "hope" catchwords of salvation. Much to his--and the world's--delight, history choreographed the performance. The lanky revolutionary, the post-racial freedom figure of twenty-first century America, soared above the wreckage of neo-conservative adventurism, promising healing and reconciliation. Intimations of a second Depression loomed over the marketplace, and America, by nature a conservative society, even found the prescriptions of a socialist like him convincing. Four decades after a black preacher named Martin Luther King Jr dreamt of a day when America "will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed (that) all men are created equal", America's first black president made his victory speech from Chicago's Grant Park: "If there is anyone out there who still doubts America is a place where all things are possible, who still wonders if the dream of our founders are alive in our time, who still questions the power of our democracy, tonight is our answer." The triumph of Barack Obama marked the peak of America's romance with change, and in a Washington bar swelling with Obamaniacs, I

did even order a commemorative Barry cocktail from the menu. Four years on, "change" is not the word that comes so easily to the president who is seeking re-election. It is not his story, no matter however tempting a subject it is for bestselling biographers, but the story of America under his anodyne leadership that animates the campaign. There is indeed a change, and it is all about the distance between Candidate Obama who swayed America and President Obama who let down America. The president on the stump in 2012 is a tired--and tiring-- advocate of status quo who has nothing new to offer but who has a lot in his socialist arsenal to fight the privileged capitalist who is challenging him. And he can't stop blaming the bogeyman from the past for all the ills of America today. In 2008, the demonology of inheritance worked because he was trading in future; today, in a country whose entire mythology is built on the so-called American exceptionalism, future is a place he dreads to enter. What he had done in the four years of his presidency is not something he wants to sell to America, and what he will do in the coming four years is not a promise he dares to offer. On display is a waffling leftist who wants to be re-elected not on his record--or his vision--but on the unreliability of the Republican challenger. The question of whether Obama will win or lose has been made redundant by one of the most tragic transformations in politics. The reconciler who promised an end to politics-as-usual has become the last socialist of the free world. There has never been a shorter version of American Dream. 

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

IN 2008, THE DEMONOLOGY OF INHERITANCE WORKED BECAUSE OBAMA WAS TRADING IN FUTURE; TODAY, IN A COUNTRY WHOSE ENTIRE MYTHOLOGY IS BUILT ON THE SO-CALLED AMERICAN EXCEPTIONALISM, FUTURE IS A PLACE HE DREADS TO ENTER.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Freedom fighter and former governor of Uttar Pradesh and Odisha B. Satyanarayana Reddy, 86, after a REDDY brief illness. He took part in the Quit India Movement.

DIED Asha Bhosle's daughter and journalist Varsha Bhosle. Varsha, 56, who allegedly committed suicide at her Mumbai home, was reportedly suffering from depression. ISSUED Notice to former Uttar Padesh chief minister Mayawati by the Supreme Court, in the

alleged disproportionate assets case against her. REJECTED Bail plea of YSR Congress leader and MP Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy in a disproportionate assets case, by the Supreme Court. BANNED Mining activities as well as transportation

of iron and manganese ore in Goa. FILED Chargesheet against former Haryana minister Gopal Kanda. He is charged with abetting former employee Geetika Sharma's suicide.
KANDA

16

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

