SCHOOLS

Special

IIM, Bangalore 5

World at its FEET
VIVAN MEHRA/www.indiatodayimages.com

IIM, Bangalore, is shunning old

ideas and opening up to new ones. Encouraging innovations, it is looking to compete with the best B-schools in the world.
By Sowmya Aji

STUDENTS AT IIM, BANGALORE, WITH THE DIRECTOR, PANKAJ CHANDRA

ow did South Korea, with a GDP of $89 in the 1930s, manage to turn it to $2,200 now? Students of the one-year executive postgraduate programme (EPGP) at the Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore (IIM-B), have studied just that. They went on a two-week tour to South Korea on an "immersion project" to compare two economies, rather than two companies or two industries. IIM-B, which has been placed the fifth best business school in India, has shifted its focus to international on all fronts, including the programme, the research and student intake. And the South Korea tour seems to have succeeded in "creating vision", as Strategy Professor R. Srinivasan, 42, puts it. Student Ravi Pandey, 42, a former Navy commander, points out that 97 per cent of cars on Korean roads are made there, boosting local economy. Fellow student Vineet Batra, 32, who gave up studying at University of California, Berkeley, to study at IIM-B, says, "The Koreans left the old idea of imitation of the West to focus on innovation, which is what India should do.'' Nazneen Jalaludheen, 34, has taken a sabbatical after 12 years in the IT industry. The EPGP course and the N.S. Raghavan Entrepreneurship Cell at IIM-B have pushed her into plans of being an independent consultant for the food industry. "We have to draw up a business model as a project, so my first step is already done,'' she says. IIM-B is focusing on increasing its

H

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

73

SCHOOLS

Special
G U E S T C O L U M N Abhishek Rathore

international presence in research. The right price to pay for an IPL player was the subject of business analytics research by Professor U. Dinesh Kumar and an academic intern, Kshitiz Ranjan, a case study paper that was published in Harvard Business Publishing. Another study was published on the business model of a safe water manufacturer in England, who pumps the profits from the sales of bottled water to improve the condition of water bodies in Africa. "For each case study or paper published by our faculty in one of the world's top 33 journals, we give cash incentives of Rs 1 lakh and $10,000 respectively. We give competitive research grants of Rs 1 crore, and a seed grant of Rs 5 lakh for exploratory research. We aim to be the best B-school in the world," Kumar told INDIA TODAY. The B-school has been taking part in MBA fairs in London, San Francisco and Singapore to attract international students. "We are accepting GMAT scores in place of CAT. We have a record that matches Wharton and Harvard in the quality of education and at least 30 per cent of our students have been placed abroad," says Chetan Subramanian, chairperson, 0ffice Of International Affairs. The school has a 100 per cent placement record. Investment banks, healthcare and e-commerce firms come with pre-placement powerpoint programmes. "About 130 firms make presentations to our batch of 380 graduates," said Sapna Agarwal, head, Career Development Services. Students, however, point to the social activism encouraged in IIM-B. Through a committee called Prayas, EPGP students voluntarily pay for daily nutritional supplements and milk to 55 poor children at Magadi town outside Bangalore, while a free medical camp is annually arranged for the public. The premier B-school gives back the Rs 15 lakh tuition fee of the postgraduate programme if students work for low salaries in the social sector for three years. A trend that should perhaps be imitated by other business schools. 

Why B is BETTER THAN A
IIM-B tends to seek out those with diverse interests. But more than the `better'B-school, it is the students'initiatives that make all the difference.
IM-A versus B is a never-ending battle--and a very healthy one! To me, the question is which is more appropriate for the aspirant. Based on my experience at B and whatever I know about A, there was one key differentiator--the focus of both colleges. IIM-A gave a lot of emphasis to academics while IIM-B had a well-rounded focus. In the first year, while IIM-A students had compulsory attendance and a heavy course load, those in IIM-B had some leeway. Also, I think IIM-A seeks out academically inclined and driven people. On the other hand, we tend to seek out those with diverse interests. In my group we've had many students with off-beat interests--not just entrepreneurs but also those who have made different choices in life. Moreover, being in Bangalore gave us the advantage of having a closer access to the industry, especially the software sector. I also think our international exposure was higher. Through exchange programmes, placements abroad and an elective that included a business trip to Southeast Asian countries, the college ensured that each student gets a global perspective, a definite asset. Today, IIM-B has a very progressive director, with a strong focus on research, alumni engagement as well as international linkages. Its specialised programmes in public policy (PGPPM) B-SCHOOLS and software focus create opportunities to build networks and interSHOULD FOCUS act with people from diverse fields. MORE ON SOCIAL One thing that most Indian RESPONSIBILITYAND B-schools can focus more on is AIM FOR GREATER the social responsibility angle. I have received support from profesINTERNATIONAL sors in both IIM-B and IIM-A for my EXPOSURE. work in the social space, but I am sure much more can be done on this front. Our international visibility is also less compared to the calibre of our students, faculty and course quality--these surely need to be boosted. The B-schools in the country are being run excellently and the Government should not interfere in their functioning. Finally, more than the `better' B-school, it is the initiative the students take up that makes all the difference. If you sit on the seashore, you get the sand, you step in and you get some shallow water. But for the pearls and treasures, you need to take a plunge into the deep sea. So go ahead, immerse yourself in the entire B-school experience-- interact with faculty, network within the industry, participate in extracurricular activities and help your B-school shine and become better.

I

as told to Shravya Jain

Abhishek Rathore is the co-founder of Blue Ribbon Movement, a Mumbai-based student leadership organisation

74

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

