The Big Story SALMAN KHURSHID

SALMAN KHURSHID UNDER SIEGE
The minister takes refuge in threat and bluster, sidestepping overwhelming evidence of wrongdoing by his Trust
By Priya Sahgal and

Devesh Kumar n the evening of October 11, Salman Khurshid was giving a lecture at The Oxford University's Centre for Islamic Studies on the subject of Unity not Uniformity: Politics of Modern India. The Union Law Minister seemed to be in an affable mood, recalling his days at Oxford, both as a student and a teacher. The impact of the story broken back home by Aaj Tak, the Hindi news channel owned by India Today Group, hadn't yet sunk in. On October 10, Aaj Tak had aired a story that highlighted financial irregularities in the Dr Zakir Hussain Memorial Trust, run by the minister and his wife, Louise Khurshid. The story was immediately picked up by India Against Corruption activist Arvind Kejriwal. Talking to the media in London on October 12, Khurshid said in a pained voice, "I am here to be honoured by the Oxford University, I am overwhelmed by the affection and honour I got in Oxford over the past two days while in my own country, third-rate people are doing third-rate things." He added: "I

He (Arvind Kejriwal) says he will ask questions and I should answer them. I say listen to my reply and forget about asking questions. I don't give a visa to go there but it's a long road to Farrukhabad... He (Kejriwal) can get there... but how will he return?
SALMAN KHURSHID Law Minister

SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

O

I am trained as a lawyer, to work with ink and pens... but it is time to replace ink with blood.

KHURSHID DURING A PRESS CONFERENCE IN NEW DELHI ON OCTOBER 14

think what they have done is worse than behaving like guttersnipes." On October 14, when he landed in Delhi, the airport was surrounded by India Against Corruption activists. Khurshid was quickly whisked away to his home at 4 Kushak Road, where a crowd of supporters awaited him, shouting reassuring slogans. But the political environment had changed. The Congress had put up a united front to defend him, but beneath the surface, there was disquiet. Congress was already scalded by the Robert Vadra bomb. Its much touted reforms were on the backburner. On

NO MARGIN FOR ERROR
 The Union minister flashed a picture, clicked on July 17, 2010, to claim that then chief development officer of Mainpuri district, J.B. Singh, had attended one of the camps organised by the Dr Zakir Hussain Memorial Trust. FACT The photograph was taken on July 17, 2010 but allegations of misappropriation of funds by the Trust relate to the fiscal year 2009-10. Singh also asserted that the signature on the affidavit submitted by Khurshid's wife Louise was forged.  Khurshid said camps were held at various

The Law Minister's defence of his Trust does not corroborate with facts
places in Uttar Pradesh to distribute equipment and aid to the physically disabled. FACT According to an Uttar Pradesh government report prepared on June 12, 2012, camps were not held in 10 of the 17 districts covered by the Trust. Camps were not held at all in Sant Ravidas Nagar, Etah and Bareilly, and signatures and seals on test check reports of camps organised in 10 districts-- Mainpuri, Shahjahanpur, Etawah, Allahabad, Bulandshahr, Kannauj, Etah, Sant Ravidas Nagar, Farrukhabad and Kanshiram Nagar-- were found to be forged.  Khurshid produced a physically disabled person, Rangi Mistry, to prove he had received a hearing aid from the Trust in a camp. FACT The same person had told Aaj Tak that he had not received any help from the Trust.  On September 17, 2012, Khurshid's wife Louise Khurshid asked the Uttar Pradesh government to probe the allegations levelled against the Trust. FACT She made the request nine days after being approached by Aaj Tak for her views.

28

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

New

New

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

The Big Story SALMAN KHURSHID
TRUE LIES
Government officers go on record to counter evidence produced by the law minister
top of it, the chief troubleshooter was in trouble. Off the record, there is one view within the Congress that he could have accepted possible irregularities in the Trust and asked for an inquiry. As a Cabinet minister, no one expects him to keep a minute-to-minute account of the workings of the Trust. The way out was handed to Khurshid by INDIA TODAY Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie in his October 8 letter to Louise Khurshid. "I am of the view that some persons in the Trust or those associated with it are indulging in wrong doings which you and Salman may not be aware of," Purie wrote in the letter. On October 14, Khurshid began his press conference by reading out Purie's letter. He adopted an almost conversational tone and told the Aaj Tak journalists that while his instinct was not to invite them, he was dissuaded by the other media, and he agreed in the interest of fair play. This was the Khurshid that the media knows, the most accessible member in the Group of Ministers. Like a seasoned lawyer, he came armed with a docket of documents and photographs. The first indication that all was not well in Camp Khurshid was when he set the rules of the game, something unheard of at Congress press conferences. This is a practice usually followed by Mayawati. Brandishing two photographs, he claimed that camps took place. Camps did take place, but only in four of 17 target districts (see box). According to Kejriwal one of the photographs displayed by Khurshid was from a camp held in July 2010, whereas irregularities were reported between April 2009 and March 2010. The Union minister did not have any answer to the charge that Louise, who is the Trust's project director, had presented a forged affidavit, purportedly signed by J.B. Singh, then chief development officer of Mainpuri District. "This affidavit was provided by the UP government, the Trust is not responsible for it," Khurshid said. He also did not want to deal with the question of how the Trust could rely on a letter written by an official who, it turns out, had retired in January 2011. The letter, written by R.S. Yadav, special secretary in Uttar Pradesh's department of disabled welfare, on March 24, 2011, was used by the Trust to seek the release of grants for the year 2010-11.

FAKE BENEFICIARIES
The Trust's claims of providing aid to the disabled have proved false in some cases

"The rubber seal on the test check report is that of medical superintendent, primary health centre.There is no such post in the district."
DEEPAK OHRI, CMO, Bulandshahr

GAJRAJ SINGH Died on March 12, 2009, but his name appeared in the 2010 check-list of recipients of relief material in Bulandshahr. PANKAJ KUMAR YADAV A resident of Mainpuri, he can't walk.According to the Trust list, he was given a hearing aid. It turns out he did not get anything. ROBIN A resident of Bulandshahr, was gifted a tricycle at a camp held on October 14, hours before Khurshid's press conference.

"The signature in the affidavit is not mine. Why would the chief development officer and district magistrate give affidavits? If it's verified by the Disabled Welfare Department, then what is the point of such affidavits?"
J.B. SINGH, then CDO, Mainpuri

"We had been given a list of 30 beneficiaries. We could identify only five of them.The remaining 25 are missing."
A.K. GAUTAM, Backward Class Welfare Officer, Bulandshahr

"It is true that there was a letter to the central Government... that people have denied signature. That letter we wanted checked by the Uttar Pradesh government," said Khurshid. As the questions became more pointed, Khurshid's tone became more strident. "Marta kya nahin karta (a desperate man can do anything)" he shouted at Deepak Sharma, the Aaj Tak reporter. Behind him, his crowd of supporters cheered. His wife put a restraining hand on his arm and offered him a glass of water. When asked if he was going to resign, Khurshid retorted, "Are you an activist or a journalist? Are you here to ask me to leave?" And this is a man Congress touts as its most genial face. A Cabinet minister recalls when Kapil Sibal came across as "too arrogant" during the Jan Lokpal Bill, the Government decided to field Khurshid as he

30

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

New

The Big Story SALMAN KHURSHID
CIVILATTACK
Calls mount for the Government to come clean on Khurshid affair

Adopting a negative attitude and launching an attack against the TV channel which did the exposé is bad. We condemn Government's attitude."
SHAHNAWAZ HUSSAIN BJP spokesperson

"NGOs of our country have been taken over by politicians. This case has the potential of waking up the society about the need to cleanse the system."
ANAND KUMAR, Professor, JNU

In an environment of malpractices by people wielding power, it is essential that the minister should come clean in public eye by agreeing to go through an investigation."
GURUDAS DASGUPTA, CPI MP

is always so "agreeable and has a perpetually concerned look". Halfway through his 100-minute press conference, he lost the look that was his USP. While accusing journalists of quibbling on semantics, it was Khurshid who resorted to semantics when he insisted that the Aaj Tak expose was not a sting but a "sourced story." The press conference degenerated rapidly as Khurshid began parading his list of witnesses--the differently abled people that the Trust had "helped". A frail looking Rangi Mistry arrived on cue and claimed that he had received a hearing aid from the trust. An applauding crowd shouted, "Khurshid zindabad". Earlier Mistry had told Aaj Tak on camera that he had not received a hearing aid. As Khurshid explained only too eagerly, "Perhaps he lied, thinking if he says he doesn't have one, the channel would give him another one." By parading this `evidence' the Law Minister claimed that he had done a reverse sting on the channel, although the channel's footage was not a sting. It got an instant reaction from Kejriwal. On October 15, he fired a fresh set of posers to Khurshid.  Do you agree that a forged letter, purportedly written by R.S. Yadav, was used to seek grant for 2010-11?  Is J.B. Singh's affidavit, submitted by Louise Khurshid to the Centre,

forged? If yes, then why did you show a forged document?  The letter written by the UP government against you, is it right or wrong?  Do you agree with UP government's June 12, 2012 letter to the Centre, which highlighted irregularities, malpractices and forgery in the Trust?  If those you claim have benefited deny it, will you resign? There are still no answers. To add to his self-inflicted woes, a video recording of Khurshid hit television channels on October 17, in which he was heard speaking the language of violence and threatening Kejriwal, who had announced a march to Farrukhabad, 300 km from Delhi, on November 1. "I have been made the law minister and asked to work with the pen. I will work with the pen but also with blood," he said, as a group of supporters at his Lutyen's Delhi home laughed. "Let him go to Farrukhabad but let's see how he returns." "They say they will ask questions and we should respond. I say that you hear the reply and forget asking questions," he went on. It earned him censure from Congress General Secretary Janardan Dwivedi. "Everyone should choose their words carefully", he said. This, interestingly, is not the first time that Khurshid has been pulled up by his party. During the Uttar Pradesh

elections, he embarrassed party president Sonia Gandhi when he claimed she had shed "tears" after the Batla House encounter. Later he claimed that he had been misquoted. That is his defence even now to his on-camera threat to Kejriwal. Khurshid can take succour from one thing. Congress is publicly backing him. I&B Minister Ambika Soni said, "There is no question of isolating him. He has come clean and decided to take the legal course." Ghulam Nabi Azad added, "There is no question of distancing from him." Later at the party's daily briefing, Sandeep Dikshit was told by Dwivedi to defend Khurshid. At night, Digvijaya Singh did the rounds of TV studios. He reiterated Khurshid's defence: "They said there were no camps, it was proven wrong. They said the signatures were fake... Khurshid himself has asked for it to be probed." Khurshid is assured of Sonia's support. It is doubtful that he will be dropped in the Cabinet reshuffle. "The current mood is to target politicians, If we give up one scalp, where will it stop?" says a Cabinet minister. For this reason alone, worried that one of them could be the next target, Manmohan Singh's Cabinet and Sonia's party have closed ranks to support Khurshid. A return to policy paralysis is the price they are paying for it. 

32

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

New

