SCHOOLS

Special

IIM, Calcutta 2

Finance is KING IN KOLKATA

The institute has had best placements for the fourth year. It's expanding its collaborations with US business schools. There's no dislodging IIM, Calcutta, from second place.
By Tithi Sarkar

STUDENTS WITH DEAN ASHOK BANERJEE AT IIM, CALCUTTA
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

ood teaching skills are enough for survival of the Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta (IIM-C), but not for its growth," says Ashok Banerjee, 47, its dean, New Initiatives and External Relations. No surprise then that the IIM-C Case Research Centre (CRC), started in June this year, aspires to create a storehouse of case studies that can be utilised not just by the institute's faculty but also by universities in India and abroad. "Most case studies we use here are from Richard Ivey (University of Western Ontario, Canada), or Harvard. Through ones we produce here, we'll be able to look at problems unique to Indian businesses, across various sectors," says Banerjee. CRC is not a one-off. "Ground-breaking research is a thrust area," he continues, outlining future plans of the institute that completed 50 years in November 2011. Fresh faculty recruits are encouraged to teach less initially so that they can concentrate on research. Already in the past year more than 100 papers from IIM-C were presented at conferences or published in books and peer-reviewed journals. IIM-C retains second position in the BT-Nielsen B-school survey for 2012. Its success is summarised by Banerjee: "I call it the 3G approach: Growth, governance and globalisation." In terms of infrastructure, there have been major additions--classrooms, hostels and faculty cabins. Intake of the new postgraduate programme (PGP) has shot up to 462 students this year, the largest batch in IIM-C history. Nearly 77 per cent of the freshers have prior work experience. Globalisation initiatives are no lon-

G

62

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

SCHOOLS

Special
G U E S T C O L U M N Amish Tripathi

ger restricted to foreign student exchanges. "So far, such programmes have mostly been in collaboration with European schools. Now we're looking at North America as well," Banerjee says. The latest is a tie-up with CEMS, an alliance of 28 top global business schools, which enables a handful of students to simultaneously earn a postgraduate degree in management, rated by Financial Times as one of the world's five best. It will also enable IIMC to collaborate on research projects. There is more on offer. Besides a string of symposia and conferences on marketing, public policy and finance, IIM-C also hosts Intaglio, the annual international B-school meet, and Carpe Diem, its annual cultural fest. "With so many activities and clubs, there are no dull moments," says Jandeep Singh, 22, second-year PGP student. "Academics were tough and competitive. But the key thing about IIM-C was the genuinely egalitarian atmosphere. Nobody partied till everyone got job placements," recalls author Amish Tripathi, 37, alumnus of the 1997 batch. With placements the ultimate bottom line, IIM-C has come out on top for the fourth year running. There are 95 pre-placement and 130 lateral offers. As many as 133 firms made 424 final placement offers. The average salary was Rs 18 lakh, with the fixed component in offers by finance firms ranging between Rs 30-40 lakh for Indian and Rs 40-60 lakh for overseas locations. "IIM-C is known as the finance campus. You get better opportunities here," says second-year PGP student Fasil Sagir, 26, who moved to IIM-C after a year in XLRI. But Banerjee says, "IIM-C is not just about jobs. We try to deliver students the finest education and exposure." He points to the strength of the curriculum in areas not directly related to management studies, from courses on law, social structure, economic and political history to world economy. For now, students and teachers are looking forward to November when the golden jubilee bash comes to an end with the release of a corporate film by director Goutam Ghose. 

My wish list as IIM-C DIRECTOR
Industry interaction with students should increase. The institute must also introduce creative courses to become an ideas hotspot.
his is, of course, an entirely theoretical piece. I don't think I'm capable of being appointed the director of my alma mater, the Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta (IIM-C). But if I were, what would I say are the good things we've achieved and what should be our plans for the future? Well, here goes. There are many good things that have been done in the recent past in IIM-C. The batch size has risen from 200 to 400, a one-year MBA programme has been launched and the faculty has been expanded from 70 to 100. Infrastructure has also improved dramatically. There is now a world-class finance lab, and online education is being given a serious thrust. The entire campus is now wi-fi enabled. New hostels and lecture halls have been built. Students today are certainly provided with better facilities and inputs as compared to what we received when we were students. But what would be the plans for the future? First, industry interaction with students needs to be improved. This is a huge challenge for IIM, Calcutta, since most large companies are headquartered in Mumbai, Delhi EMPHASIS and Bangalore. But we've got to SHOULD BE LAID find a way to bridge that gap. No amount of theoretical inputs ON TRAINING MORE can match the strength of hard ENTREPRENEURS practical experience. AND HELPING Moreover, I would emphaTHEM THROUGH sise on training more entrepreneurs and helping them through INCUBATION incubation cells. Institutes like CELLS. Stanford, Cambridge and Massachusetts Institute of Technology do this very well and I believe IIM-C should also work harder in this area. If IIM-C can become an entrepreneur incubation hotspot, not only will we open more opportunities for our students, we will also succeed in giving back to our great country in large measure. Lastly, as the director I would explore if the college can introduce courses that can help those students who may have a creative bent of mind. Very few parts of my formal education prepared me for my career in writing. I did a BSc in mathematics from Xavier's, Mumbai, and then did an MBA from IIM-Calcutta. A writing career happened more as an accident rather than through a plan. Though I must admit that my MBA and job experience did help me in marketing my books. But the point I want to make is that there could be many IIM-C students who may be interested in creative fields. Can the institute have elective courses to help such people? I say, why not?

T

as told to Shravya Jain

Amish Tripathi is the author of The Immortals of Meluha

64

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

