SIMPLY DELHI

Market watch

The Makeover
nce home to over 75 tailoring shops, Lodhi Colony's six-decade-old Meher Chand Market has undergone quite a makeover in the past few months. Hip new joints like Bagels Café, Kunafa and the French bistro Chez Nini have made the who's who frequent this market. The market is no longer an electrical repair, or darji stopover, instead, you can now shop here for a host of home décor items, designer outfits, daily supplies and more. So while you pick up some kitsch at Play Clan, or shop at Masaba Gupta's store, you can stop by at The Cheese Ball and sample a variety of exotic cheese. SIMPLY DELHI brings you the best the market has to offer.

Play Clan
A team of designers, artists and illustrators are behind Play Clan's useful-yet-ever-so-funky products. The store is all about playing with out-of-the-box themes. A few months back Bollywood characters found their way on cushions,mugs,notepads,fridge magnets and greeting cards. Mr India's Mogambo aka Amrish Puri and Rangeela's tapori Munna aka Aamir Khan were quite an attraction. Now they have a collection of cushion covers and T-shirts that display the essence of the city. Check out the quirkily-designed products with commuters waiting in a queue at Rajiv Chowk, highlighting places like Connaught Place and Palika Bazaar. Look out for greeting cards, and T-shirts with funny slogans such as mehangai dayan khaye jaat hai, hata sawan ki ghata. Who could have thought that such mundane things could become entertaining bestsellers! The store space is filled with colour and doodle art splashed across all their products. Cost Rs 995 to Rs 1,295 for T-shirts, Rs 265 to Rs 595 for stationery At Shop 17, Meherchand Market, Lodhi Road Tel 24644393; theplayclan.com

REDISCOVER THIS NEW HANGOUT ZONE IN TOWN

O

CMYK
CMYK is a real find for those who are interested in photography, performing arts, architecture, travel, and gourmet cookbooks. The store stocks an impressive range of titles from publishers such as Phaidon, H F Ullmann, and Carlton. CMYK comes from cyan,magenta,yellow and black--the four primary ink colours used in printing. An initiative by Roli Books,this is the city's first art and design bookstore. It also stocks stationery by inhouse brand Designwallas.As a sideshow, the bookshop also hosts PechaKucha nights (meaning chit-chat in Japanese) that provide a platform for upcoming artists to display their works through PowerPoint presentations.The focus is on affordable art books. A good example is Street Art by Johannes Stahl (Rs 670) which features well-known artists like Banksy and Shepard Fairey who over the years have brought underground artistry to the mainstream. At 15-16 Mehar Chand Market,Lodhi Road Tel 24641881

The Cheese Ball
The go-to-place for Delhi's cheese lovers, The Cheese Ball by Flander's Dairy offers over 60 varities of cheese! The aroma of cheese fills the room, and you may sample a few slices before you decide which one you want to buy. The staff will guide you through the shelves and definitely increase your knowledge of cheese. Besides the regular mozzarella,gouda,ricotta and cheddar,the store has some interesting herb infused cheeses like chilli, oregano gouda, cumin gauda and more. Aspiring bakers can find excellent mascarpone cheese here- perfect for a homemade tiramisu or cheesecake. Price Starts at Rs 150 for 100 grams, depending on the choice of cheese At 31 Meher Chand Market, Lodhi Road Tel 24653789
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Kunafa

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

This tiny bakery named after the Palestinian sweetmeat Kunafa,offers alternative choices for Delhiites with a sweet tooth. Their smiling staff will offer you a complimentary flaky sweetmeat the moment you enter. You might be spoilt for choice since Kunafa houses over 50 varieties of sweets and dry fruits from Palestine, Lebanon and Syria. Choose from a range of kunafas (a pastry made with fine, sweet vermicelli and cream), baklavas, stuffed dates, Turkish figs and organic honey. While you enjoy the sweet bites, make sure you also try their bitter Arabic coffees. Cost Rs 1,500 per kg At 70 Mehar Chand Market Tel 49050644; kunafa.in

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

OCTOBER 2012  SIMPLY DELHI

s-27

