Real estate is on a roll and with the wide array of options available along with easy availability of loans, and rising urbanization leading to increased demand of dwelling units, and also the rise in nuclear families have all lead to this real estates boom. As you must be aware that India's reality market is showing a downward trend but it still has the growth potential with the development & investment into promising assets. One of the leading countries in Asia, India's real estate sector has the potential to come up with this market situation.

THAT WILL M A K E Y O U R D R E A M C O M E T R U E _^ --
A

^_

Anl HI PAC Tpresentation

Ii i
'.

AnimPACTreature

DREAM HOMES
Home!!! The only place in the world that lets us be free; be what we originally are, The comfort and the love that awaits us here is absolutely incomparable. We all strive for a house that is built to perfection has all the comforts that we deserve and desire and then, of course, the lovin family makes it a perfect "home".
But this perfect home is often thought to be within the reaches of a privileged few only. The common perception is that it is available to only those who are born with a silver spoon in their mouth. It is this perception that we are attempting to alter through this presentation of ours that is "Dream Homes". Today, one of the factors one looks for while buying a home is quality construction. A home buyer wants to ensure that the home will be safe and sound for its inhabitants, remain inhabitable for a maximum possible amount of years, not develop problems over time, not entail huge repair and maintenance costs, have good resale value if one decides to sell it, etc. All these basically pertain to bringing that dream home within the reach of everyone who dreams to have one. So let us guide you to a plethora of avenues that you can explore while getting this dream fulfilled. Bringing to you the most affordable and wonderful homes in and around the city. So, go ahead, choose the home and live your dream

Best location and pocket friendly price have made RYNE hot property
hen every builder is running pillar to post to sell apartments, there is one builder who isn't loosing his sleep, Yes we are talking about REALCRAFT BUILDTECH. The company is not too old but enjoying the reputation earned after decades of hard work. Obviously credit goes to its founder Shri Jayesh Sharma. An entrepreneur who has seen many autumns before enjoying this fresh spring. Started his journey as a small contractor Jayeshji graduated in the school of life. And perhaps it is his this tenacity and hard work that has helped him in achieving the success in his very first project Livia. Yes, apartments offered under Livia had not only redefined lifestyle but the price quoted also brought unfading smiles on customers' faces. And infact it is the success of Livia that actually motivated

W

REALTECH BUILDTECH to initiate its next residential project Ryne. Well planned residential homes near Greater Noida, adjacent to express way are soon going to offer whole new platform for aesthetic living. Proximity to Hindon river, occupants of Ryne homes would enjoy verdant greens and abundant of fresh air as out of 900 units 600 are three side open and rest 300 two side. Besides once you are here, life won't remain sedate rather it will be emboldened with joy and happiness. And that's not all, place is also dotted with matchless facilities and amenities. Yes, business hubs at stone throw away distance; gigantic malls for shopaholics, world class schools and collages to infuse knowledge and the best of the hospitals with state-of-the-art medical facilities will accentuate pleasure of living. Needless to say quality and attention to detail will be the hallmark of Ryne. Locational advantages of RYNE  Located on 2nd milestone of Yamuna Expressway  First underpass of Yamuna Expressway  05 minutes drive from Pari Chauk  20 Minutes drive from Faridabad, and Ghaziabad  20 Minutes drive from Delhi, In Close proximity to GOOAcres IT Parks  Adjacent to Gautam Budh University & Noida International University   Adjacent to NUT, Night Safari, A.M.R. (The Great Adventure Mall) ;  Far ahead of fomula one race track (Buddh circuit) Features that make RYNE Apartments buzz with life 80% Green areas surrounded by Central Lawn & Lily Ponds. Recycling of water for Gardening, Aesthetically Designed Children Play Areas & Jogging Tracks, Intercom Facility, Party Lawn for Residents. Health Club with Swimming pool, Gym, Spa Sauna Meditation & Yoga Centre.

AnimPACTreature

Pay for pur
hen it comes to homes no one builds it better, stronger and spectacular than Gaursons. With a proven track record of delivering what it promises, Gaursons is a real estate developer to reckon with in Delhi NCR. Whatever it has touched has turned into gold. It has happened in Indirapuram. And it holds true for each project of Gaursons. Its partner, Saviour Builders Pvt. Ltd. is also renowned for its commitment to quality and is a respected name in the real estate fraternity. The duo is all set to create history in Noida Extension, where they are coming up with a landmark township, Gaur City. With a portent to become benchmark for all future real estate developments, Gaur City, spread over 130 acres, is a fine amalgam of high living ensconced not only by the

pet a
greenery but all the modern amenities such as multiplex, stadium, Olympic size swimming pool, hotels, hospitals and schools among others.  Futuristic township spread over approx. 130 acres of land. Approx.45 acres land kept open for parks, play ground, open space, roads and public parking, sport facilities etc. in addition to green/open areas of group housing  Renowned architecture of RSR Singapore. Landscaping within the complex  Olympic size swimming pool and radiant club featured with Reading Room, Cafe, Latest Gymnasium, Sauna Bath, Steam Bath, Jacuzzi Bath, Billiards Table, Table Tennis, Card Table, Common Hall for get together and sufficient play area for children.

W

Supertech's affordable Housing at Noida Extension
Affordable has brought opportunities for many to buy home. Supertech Limited a leading real company is offering various to this in Extension, as -Greater Noida West,
Eco Village I Eco-Village is a residential project located in Noida Extension, spread over an area of 50 acres. The project comprises of 1, 2, 3 and 4 BHK apartments, area of which ranges between 550 sq. ft. to 2275 sq. ft. The project is a combination of high as well as low rise apartments. This project has world-class amenities like Swimming pool, Health Club, Medical Centre, Ayurvedic Massage Centre, Badminton and Tennis Courts, Amphitheatre, Clubs and Shopping Complex. The project also has 82% beautifully landscaped area, ample parking lots and artistically designed vaastu-friendly apartments. Eco-Village-ll Eco-Village-ll is an eco-friendly residential project in Noida Extension, spread over an area of 80 acres.. The project comprises of 1, 2, 3 and 4 BHK apartments, area of which ranges between 550 sq. ft. to 2275 sq. ft. The project is a combination of high as well as low rise apartments. This project provides a gymnasium with Swimming pool, Health Club, Medical Centre, Ayurvedic Massage Centre, Badminton Court and Tennis Court. The project also offers facility of reticulated gas supply to every unit, 24-hour power back up, ample parking lots and a shopping complex. The artistically designed units are vaastu-friendly built amidst 82% beautifully landscaped area. Eco-Village III Eco Village-Ill is also an eco-friendly residential project just like its predecessors, which provides high quality lifestyle at a pocket friendly cost. With the facilities available at Eco-Village-lll, it is a mini township that takes* your comfort and convenience to a whole new level. It is a./ combination of Low-rise and High-rise buildings .The project comprises 2 and 3 bedrooms apartments, area o|jl which range between 890 Sq. Ft. to 1850 Sq. Ft. Floor plans are 3-4 sided open and artistically vastu friendly designed. This project provides world class facilities like Swimming pool, Health Club, Medical Centre, Ayurvedic Massage Centre, Badminton Court, Tennis Court & Amphitheatre. The project also has well designed complex with beautiful landscape.

I R.K. ARORA
Chairman & Managing Director

AnimPACTreature

The pioneers are rising tall at Faridabad
ivotal Infrastructure has a repute of being one of the most trusted developers in Faridabad. They have been doing a laudable job in the rise and development of the infrastructure in the city. Being one of the most trusted real estate developers in India, the group has also been known to partner and collaborate with various leading and reputed names among infrastructure developers. Pivotal Infrastructure has joined hands with Ansal Buildwell to alter the skylines of Faridabad. The Ansal Group is amongst the handful of Indian corporate groups to have built a global reputation through a culture of innovation and excellence. Four decades ago, this dynamic enterprise altered Delhi's corporate skyline. The leading among the projects, being the very prestigious and unique, Royal Heritage, a plush residential project, conceived around Maharaja style architecture blended with the comforts and amenities of modern era. Royal Heritage promises to make it's occupants feel no less than a royal family. Their newly unveiled project Faridabad Eye, has been a huge success to start with. Faridabad Eye, which stands 32 storeys tall within the complex of Royal Heritage, is

P

a perfect embodiment of luxury, style and comfort living. Rightly named, the Faridabad Eye, it is tailor-made for those, who want to fly high and take over the clouds, and have no fear in looking down to their roots in the ground. The Ansal group has been instrumental in the development of the Mainland Faridabad. Our group projects are exclusive as Our projects are funded by leading banks of the country such as the State Bank of India, HDFC, to name a few. Projects are strategically located, by being in close proximity to the upcoming Metro station in Faridabad.  High speed construction has given our projects an edge over all the other projects in Faridabad Our projects have the highest prospects appreciation. 톂he Royal Heritage project has been a huge success, by becoming one of the fastest selling projects. This project has been widely received and highly successful. The rates have been revised, and the apartments are almost about to be sold out. Book your dream home today, because the opportunity to own it too has risen by a few more floors.

Bringing to you the most affordable and wonderful homes in and around the city.
nnati Fortune Group is the conglomerate of various sectors. Unnati Fortune Group today is among the leading Realty and Infrastructure companies of India. It currently operates in a range of business verticals such as, group housing, commercial, shopping complex, hospitality, manufacturing and infrastructure under the leadership of Mr. Anil Mlthas (Chairman& M.D) and experienced Board members. Unnati Fortune Group's relentless -commitment towards excellence has ^fetched the group the coveted awards I f "Premium Project of the year 2011" J|nd "Best location in the city" from ^Builders Council of India" and ISO r9001:2008 certification for the global quality construction standards as well. Not only this, the company has got memberships in a large number of organizations such as CREDAI, FICCI, IGBC, ASSOCHAM, Confederation of Indian Industry (CM), International Chamber of Commerce (ICC India), Builder Association of India (BAD for social welfare. The Group's main thrust is in

u

IANILMITHAS
Chairman & Managing D

construction & up gradation of major highways & real-estate development and construction of a number of prestigious residential complexes, which are a confluence of luxury, elegance and convenience. The ongoing projects are The Aranya (residential) at GH-02, Sector-119, Noida, Hotmart (Commercial Destination) and Aranya Service Suites in Sector-4, Vaishali Ghaziabad are adjoining Vaishali Metro Station. Group's Coming up projects is The Address (Luxury Hotel Apartments), Aranya Mansions (Ultra Luxurious Villas) at Sector 119, Noida and Aranya Homes in Greater Noida west. Aranya Homes is a new residential project in 10 acres and located at Sector-10, Greater Noida that offers 2/3 BHK apartments. The Group has a vision to construct 10000 units in the year 2013-2014, which could be served to every segment of the society. The core is not only providing a house but a home which would be actually a value for money for the buyer.

AnimPACTreatiire

Shaping dreams into reality
itnessing the haphazardly growing unauthorized;! industrial area in & around Faridabad, it has become a matter to contend with not only for the residents living nearby but also for the whole of 1 Faridabad. Prithla happens to be rightly placed on NH 10 minute derive from Sec 59, Sec 58, Sec 25 Industrial Area Faridabad, equally distanced from Palwal with adequate land to accommodate industrial sectors at the core and buffer zone on the periphery. According to tha.-*,plan 3100 acres of land has already been allotted/ allocated for setting up a dry port. Apart from a dry port, Prithla Development Plan has also allocated about 3500acres of land towards setting up of 13 new Industrial Sectors. Among these 13 Industrial Sectors, SRC Industrial Park1 in sector '4 A1 is getting its' presence felt. 'SRC Industrial Park' is first Private Industrial Township under PPP Model of Prithla Development Plan. This project is conceptualized for about 150 acres and company has received license on 42acres approx. in the first phase. The project will be immensely benefited from the new sewerage line/ water line to be laid down in the area for which the work is already in progress. Promoter - Sh. Subhash Choudhary who envisions this project has more than 25 years of experience in construction line & heads a team of young, dynamic, dedicated personnals. The township has dedicated connectivity from national highway NH-2. The Private Township will be bordered by 60 mts road on 3 and 24mts on the remaining 1 side. The Township will be lit by solar power on the streets, which will be 24mts, 18mts & 15mts in width. There will be CCTV cameras

W

I SUBHASH CHAUDHARY Chairman & Managing Director
and manned security to care of every nook & corner of the township. The township is planned to substantially reduce the lead time for setting up of an industrial project. Presence of bigwigs like ACE, HPL, Pooja Forge, Auto Lek, Indian Armor, STL, SKH, Mahindra & Mahindra & Phoenix contact in its' neighborhood presents a fantastic opportunity for ancillary industry. The prospects of the area would be further strengthened by the IT parks, Cyber Parks, Knowledge Parks, Medi-city, Leisure city, Fashion City, Entertainment City & Eco-Sports city to be build along KMP expressway as per government planning. This could also be noticed by observing fanatic buying of space by these industries in 'SRC Industrial Park'. With two very good boosters in KMP expressway & Yamuna expressway, success of private township 'SRC Industrial Park' & Prithla development plan in itself is imminent.

These are the organisations committed to providing you with all the requisites for making every fantasy of yours come true. This presentation "Dream Homes" was another one of the efforts in this direction. Here you are presented with all the viable and workable options that can be undertaken to help you get that blend of perfection and cosiness that come to mind while thinking of the sublime place that is going to be your home. Presented herein are the people that have kept "you" in mind while they plan whatever it is that they are constructing. It is your choice, your comfort, your wellbeing, your thinking and your family's safety and hygiene they think of while undertaking a new venture. Your family matters as much to them as it does to you. This is the sole reason they keep you at the epicentre of all their creativity and engineering skills. That is how they craft these masterpieces of theirs to match the impeccable finishes that you desire. Never again would you have to worry about whether or not you can afford that revered dwelling that have been craving all these years. All you have to do is go through this presentation and surely you would end up loving each and every one of them. The only thing that you won't be able find here is how to choose just one

