AnimPACTreature

Genuinely utritiou
и.

' ugust Spice is a chain of casual dining and delivery ' restaurants in Delhi NCR. On offer to the food aficionados is a rich collection of traditional Indian culinary delights, complimented with the best of the world cuisine that continues to humble Indians taste buds. So much so, they even coined a phrase to describe it - Modern Indian Cuisine. And best of ail is the value you get for pur rupee. Just a few months in its making, August Spice is an off-shoot of its popular face, the August Hue Banquets & Catering Services (# 49449966), known widely for its peerless branding, exclusive themes, unwavering quality of its offerings and diversity in world cuisine, playing host to weddings, parties and corporate events alike. Just a step inside either one of their outlets presently at Shaiimar Bagh in north Delhi and the others in southern part of the city, at Oilli Haat PA), Friends Colony & SDA, the tasteful aesthetic decor and the smiling 'ever eager to welcome' countenance of the service personnel immediately draw attention of any visitor, making them secretly wanting to have more of such stores, near their own place. With the finest of the ingredients, low fat cooking mediums, combined with toads of pioneering cooking techniques to preserve nutrition, and the ever so consistent taste that is bound to linger long after, it's only a matter of time before you too would become an addict.

BERCO'S TAKES WING!
The 15th new Berco's opens! The endeavor is to introduce one in every part of the city so that there is always a Berco's close to you. I KABIR ADVANI DIRECTOR
keeping their essence intact. Along with old favorites like Crispy Honey Chicken you will find interesting introductions like Wasabi Prawns and Khow-suey. Berco's takes pride in evolving with the budding epicurean taste-buds of well travelled Indians who seek the same interesting flavors back home. While Chinese is still the forte, at Berco's you will find a delectable mix of other Asian delicacies as well - like Thai, Burmese, Japanese and Vietnamese. With a strong network of Home Delivery Riders they also make sure that the same taste is delivered to you in the comfort of your home when you are in a mood to just sit down, relax and have lip smacking food in your own space. As a matter of tradition, the bar continues to raise itself with the opening of each new Berco's. The challenge is always to keep the price point intact. Thus like all renowned chains, at Berco's you will find that the price will be same across the board. Be it in South Delhi or North. Besides taste, value-for-money is the second pillar of the Berco's promise of: Palate, Price and Portions. Perhaps it is the three Ps, or the Berco's culture of service, or maybe it is just plain great food that has won Berco's accolades year after year like People's Choice Restaurant by Food Food, Best Chinese Restaurant by Mouth Shut, Master Chef Australia Certification, 101 finest restaurants in Delhi by Mail Today and Times Service Excellence Award. From 1 to 15, the time has come, for Ihe chain to take wing.: : : r::::r:^::;^

T

hree decades ago, the first Berco's set foot in C.R Today, there is one is every corner from Gurgaon to Noida, Saketto Pitampura, and with Preet Vihar, Dwarka, Janakpuri, Rajouri Garden, Kirti Nagar, Rohini, Kamla Nagar, Faridabad, Amritsar and with the newest one in Jalandhar.. .the list goes on. The secret to the success of the chain is 'constant innovation'. They take pride in continuously re-inventing themselves by offering new ideas in terms of the experience and food, while

'*MIBB
'"и'и' '-'ии; ;'-

