Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE ENCHANTED SPIRITS
The ancestral magic of Africa animates the new novel by M.G. Vassanji
By Geeta Doctor

THE MAGIC OF SAIDA
byM.G.Vassanji Hamish Hamilton Price: RS 499 Pages: 305 BETWEEN THE COVERS Vassanji gives a credible narrative that encompasses a whole swathe of historyfrom the coming of the European colonial powers into East Africa and the resistance offered to them bythe local tribes led bycharismatic Muslim leaders.

f you are lucky enough when standing at the very edge of the Gujarat coastline, you can feel the strong magnetic pull of the African continent beckon to you. You can scent the hot winds blowing in from its Eastern flanks as they suck in the dhows that have carried generations of small men with big dreams like Vassanji's Punja Devraj to Zanzibar, and beyond, to make their fortunes. Or if you are a tourist today, catch a glimpse of Africa in the villages where the Sidis remain, the human vestiges of a trade that was common enough on both sides of that vast continent, as they dance and clap and swallow fire along with the humility that has made them the latest attractions in the Gir forest, together with the lions. Ask any Gujarati, however, if there is any African ancestress in their family and they will rear as if bitten by a scorpion. Miscegenation is not a topic of conversation, though you may notice a sloping forehead with thick lips and curly hair, pink palms in people who live near the coast; or as Vassanji describes his protagonist Kamal Punja, a big man with a fleshy face and "that Indian name (that) belied his appearance when I saw him, which was evidently that of an African". The name does not immediately signal the fact that Punja is a Muslim. Though it does make sense of the subsequent revelations when Vassanji describes how Kamal Punja's grandfather Punja Devraj had experienced a moment of epiphany at the shrine of a famous Sidi saint in Gujarat, urging him to cross the seas to Zanzibar. There's SAURABH SINGH/ even a delightful moment, www.indiatodayimages.com

I

when the young Punja Devraj encounters a lion on his journey by foot through the forest and imagines it to be the spirit of the saint. It also makes the unravelling of Vassanji's densely woven narrative, which encompasses a whole swathe of history from the coming of the European colonial powers into East Africa and the resistance offered to them by the local tribes led by charismatic Muslim leaders, entirely credible. The timbre of the Islamic tradition that he invokes in conjuring the memories of the poets and oral historians in the little town of Kilwa, in the hinterland of Dar-es-Salaam, is as subtle and entrancing as a morsing (or Jewish harp). The story that he tells though is a searing one of the love and betrayal of two brothers. One of them is Mzee Omari whom we meet early through the eyes of the young Kamal Punja. Omari has become a famous poet, who is reputed to have written the history of his people through the interventions of a personal genie, named Idris, who is given to chucking pebbles at Kamal to put him in his place. The other is Omari's older brother, Karim Abdelkarim, the rebel poet who took on the mantle of what came to be known as the War of the Waters inspired by what Vassanji describes in his prologue as the spirit of Kinjikitile, a water naiad perhaps, who becomes a part of Kamal's history, as the great love of his life--Saida. In its simplest form Kamal is the David Copperfield of Vassanji's tale making his way into the world wracked by being neither African nor Indian and turning instead into a successful doctor in Canada. Then the voices of the past lure him back to Kilwa and the mysterious spirit of Saida, who is no less than the daemon of Africa herself. Once again, Vassanji excels. 

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

