AnimPACTfeature

T

This B School is unique because their students are not considered to be I mere class room MBA's. The moment a graduate clears the GEMS B I SCHOOL entrance test and gets admitted, the student is assessed, trained and places in a suitable job related to the specialization the student is assessed, trained and placed in a suitable job related to the specialization the student has chosen in his/her MBA. It could be HR, Finance, Marketing, IT, IB, Retail, Healthcare or Events, Monday to Friday the student goes through the grind in a corporate and Saturday and Sundays, for two full days, returns to the campus to lap up management concepts. The student learns and earns, works and studies. GEMS B SCHOOL swears by this unique methodology of learning because it firmly believes that management as a science cannot be understood and imbibed by a student in the classroom alone. They strongly believe that supplementing of management theory with industry experience enhances the learning process. Students who pass out of GEMS B SCHOOL are picked up like hot cakes by the industry because in addition to their theoretical knowledge they come with two years real time industry experience. GEMS B SCHOOL students are performing well in companies like ABB, Accenture, Axis Bank, Convergys, Deutsche Bank, HSBC Bank, Dell, HR IBM, Emphasis, Infosys, Volvo, Wipro etc. GEMS B SCHOOL is an authorized University academy partner of SAP Germany and students can also pursue SAP ERP Bl and R3 certifications along with their MBA. SAP certification is offered by SAP Germany and MBA, which is a full time one is offered by a UGC recognized government owned unversity. Students also have the option of pursuing this course through an online mode.

INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA
alike. Addressing the need of SMPs and SMEs who are one of the key engines of economic growth and development, global reporting convergence is also one of the current challenges. With a view to converge with IFRSs, ICAI had formulated the Indian Accounting Standards (Ind ASs). Adequate steps to enhance the knowledge of the members and other stakeholders for proper implementation of IFRS converged Indian Accounting Standards (Ind ASs) are being taken by conducting workshops, seminars and IFRS Certificate Course. CA Amendment Bill was passed by both houses of the Parliament paving the way for Limited Liability Partnerships (LLPs) and Multidisciplinary Partnerships (MDPs). This would help the professionals and thereby the country in achieving a leadership position in the services sector. · How has the year (2011-12) been for the profession of accountants? ICAI has been regulating the accountancy profession for more than last 6 decades and is now proceeding towards the phase of consolidation. Since last decade, economy momentum is stabilizing and the role of accountants whether during buoyancy or downturn has always been complementary towards building a credible, reputable and internationally competitive economy, irrespective of the capacities in which they perform. Convergence with IFRS, implementation of GST, Direct Tax Code, Corporate Laws have also necessitated the need of Chartered Accountants in various sectors of the industry. From the placement point of view, Year 2011-12 has been a good year. An overwhelming response was received from the recruiting organisations. The average starting salary offered to newly qualified CAs was around Rs. 6.5 lakh per annum. An annual package of Rs. 14 lacs was offered for domestic posting and Rs. 25 lacs for International posting.

INTALKWITH
ICAJaydeepNShah PRESIDENT
What is ICAI's outlook for the Indian market for 2012-13? Although global markets are in the phase of stabilizing, Indian market is more or less resilient to the effect of the downturn and will flourish in the years to come. ICAI as a regulator acts as professional developer, educator, standard setter and government advisor on various policy matters for the economic and financial development of Indian markets. ICAI, through its regulatory driven mechanism of Peer Review Board and Financial Reporting Review Board, aims at having oversight over the professionals for which it seeks full autonomy in its functioning to fulfill its avowed mandate. i What are some of the key developments affecting the profession of accountants in India? The emerging scenario of the Indian accounting profession is focusing on the socio economic concepts like sustainability reporting, integrated reporting framework, Cloud computing, environmental accounting, social audits, sustainable development in a sustainable green economy and

