UP FRONT

KIRAN MAZUMDAR-SHAW

HEALTHCARE FOR ALLAND INDIACAN DO IT
s the Government plans to provide free essential med- test means that the supplier must take it back. If the comicines to all, India is finally on the road to ensuring pany fails the test thrice, TNMSC blacklists the supplier. healthcare for its citizens. The destination may still be The recent debate which ended with the Group of a far way away, but it is significant that the journey has begun. Ministers deciding on a market-based pricing mechanism for According to the Planning Commission, until recently, essential drugs is unnecessary in the context of supply of free when the Government was spending a mere 1 per cent of medicines for all. Through competitive and bulk procurement the GDP on healthcare, 39 million Indians were pushed into in the open market, the process automatically drives down poverty because of health-related expenses every year. drug prices. The streamlining of drug procurement through Even with the Government now allocating 1.95 per cent this model has lowered costs by about 30 per cent in of GDP on health, India's healthcare spending is amongst Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh where the TNMSC model has the lowest in the world. been replicated. The drugs TNMSC provides are procured at More than funding, it is mostly the lack of political will extremely low profit margins--around 0.01 per cent. and effective administration that have kept accessible and Other countries have had significant success with generaffordable healthcare out of the reach of most Indians. There ics. German watchdog IQWiG (Institute for Quality and is no doubt that public healthcare funding needs to be much Efficiency in Health Care) conducts a value-based analysis of higher; but even the admittedly small allocations are largely drugs and decides the level of reimbursement. The process frittered away. That is an unforgiveable situation given that has spurred greater use of generics and brought down prices we have the capability to secure the health of all. nearer to generic drug levels, saving Germany's public It is not just about money. It is also about the effective util- health insurance funds 12.9 billion euros in 2011. In the US, isation of the funds allocated. We can meet many of our PCORI (Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute) has healthcare objectives even if there are funding constraints. been instituted to control healthcare costs. Though there will Tamil Nadu is a good example of what a transparent and always be a retail market for branded drugs, such formulaaccountable programme can achieve in terms of delivering tions will have no place in bulk procurement for universal efficient healthcare. It also makes the issue of market-based healthcare owing to competitive tendering. The increasing drug pricing quite irrelevant. Since 1994, the Tamil Nadu use of biosimilars will also drive down prices. Medical Services Corporation (TNMSC) has been ensuring that Apart from competitive tendering for drugs procureessential drugs are affordable and available to all. Its suc- ment, IT can also play a key role in the successful running cess has led the Centre to replicate TNMSC's model through a of free drugs system. TNMSC has a robust IT supply national healthcare plan. Through the plan, the Government chain management platform that transparently tracks the aims to provide 348 essential life-saving movement of drugs all the way from SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com drugs free of cost--and a set of basic the manufacturer to the patient. The health services called the Essential data collected by the IT set-up is highly Health Package--to every Indian. visible, helping secure drug quality Tamil Nadu's drugs procurement and transparency in drug procurement and distribution mechanism is driven by and distribution. a competitive tendering process and an To make the Universal Health Plan enabled supply chain management truly effective, the system also needs system. The competitive tenders at the to track the health outcome of each centralised procurement stage ensure patient through electronic health that the lowest bidder wins. This sets the records (EHR). Linking EHRs to patientstage for a robust weeding-out phase level drug distribution will make the imwherein a branded formulation will not pact of health delivery measurable. stand a chance in the tendering process Also, procurement forecasting must be if it is charging, say Rs 90 for 10 tablets, mapped at the district level. This will when a generics maker is charging Rs 9. enable efficient inventory management In this process, it is the patients who are and timely delivery of essential drugs the winners since they gain access to It is not just about money. It is even in contingency situations like epigood quality drugs at the most competidemics and natural disasters. also about effective utilisation tive price. This good quality is guaranSuch a system of universal healthof the funds allocated. We can care will set a global benchmark. teed through a stringent quality control meet many of our healthcare system. TNMSC follows a rigorous testing objectives even if there are process in which each batch undergoes Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw is chairman and laboratory checks. Failure in the quality managing director of Biocon funding constraints.

A

10

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

