SIMPLY DELHI

Ebuzz

BY EKTA ALREJA

CLICK INFO
Check out these interesting websites that bring various kinds of services to your doorstep--all at the click of a mouse!

Easyfix.in
A leaky faucet welcomed Shaifali Agarwal when she shifted to her new apartment in 2009, leaving her running from pillar to post to find a handyman to fix it. That was the start of Easyfix.in, a one-call repair and maintenance provider. Agarwal realised that there would be others like her battling such problems in the middle of hectic work days. In July 2011, she quit her job in order to dedicate more time towards her venture . She did her market research, rented an office, hired a few people to man the office, set up her website and phone lines and hence began Easyfix.in. The website provides services for plumbing, electrical and carpentry work. And no, their services do not

OCTOBER 2012  SIMPLY DELHI

s-47

SIMPLY DELHI

Ebuzz

burn a hole in your pocket. Just a nominal charge of Rs 130 (with an added benefit of free after service) is applicable if they visit your house and rest depends on the type of service they provide. Services applicable only in Delhi

Dineout.co.in books you a table at the restaurant of your choice.Apart from this, they also make organising a party at a restaurant a hasslefree process

Postmygreetings.com
Forgot your wife's birthday this year again? How about a hand-delivered personalised greeting card, with her photograph on it? This is what Postmygreetings.com, an online retailer of printed greetings cards does for you. At the website, you can use handwritten fonts and graphics to design a card; upload your happy pictures, pick the envelope and get the printed copy of the card delivered at the doorstep. Introduced in

August 2011, the website has come up with many creative ways to send one's wishes. It allows you to keep a track of events and occasions; and set up reminders to ensure the delivery on a desired date. An account on postmygreetings.com also allows you to maintain a wallet thus reducing the cumbersome process of repeated online payments.

Dineout.co.in
You might just skip this website, thinking that this is another run-of-the-mill website, trying to ape the more famous Zomato.com. Dineout.co.in does provide you with information on variousrestaurants in Delhi but the difference is that they book you a table at your restaurant of choice.

Apart from this, they also make organising a party at a restaurant a hassle-free process. And the best part is they help you get the best deals and discounts. They have tied up with some of the finest restaurants in the city like Smoke House Grill, The Kebab Factory, Veda, Olive Bar & Kitchen and many more. Four friends, Sahil Jain, Nikhil Bakshi, Vivek Kapoor and Ankit Mehrotra quit their jobs to start this online venture. With over 200 restaurants in their kitty, the website which was launched last February does 8,000 bookings a month. They are also planning to launch in Mumbai and Bangalore next year.

Gadi.com
An online marketplace for car buyers and sellers, the website hit the virtual world in May 2008. Since then, it has been helping auto-lovers to browse through numerous cars and other vehicles. The website claims to be the best source for new car research in India with an added benefit of detailed information that includes specifications, features, prices, news updates, expert opinions, user reviews, ratings, dealers and a lot more. Recently the auto portal has also launched a section for bicycles. This new segment enables online research for cycles by providing prices, specifications, pictures, editor notes, user reviews and dealer listings for innumerable models across all leading domestic and international brands available in India.

ns tio tra us Ill by H AB UR SA om .c es ag im ay od at di .in w w w H/ NG SI

Bestcollegeart.com gives an opportunity to young artists to upload their five best works and sell them to collectors. The website also enables you to buy art without any commissions

Bestcollegeart.com
This one is an online retail platform which gives an opportunity to young artists to upload their five best works and sell them

to collectors. Founded by artists, collectors and gallery owners, the website has made art more accessible--both in terms of price and ease of access. Kapil Chopra, an art collector collaborated with Peter Nagy, owner of Nature Morte and Swapan Seth, to give the website a headstart in 2010 and since then the website has become a hot bed for many young artists. There are always fresh works available on the website as no piece is kept for more than six months. The website enables you to buy art without any commissions and at reasonable valuations below Rs 99,000. All money earned is then invested back into developing basic infrastructure and exhibitions.

s-48

SIMPLY DELHI  OCTOBER 2012

OCTOBER 2012  SIMPLY DELHI

s-49

