flnimPACTreature

PREPARING LEADERS OF TOMORROW
IMANISH GUPTA
Chairman, JIMS stablished in 1993, Jagan Institute of Management Studies is a premier business school in India. JIMS imparts professional education at post graduate level in the fields of management and information technology. In management, JIMS offers three Post Graduate Programs - PGDM, PGDM (IB) and PGDM (RMM). All these programs are duly approved by AICTE. Its PGDM program is accredited from National Board of Accreditation (NBA) for excellence in quality education. PGDM has also been granted equivalence to MBA degree by Association of Indian Universities (AID). JIMS is a place of learning for knowledge-driven learners. It has been built with an aim to impart education that surpasses the benchmarks of excellence. To achieve the motto it has a comprehensive pedagogical structure which provides paramount academic skills, curriculum with the ever-evolving dynamics of global business environment, esteemed faculty with their vast experience and expertise and world class facilities.The USP of JIMS does not lie in doing anything bizarre; anything out of the box; anything unconventional. We would like to remind the off-repeated Shiv Khera phrase 'Winners do'nt do different things; they do things differently'. Similarly JIMS, like any other management Institute of repute, does conduct its curricular, co-curricular and extra curricular activities; be it class room teaching; syllabi revision and upgradation; presentations and soft skills; live projects and so on. However, we make sure that the so called routine curricula are delivered in a manner that a student with IT background comprehends the issues in the same manner as a student with English (Hons.) background or Commerce (Hons.) background. We encourage creativity; enhance core capability; impart specific skill. We not only train our students to be efficient managers only but also to be responsible citizens and honest human beings.

YMCA Offers Holistic Edee
he New Delhi YMCA was established in 1927 with the I aim to provide- professional education and vocational I Courses, sports and residential facilities, ,,,ipowerment and social action towards an equitable society. The education activity is done under the banner of human potential development programme which comprise four institutes with a vision to enable students from all walk nf life to access quality education at a very reasonable cost with no discrimination of caste, colour or creed. The institute provides various courses in many field of activity. There's a lot of impetus on tourism. A phenomenal amount has been ear marked and put at the states disposal to promote tourism. Tourism implies development of aviation industry and hotel industry as they are dependent on each other. Accordingly, the courses cover these aspects. A complete vocational package is available in the institute so as and when the student, after completion of the course, is looking for a job, he or she is fully equipped to meet the requirements of the industry. All courses have been planned in a similar manner: besides the above mentioned, there are also courses available for learning foreign languages. This is crucial for students to develop skills to interact in foreign multinational companies that are investing in the country in a big way. It has various allied courses like health management, lifestyle and weight management and sports nutrition. This enables students to specialize in various fields of activity. _____ _____ "ement dedicated to meet human needs, is a result of the Industrial Revolution in England " h forced thousands

E

PDM Educational Institutions, Bahadurgarh

TOTAL EDOCATION ONDER ONE ROOF
DM Educational Institutions based at Bahadurgarh, an upcoming town of Haryana, Mr. Joginder Singh Prabhu elaborates "The Institution believes in being guided by a universal spirit, operating in hitherto unserved areas like rural and in disciplines where there is shortage of quality manpower. The PDM believes in combining what is best in traditional education and what is latest and appropriate in technology like web based learning, open learning and interactive learning." With this core goal in mind, the Prabhu Dayal Memorial Religious and Educational Association (PDMREA, popularly referred as PDM) came up with its first Institution named PDM Polytechnic in 1995-96, and then came up PDM College of Engineering in 1999, PDM Public School in 2003, PDM College of Management & PDM College of Pharmacy in 2004, PDM Institute of Engineering & Technology at Karsindhu, Safidon (Jind) in 2005, PDM College of Education, Ultra Modern PDM Dental College & Research Institute & General Hospital in 2006, PDM College of Engineering for Women in 2009 and PDM School of Technology & Management in 2011. A new Institute in thefcgj form of PDM International School is coming shortly to add more grace to the PDM Family. Today, it is well established institution spread over 45 acres of land in absolutely pollution free -'a; surroundings. The Association has achieved success in the field of education in a short span of time and it plans to add new educational courses every year so that quality educatfHS_pi field becomes available under one roof for the conve^H^^g the students, which was a dream of Shri Prabhu Dayal Ji, t noted philanthropist, in whose memory PDM Group ofjl| Educational Institutions have been established.

P

*-*nm

idoning the
Air Cmde. fK Sharma countryside for better )IRECTOR "V'n9 m>ne c'ty Britain was plagued with the many ills and human suffering caused by sudden rise immigrants in London. It was the worst affected city, there being no agency to take care of the people.

tWj..
JAPrabh CO-CHAIRMAN

