Delhi; the city of extremes. On the one hand, we have street vendors selling the best tasting street foods in the country; while on the other, we have restaurants that meet the eye as the epitomes of grandeur and splendour.

As beauty is in the eye of the beholder, so the quality of a restaurant is in the experience of the diner. Nothing excites the senses quite like a carefully crafted meal. The right array of colours, smells, and perfectly combined tastes can make you come alive, and heighten your enjoyment of the wonder that is food. We love to gather around a beautiful meal with our family and friends, and experience the laughter and fun that are brought to life around the table. This joy; this fun; this love; this elegance is what we are trying to bring to you Delhiites with our Anniversary. The places you want to be when you want that classy environ to impress a boss, woo a special someone, show the love and care to your parents; all those special moments that call for a show of magnificence as brilliant as you. All this and more is enlisted in this feature here. So sit back, relax and enjoy the joy-ride that is this presentation "Elegant Dining",

RADISSON BLU PLAZA DELHI RELAUNCHES STATE- OF-THE- ART BANQUETS
Contemporary in style and decor, the banquets are equipped with the most modern technologies available anywhere in the world
adisson Blu Plaza's newly renovated banquets are a fine blending of sophisticated technology and artistic splendour. A combination of rich Porto Gold and classy Spider Gold stone add a touch of grandeur to the majestic space and breathe magnificence into the decor. Distinctly furnished with rich textured silk fabric in a combination of two veneers; namely Ebony Rosewood and Walnut Burl timber panelling, the elegant banquets - Crystal Room, Ebony 1 and Ebony 2 - provide an ideal space for conventions, celebrations, parties and weddings. Crystal is an ideal banquet for conventions and parties of up to 1000 people. Rich silk fabric used creatively on the sliding partitions give to it the harmonious facade. Ebony 1 & 2 are smaller meeting rooms that can host up to 30 people each. Banquet has a grand porte-cochere with an elegant waterfall in front giving a majestic look. A wall embellished with mother-of-

R

pearl over a stretch of 5 metres, greets the visitor at the entry to the banquet lobby and a chandelier artistic in style and decor adds to it a touch of grandeur. Unique custom designed exclusive chandeliers, imported from LASVIT in Czech Republic reinterpret the illume concept. Inside the banquet, the walls are clad with fabric and adorned with vertical stainless stripes, also back lit with LED lights. The coves of the ceiling with their RGB LED lighting cater to the mood of the functions. Adding a soft glow to the ambience are the backlit portals that have Onyx panels on either side. Blending modern and sophisticated technology with artistic splendour and luxury are the futuristic sound and lighting systems that operate on a single touch of an l-pad with the capability of high definition multiple formats inputs. Seamless Wi-Fi Internet access on demand makes it an ideal venue for business conferences.

