Na tion

BIHAR

LALU DRAWS HUGE CROWDS AT HIS PARIVARTAN YATRA IN BEGUSARAI, BIHAR
PRASHANT RAVI

REFORMED LALU PLOTS COMEBACK
Buoyed by the massive response to his roadshow, and parallel protests against Nitish Kumar, the RJD chief has declared war on the Bihar Chief Minister
By Devesh Kumar in Patna

G

aram tel me phas kar jaise phatinga pharpharawe la, oinse hi Nitish baukhla gayal ba, (Nitish Kumar's rants are reminiscent of a moth trapped in boiling oil fighting for life)," says Lalu Prasad Yadav. A day after he wound up the fourth phase of his Parivartan Yatra at Begusarai, the RJD supremo responded to Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar's insinuation that protests by teachers during his Adhikar

Yatra had been instigated by his adversaries (read Lalu Prasad Yadav). Lalu's yatra, which kicked off on June 12 at Bettiah, located on the Bihar-Nepal border, has already covered 15 of Bihar's 37 districts. The popular response has taken the RJD chief himself by surprise. Local intelligence sources say his public meeting at Khagaria on October 5 drew a far bigger crowd than the one by Nitish on September 26. He addressed an even bigger rally at Begusarai's ITI grounds on October 6. The RJD camp

is buoyant. In contrast, Nitish was forced to cut short his yatra, because of protests and black flag demonstrations, mainly by teachers on contract. An overzealous administration sought to clamp down on the protests at the rally venues in Jamui and Nawada by turning back men wearing black T-shirts, and asking girls to take off their black dupattas. The move triggered a storm. "It was a wrong step. The officials went on an overdrive,'' admitted JD(U) spokesperson Shivanand Tiwari.

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

Na tion BIHAR
KM KISHAN

The RJD chief's comeback plans, however, may be stymied by the outcome of his trial in the fodder scam case, which has reached a critical stage in the court of the special CBI judge, Ranchi. Examination of defence witnesses ended on October 8. Only arguments remain to be held. At the end of the arguments, which CBI sources say will be short, the judge will reserve his order. "We're reasonably certain Lalu will be convicted,'' says a senior CBI officer. He argues that in the past year, there have been over 100 convictions in the case, which relates to the fraudulent withdrawal of over Rs 37 crore from Chaibasa treasury in West Singhbhum. Lalu, however, remains unfazed. "You know what happened in the disproportionate assets case. Rabri Devi and I were given a clean chit by Special CBI Judge Muni Lal Paswan on December 18, 2006. The Supreme Court, in its April 1, 2010, judgment, put its seal of approval on our exoneration. The trial in the fodder scam case will meet a similar fate. I have full faith in the judiciary," he told INDIA TODAY at his 10, Circular Road residence in Patna. Clad in a white khadi vest, with a white dhoti tied high on his waist, he looked relaxed. The sprawling bungalow is located right across 1, Anne Marg, the official residence of Bihar's chief minister, over which the Rabri Devi-Lalu duo held sway for 15 long years before Nitish dislodged them in November 2005. In May 2009, Lalu lost the railway ministry at the Centre as well. For the first time in 19 years, the RJD strongman was out of power at both the Centre and the state. He has been in political wilderness ever since. The RJD chief is now on a mission to reclaim his political and social base in Bihar. He spends more time crisscrossing the state, reconnecting with its people. Gone is the swagger and the arrogance that had come to be associated with him and his party during their long stint in power. He is a much-mellowed man, fighting for survival in a state that was once considered his fiefdom. To test political waters in the state, RJD and its al-

"Nitish is Natwarlal. He deceives people and has nothing to show. Not a single paisa of investment has come into Bihar in past seven years."
liance partner, the Lok Janshakti Party, organised a statewide bandh on October 15 to protest against the police firing at Madhubani on October 12 which claimed the lives of three people. His wit is intact. He is using his earthy and rustic charm to great effect to persuade people to give him one more chance. He talks the language of inclusion to dispel popular perception that RJD has become a one-caste party. "It is a propaganda by my rivals. I have always taken all castes and communities along, although my focus all along has been to uplift the conditions of the underprivileged and the minorities. I have never done or said anything against upper castes,'' he says, responding to charges that he has only disdain for the upper castes. "I never gave the slogan: `Bhoora Bal kat do'," he adds. Bhoora Bal is an acronym for Bihar's four upper

NITISH ADDRESSES A RALLY DURING HIS ADHIKAR YATRA IN BEGUSARAI

castes: Bhumihars, Rajputs, Brahmins and Kayasthas. The slogan was attributed to him during the postMandal days of the early 1990s. The RJD chief pokes fun at Nitish and his yatra for pressurising Delhi to give the status of a `special category state' to Bihar. Lalu says it was he and his wife Rabri Devi, the then chief minister, who had first made the demand after Bihar's bifurcation in 2000. As proof, he refers to a frontpage story carried by a local daily on February 4, 2002. "During a visit to Patna by the then prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Rabri Devi had made a strong case for getting Bihar recognised as a special category state. Atalji initially said he would consider the demand, but under Nitish's pressure, offered a special financial package instead,'' Lalu alleges. "Nitish is playing Natwarlal (the notorious Bihari conman). He deceives the people. He has nothing to show for development. His tall claims on law and order have taken a knock in the last year. Not a single paisa of investment has come into the state in the seven years of his reign. Corruption is rampant. Bureaucrats call the shots,'' says Lalu.

34

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

Na tion
He also made light of rumours of an impending JD(U)-BJP split. "All these years, Nitish Kumar sat on RSS'S lap, allowing communal forces to get stronger. Now he is talking of a divorce. Sau chuha kha kar, bilaiya bani bhaktin (After eating a hundred rats, the cat seeks repentance before God),'' he said, reeling out a popular Bhojpuri proverb. In Lalu's new avatar, development has replaced caste as the main political idiom. In his new incarnation, he has made a concerted effort to distance himself from his two brothers-in-law, Sadhu and Subhash Yadav, and other controversial elements who engineered his downfall. He cites his record as railway minister to project his image as a man who means business, and promises to take Bihar on a new path. To take on Nitish, Lalu is trying to

WESTBENGAL

ABHIJIT MUKHERJEE AND WIFE AFTER HIS WIN

On the Edge of Oblivion
Abhijit Mukherjee's slender margin and BJP's rise in Jangipur bypoll suggest more trouble for Congress
he Congress victory in the bypoll to the Jangipur Lok Sabha seat, represented by Pranab Mukherjee till he became President, has disturbing undercurrents for the party. The most surprising subterranean presence is that of BJP, whose candidate Sudhangshu Biswas secured 85,887 votes, against 330,383 votes by CPI(M)'S Muzaffar Hussain and 332,919 votes by eventual winner, Pranab's son Abhijit Mukherjee. With the state's ruling Trinamool Congress (TMC) refraining from contesting, the eventual margin of victory--a mere 2,536 votes--is indicative of TMC votes going everywhere, in the absence of specific instructions from the party. Sixty per cent polling was recorded in the October 10 by-election, as against 84.71 per cent in the 2009 General Elections. Three Muslim candidates, one of them independent and the other two from Welfare Party of India and People's Democratic Conference of India, parties known only to this part of the world, together polled a substantial 65,000 votes. Muslims comprise 71 per cent of the electorate in Jangipur. With CPI(M), too, fielding a minority candidate, BJP'S 8 per cent uptick signals a polarisation. "Secular voters find Mamata

"Nitish sat on RSS's lap for years. Now he wants divorce. Sau chuha kha kar bilaiya bani bhaktin (After eating a hundred rats, the cat seeks repentance). "
forge an alliance with the Congress, but has been rebuffed in his efforts so far. "To keep communal forces at bay, it's essential that all secular forces should come together," he says. To large sections of the electorate, though, memories of his stint in power are still fresh. "I'll never vote RJD. Patna was so unsafe during RJD rule that rapes and abductions were the order of the day. Girls could not venture out, and people were afraid to step outside after 7 p.m. How can we forget those days ?'' says the manager of a nationalised bank in Patna. "Nitish is doing a better job. Roads have improved. Many rural poor people have houses. Girls have got free bicycles," says Rajo Devi, an EBC (Extremely Backward Class) from Hardia village in Sitamarhi. Vindication is still some distance away for the former chief minister. 

T

Banerjee's minority appeasement repelling. The polarisation is crystallising fast among semi-urban voters," says political analyst and BJP leader Tathagata Roy. Of 1.24 million voters in Jangipur, around 100,000 are migrants, with 800,000 bidi workers. The narrow win is a setback for Congress strongman in Murshidabad MP Adhir Chowdhury. Says BJP'S Roy: "Congress has lost credibility, CPI(M) has lost its vote bank and people are disgusted with TMC. Adhir Chowdhury is a dwindling force. Had he been as strong as he used to be, there would have been no division of votes." Partha Chatterjee, West Bengal's commerce and industries minister, feels vindicated at TMC'S parting of ways with the Congress: "The result would have been different had TMC fought. Congress would have vanished in its bastion. The party should learn that it can't move ahead without Mamata's support." Chowdhury says, "Abhijit and Pranabda are like David and Goliath. Also, it was difficult to convince people to vote for Abhijit, after the diesel price hike took a toll on farmers." CPI(M) leader Mohammed Salim sees the result as proof that "the anti-communist wave is now over". by Manogya Loiwal

36

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

PTI

