UP FRONT

SHUJA NAWAZ

urry up and wait! This seems to be the order of Trunk Road. Much more than any New Silk Road initiative the day as Pakistan and India take tentative steps that will become moribund if Pakistan remains a recalcitowards normalcy. After much trumpeting of the trant barrier between Central Asia and India. Common visa accord signed in Islamabad after External Affairs prosperity should contribute to creating security over time. People on both sides of the border appear ready. In Minister S.M. Krishna's visit and discussions with Pakistan's Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar, the maw of the Lahore not long ago, a lawyer swept aside the curtains in bureaucracy appears to have swallowed the agreement and his office and showed me a new building going up next to refuses to release it. The latest out of Islamabad is that the his offices near the high court. No, this was not a new set of Cabinet still has to approve the agreement. Surely, the offices for the legal eagles. Rather the owner had told him paperwork for such an approval must have been readied that he was building a hotel in anticipation of the flood of Indian visitors across the Wagah border. Trade follows peobefore the accord was signed. Conspiracy theorists will have a field day as to the cause ple and vice versa. Studies, among others presented by of the delay. Even the often-blamed Pakistan military Mohsin Khan at the South Asia Center of the Atlantic favours ending the "no-war no-peace" situation with Council, indicate that potential for trade between India and India, so it can concentrate on the domestic threat of mili- Pakistan, at the same level as in 1947, could touch $100 biltancy. Meanwhile, people who wish to travel from both sides lion (Rs 500,000 crore) a year, making Pakistan one of the of this fractious border remain in suspended animation. top three trading partners of India. Up from some $5-6 bilOverseas consulates of both countries have yet to receive lion (Rs 25,000-30,000 crore), of total trade via official, inorders to ease up on restrictions. Not that the new accord direct, and illegal channels today. The window of opportunity for politicians on both sides represents a radical leap forward. It is marginal at best and it appears rather than simplifying the visa regime, officials of this divide is narrow. The elderly leaders may be losing decided to make a dog's breakfast out of it, creating new cat- touch with their increasing youthful populations. Pakistan's egories and slicing and dicing the different visas so they will median age is 21 years, India's 25 years. The average age of a minister in the Indian Cabinet keep the "babus" occupied. Despite SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com is reportedly 65 years. Pakistan these hurdles, bravo to those offimay have the edge in that departcials who keep issuing visas, often at ment, as the gap between their two short notice, on their own recogniforeign ministers indicates. But it sance. And bravo to the home minis time the politicians took action istries that have not taken them to that would give their youth a task for their transgressions. greater chance to carve out a On a recent visit to Pakistan and peaceful economic future. Indian India, I was struck by the hundreds Deputy National Security Adviser of Indian visitors to Lahore under Lata Reddy talked at a gathering I the aegis of Aman-ki-Asha for attended in New Delhi about the different events, including a high need for India to create an "intetempo India-Pakistan Management grated neighbourhood" if it is to Summit. The sentimental outpoursuccessfully face an uncertain fuing on the final day of this summit, ture attended by "complexity". She where I was also asked to speak, was warned of the nexus between cliastounding. "Jinay Lahore nahin mate change, rising populations, waikhiya oh jammiah hi nahin and increasing inequalities. Amen (Whoever has not seen Lahore has to that. War has failed both India yet to be born!)" seemed to be the and Pakistan. As most of my interPunjabi slogan of the day. If India and Pakistan are to expand their If India and Pakistan are to expand their locutors in Pakistan and India on this visit told me, it is time now to economic horizons, then they need economic horizons, they need only wage peace. only start in their own neighbourstart in their own neighbourhood rather hood rather than reach out across than reach out across the seas. Let the the seas. Let the business sector take Shuja Nawaz is director of the South business sector take the lead. This the lead. This makes economic and Asia Center at the Atlantic Council political sense, as it will empower makes economic and political sense, as in Washington DC and author of their people and create jobs and it will empower their people and create Crossed Swords: Pakistan, Its Army, trade opportunities along the Grand and the Wars Within jobs along the Grand Trunk Road.

LET'S WAGE CROSS-BORDER PEACE NOW H

12

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

