Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

ROMANCING THE SULTAN
This entertaining biography of Harun al Rashid is a hall of mirrors which reflects the great paradoxes of power and the sweep of oriental philosophy
By M.J. Akbar

THE CALIPH'S SPLENDOUR: ISLAM AND THE WEST IN THE GOLDEN AGE OF BAGHDAD
by Benson Bobrick Simon & Schuster Price: $ 28 Pages: 284 BETWEEN THE COVERS The bookhighlights the capricious wisdom of sultans blessed and then haunted byan absolute authoritythat made them masters of life and death through nothing more substantial than a delivered word.

Compare these truths, mentioned by Benson Bobrick, with widely-held assumptions. 1. Most Muslim rulers actively discouraged conversion of conquered populations to Islam, and permitted them to live by the norms of their faith. (They had a good reason; they were interested in higher tax collection.) 2. Baghdad was chosen as the site of a new capital of the Abbasid dynasty by the Caliph Mansur because: a) a Christian prophecy foretold that a city built there would become famous through the world; b) it was well situated as a hub for trade between Egypt, Syria and Turkey; c) it was once the pride of the Old Testament king Nebuchadnezzar; and d) it was free of mosquitoes. Answer: All four. 3. Caliph Mansur's personal astrologer was a Jew, Mashallah, who determined the auspicious moment when Baghdad's foundation stone was laid. 4. Harun al Rashid, the most famous of the Abbasid Caliphs, had a brother named after Moses (Moosa) and another after Jesus (Isa). He was named after Aaron (Harun). Despite being a younger son his father placed him in the line of succession because his horoscope predicted a golden age under his rule. Harun's role model was the Persian monarch Darius; he introduced polo, a Persian game, to Arabs and promoted chess. His personal doctor was Jibril (or Gabriel) Bakhtishou, a Nestorian Christian. 5. A contemporary Arab proverb said, "He who has two wives leads an anxious life; he who has three is embittered; he who has four might as well be dead." A second was equally popular: "A table without vegetables is like an old man without wise thoughts." 6. The most powerful family in Harun's reign was that of the Barmaks (Barmecides, in the English translation of Arabian Nights). They were sons of Khalid al-Barmak, a Buddhist scholar and noble from Balkh in Afghanistan, who had converted in 705 AD. His son Yahya, Harun's Vizier, was a renowned scholar of Hinduism, medicine, astronomy, astrology and physics. Harun invited Brahmin scholars to Baghdad; along with texts,

they brought the eggplant, now intrinsic to Arab cooking, and sugarcane. In turn, Arab scholars went to Benaras to study Sanskrit and astronomy. Among the texts translated into Arabic were an account of Buddha's previous lives and the Bible. 7. The Jewish colony in Harun's Baghdad had 10 rabbinical schools and 23 synagogues which helped take their tradition and philosophy to south Europe. The East Syrian Church flourished; other Christian sects included Jacobites and Nestorians, whose missionaries were sent as far as China. Mandeans (followers of John the Baptist) and Sabians (who worshipped stars) were among the other well-represented denominations. Christian holidays were shared by Muslims as well. The most important secular holiday was Navroz, to mark the arrival of spring, when people splashed water on one another and distributed sweets. 8. One grandson of Harun became a Sufi ascetic. Once, Harun angrily told this grandson that he had disgraced Harun among kings; the ascetic replied that Harun had disgraced him among

saints. He left the palace, worked as a labourer and died in poverty. When he died, however, Harun buried him with royal honours. 9. All that you know about Ali Baba, forty thieves and dancing girls called Marjina, is true. There were criminal brotherhoods; prostitutes wore red leather trousers, with daggers in the belt, and approached potential clients with a discreet cough. Music and poetry were the highest art forms at court. 10. Harun wanted to build a canal linking the Red Sea to the Mediterranean (today's Suez), but was dissuaded for strategic reasons--for it would open a route for hostile armies from the West. 11. In 791 AD, Harun made education the formal enterprise of his empire, and a hadith of the Prophet its motto: "The ink of a scholar is more sacred than the blood of a martyr." There were more than a hundred bookshops in Baghdad alone. The first paper mill was established in Samarkand with the help of Chinese craftsmen captured in the battle of Talas in 751 AD. In 794 AD, Jafar al Barmak, the trusted Vizier, set up a mill in Baghdad, and introduced paper to governance--and with it, presumably, was born the file, and red tape. 12. Petroleum has been familiar to Iraq from ancient times. It was believed that Noah built his ark in Najaf, and sealed his boat with coal pitch. Any more of these pearls, and you might be dissuaded from reading this entertaining biography of one of the fabled names in world history and literature, Harun al Rashid. But this is only an appetiser. There is much to feed on, not merely from the menu of memory,

(RIGHT) HARUN AS A MATURE CALIPH AT THE AGE OF ONLY 46; ABBASID HORSEMEN IN A TWELFTH CENTURY ENGRAVING BYAL-WASITI

but also as a gentle guide to the present. The style might be called double-narrative, telling the story through stories; events are propelled by anecdotes and character fleshed out in conversation. The book becomes a dynamic hall of mirrors which reflects great paradoxes of power, the spirit and sweep of oriental philosophy, and the capricious wisdom of sultans blessed and then haunted by an absolute authority that made them masters of life and death through nothing more substantial than a delivered word. And yet the abiding takeaway is not the glory of life at the peak of human possibilities, but the relentless certainty of death which makes all glory an illusion. As death approached the Caliph Mansur, he turned to his chamberlain, Rabi ibn Yunus, and remarked how sweet the world would be were it not for death. Rabi dryly reminded him that were it not for his father's death, Mansur would not be on the throne. But there is also a fate worse than death; the sudden fall from a pinnacle. Harun's reign is stained by his decision, taken through tormented months but executed on one dramatic night, to destroy the most loyal family in his empire, which held the reins of state from the moment Yahya al Barmak guided Harun to the throne against rivals in 786 AD. No one was closer to Harun's affections than Yahya and his sons, who ran government with exemplary ability till they made the inevitable mistake of succeeding too well. The blood-soaked night in January 803 AD began with Harun ordering his incredulous but obedient courtier Masrur to bring Jafar al Barmak's head. Harun's guilt never quite left him, although the Barmaks had enough enemies to produce a litany of justifications, among them that they were infidels in disguise. Six troubled years later, death came to claim Harun himself, announcing its presence through a nightmare. Harun saw a vision of an arm under his bed, holding a fistful of red earth, and heard a voice saying, "This is the soil in which you will lie." He was headed towards the Persian city of Tus, whose earth was red. In Tus, Harun supervised the preparation of his grave, and chose the sheet that would be his last shirt. As the Quran was recited he drifted in and out of consciousness. He called for a blanket; his last words, to an attendant, said with a laugh, were, "Remember the poet's lines: `Those belonging to a great race/Must bravely bear the hardest fate.'" He was only 46, but a portrait shows a very, very old man. Harun would have relished the irony of a wandering future poet who also lived in Tus, Omar Khayyam: The worldly hope men set their hearts upon Turns ashes--or it prospers; and anon, Like snow upon the desert's dusty face Lighting a little hour or two--is gone. 

86

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

87

NEW

