Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE KILLER INSTINCT
Anita Nair's new novel is a psychological thriller set in the dark alleys of Bangalore
By Madhulika Liddle

CUT LIKE WOUND
byAnita Nair HarperCollins Price: RS 299 Pages: 358 BETWEEN THE COVERS Nair introduces us to a police detective who is commonplace,human,a man one can relate to. Inspector Gowda is 49, going to seed,and often at odds with those around him.

ugust 1, the first day of Ramzan. In a secluded room, a man looks into a mirror and begins to dress: Makeup, attar, a sari, expensive pearl earrings. Before the mirror, `Bhuvana' comes to life and steps out into the bazaars of Bangalore's Shivaji Nagar. What Bhuvana wants, she nearly gets: A passing man is attracted to this elusive woman--but another passer-by makes the mistake of pointing out that Bhuvana is no woman. For that, the interloper is killed. A blunt instrument thwacks into his skull, and a string coated with ground glass leaves a `cut-like wound' around his throat. He is burnt alive, his body dumped outside town. Enter Inspector Borei Gowda. Anita Nair's Cut Like Wound stretches over a period of a little over a month, beginning with that dramatic first evening of Ramzan, and ending with St Mary's Feast. Between the two celebrations, Nair introduces us to a police detective who is commonplace, human, a man one can relate to. Inspector Gowda is 49, going to seed, and often at odds with those around him: His wife Mamtha, a doctor with whom he has a long-distance (and distant) relationship; their son Roshan, a medical student who lives with Mamtha in Hassan; the irritating ACP Vidyaprasad; Gowda's new junior, SI Santosh; informers; suspects; and sundry relatives. Nair weaves a fastpaced, engrossing tale of suspense as Gowda and Santosh investigate. More corpses turn up, as do clues, sometimes serendipitous. But just as Gowda is getting his teeth into this case, personal dilemmas arise: Urmila, the exflame Gowda has not seen in 27 years, suddenly returns--and

A

brings in her wake an emotional upheaval. In stark contrast to Gowda's relatively mundane existence is the grim world of the murderer. Nair introduces us to him in the first chapter, and as the book progresses, we get better acquainted. His fantasies, emotions and hopes are etched in a way that is chilling yet oddly touching. We get to see murders take place before Gowda does; we get an insight into the mind of Bhuvana--and yet some mysteries remain till almost the end. What, for instance, is Bhuvana's connection with the wealthy, corrupt Corporator Ravikumar, who lives in a mansion as grand as the Mysore Palace? Even though there is plenty of police procedure (meticulously researched, it appears), this is not an old-fashioned whodunit. And therein lies the strength of Cut Like Wound. It is not just a story of another smart cop on the trail of another serial killer. It is more a story that explores the mind of a killer, even tempts the reader to sympathise. All the time, without letting go of the fact that Gowda is the true protagonist. The weakness is in the depiction of Gowda himself. While there is abundant (even superfluous) detail about the lives of minor characters-- Gowda's old classmate Michael Hunt is a case in point--Gowda himself is not completely explained. Who really is Gowda? The incorruptible cop or the one who called in favours to have his son admitted to medical college (and was able to cough up Rs 5 lakh for it)? The middle-class, middle-aged man, the epitome of an Indian inspector, or the one who studied at St Joseph's with the likes of the sophisticated, Audidriving, whisky-guzzling Urmila? There are intriguing gaps here. One can only hope that the tagline of the novel, `Introducing Inspector Gowda', means there is more to come. Gowda is a character worth knowing better. 
SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

88

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

