SCHOOLS

Special

XLRI, Jamshedpur 4

Business WITH ETHICS
By Amitabh Srivastava

Courses are updated regularly. Managerial ethics is a core subject. At XLRI, the aim is to create leaders with high business principles.

arian Nicolai, 23, a human resource management (HRM) student from IESEG, Paris, had the chance to study at "better known business schools in the US in culturally easier-to-acclimatise social settings". It was part of a student exchange programme. She chose XLRI and calls it the "right decision". "My experience at XLRI has been amazing. I would have never understood the economy and market sentiment of developing nations had I not come here," she says. "Our teaching methodology is essentially interactive. It helps students build and augment understanding to successfully control real-life management issues," says Pranabesh Ray, 59, the dean (academics), an XLRI alumnus. Set up in 1949, XLRI was placed fourth in India by the Business TodayNielsen B-schools Survey. For XLRI, 2012 has been a defining year. The institute has undergone a rebranding process this year. In addition to the logo, it also has a new descriptor: Xavier School of Management, and a new tagline, `For the Greater Good'. "XLRI is constantly evolving to attract the best students, the most accomplished faculty, and also the most reputed organisations for placement," says Sunil Varughese, chief brand and sustainability officer. This year, 73 companies including Coca-Cola, Deutsche Bank, Google, McKinsey & Co and HSBC made 284 job offers to XLRI students. XLRI is also in the process of setting up a new campus in the national capital region of Delhi by 2015 and a second campus in Jamshedpur by 2013. The second campus in Jamshedpur will

M

XLRI STUDENTS WITH PRANABESH RAY, DEAN (ACADEMICS)
SUVASHIS MULLICK/www.indiatodayimages.com

70

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

SCHOOLS

Special
G U E S T C O L U M N Vineet Nayar

create an additional 120 seats. The Delhi campus will also have an intake of 120 students. At present, XLRI accommodates 240 students. From the next academic session, XLRI will also launch a global MBA programme in collaboration with Weatherhead School of Management of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, US, and School of Economics and Management of Tongji University in Shanghai, China. XLRI started its inter- national programme in 2001 in collaboration with Al Abbas Institute of Technology in Dubai. It has since developed academic collaborations and exchange partnerships with institutes around the world. In 2010, XLRI also started a customised postgraduate course in collaboration with the Apollo Hospitals Group to enhance managerial skills of healthcare professionals. The institute has been continuously evolving. The faculty keeps updating both pedagogy and course content, and the curriculum is updated every second or third year, with inputs from the business world. But the institution has remained wedded to its core values of business ethics, says Ray. "We don't just create business leaders for tomorrow, we create leaders with high business ethics. Managerial ethics is a mandatory subject. A three-day village exposure programme is a must for students. Creating values of ethics, integrity and excellence are our hallmark," says the dean. These values are indelibly engraved in the minds of students. Second-year HRM student Krishna Chaitanya, 21, interned in Mumbai to help an NGO scale up night schools for poor children. Anubhuti Jain, 21, also a second-year HRM student, spearheaded the efforts of SIGMA, a student group, to collect Rs 2.20 lakh to fund the studies of 53 tribal children. It is difficult to get into XLRI. About 100,000 students apply every year. Based on their Xavier Admission Test (XAT) scores--a minimum 90 percentile score in XAT, or 650 in GMAT is needed to be shortlisted--2,500 are selected for group discussions and personal interviews. From that, only 240 are selected. For the students, the XLRI experience is worth the labour. 

Learning Management IN THE MIDDLE OFNOWHERE
At XLRI, thinking irrationally is encouraged. Students also learn the value of working for society rather than individual gain.
ack in 1983 when I had enrolled in XLRI, despite its eminence of being one of the most prestigious management education institutions in India, the question I was asked most often was "Where the hell is XLRI?" I was a bit disappointed by that query initially, until I discovered in my 36-hour train ride to Jamshedpur that "middle of nowhere" is actually what makes XLRI so special. Once you get to XLRI, you have nowhere else to go. Professors, students and even the chaiwallah have to create a community amongst themselves. Camaraderie blooms in this environment which is more collaborative than competitive and more emotional than just practical. It is an oasis of selfdiscovery which "changes lives" and creates lifelong friendships. I've had the privilege of not just studying but also working with many XL-ers and have observed four distinct attributes that set them apart. The first is leading by heart. You can become a true leader only when people follow you, and that is only possible when your colleagues "feel" for what you stand for. XLRI excels in bringing this leadership style centrestage because DIGRESSING many students major in HR. FROM CONFORMED Second, it cultivates a unique NOTIONS IS mental agility to deal with adversity CELEBRATED AT and connect dots that others cannot connect. The 45 degrees sumXLRI MORE THAN mers, poor electricity supply, food CONFORMING best left undisturbed and impossible TO THEM. train reservations become irrelevant as the goal of learning becomes the focus. This attitude gains tremendous relevance in today's challenged world where leaders whose brains are wired to seek opportunity in adversity are more likely to succeed. Third, it encourages irrationality in thinking. Digressing from conformed notions is celebrated here--irrationality in your expectation from yourself, your team, your idea, your company, and even the world at large. Last, because of Jesuit origins, XLRI underlines the value of working for the greater good of society and not just economic gains. Leaders with a higher purpose have an inner strength and a unique moral compass which guides them effectively through hopeless situations. Coming back now to the question of "Where the hell is XLRI?" Over the years, XLRI has made its geographical or brand or rating-based associations completely irrelevant. What has instead come to define it more prominently are the thousands of leaders it has shaped. Thus the more relevant question to ask now is--"Who the hell is an XL-er?" I hope you will know one when you meet one.

B

Vineet Nayar is vice-chairman and CEO of HCL Technologies

72

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

