Nation

UTTAR PRADESH

THE PRODIGALWANTS TO RETURN
Amar Singh praises Mulayam, but that isn't enough to get him back into the SP fold
YASHBANT NEGI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

when he told voters how ay what you will but AMAR SINGH Mulayam had betrayed him there's no disputing and was "dishonest both in his Amar Singh's sense of emotions and his politics". political timing. Languishing Amar Singh's poll campaign on the sidelines of power, the speeches used to end with a former Samajwadi Party (SP) general secretary has been warning: "If, after all this, the watching UPA Government's people of Uttar Pradesh are decline as keenly as Mulaready to coronate Mulayam yam Singh Yadav's rising Singh as the emperor and graph. And he knows that if Akhilesh as Shahzada Salim, he wants to make a comethen Uttar Pradesh deserves back, now is the time to it." Now suddenly, both the make his move. tone and grammar of Amar And what more auspiSingh's rhetoric has changed. cious a place to start than He points out that "no one had Varanasi. On September 22, approached me (to join SP) and I have not applied" but is while visiting the temple quick to add, "The bitterness town, Amar Singh made it a has vanished." point to praise Mulayam's The party is not impressed. "political maturity" in supporting the UPA. As Amar SP spokesman Rajendra ChauSingh knew it would, this dhary refused to comment, immediately sparked off saying "the party doesn't pay speculation of a reconciliaany sort of attention to his statement". A senior Cabinet tion between the two old AMAR SINGH IS HOPING MULAYAM minister in the SP government friends-turned-antagonists. said Amar Singh's praise for When INDIA TODAY asked MAY NEED A NETWORKER TO HELP Mulayam is a strategic ploy to him about his sudden HIM COBBLE NUMBERS TOGETHER test the mood in SP towards change of mood, Amar Singh replied, "Common contacts him. "If Akhilesh calls him unIN THE NEXT GENERAL ELECTIONS. tell me that both Mulayam cle it is out of respect, not afand Akhilesh have been talking good you are a non-entity like I.K. Gujral or fection," says an SP MP. of me, they are nostalgic about the H.D. Deve Gowda and no one feels The guarded responses do not time we spent together. So if someone threatened by you. The other is if you make for good news for the Thakur on talks good of me, why should I talk ill secure a massive mandate like Indira political sabbatical. Amar Singh is still of them?" He added, "Even today Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi. I don't think the one name that unites SP's warring Akhilesh says I will always be his un- Mulayam is a toothless politician, leaders. From Akhilesh Yadav to Azam cle. If this is so, then how do I deny that everyone will feel threatened by him. Khan to Shivpal Yadav to Ram Gopal It is unlikely that he will be the unan- Yadav--all of them oppose him. Even he is my nephew?" Political posturing aside, Amar imous choice of all parties. He will if Mulayam still harbours goodwill toSingh knows that with the next need the numbers." wards an old friend, he is not going to Only, there is a slight catch. SP has risk revolt in his party by bringing back General Elections threatening to throw up a hung Parliament, Mula- not forgotten that barely six months Amar Singh. It seems Mulayam unwityam is the best catch in town. He is ago, Amar Singh fought an entire tingly wrote the epitaph on their hoping that his old friend might need election campaign in Uttar Pradesh relationship when he told reporters in a networker to help him cobble the with just one goal in mind: To ensure November 2011, "Amar Singh ka numbers together. As he pointed out that Mulayam and his son don't re- adhyay samapt ho chuka hai (Amar quite aptly, "There are two ways you turn to power. SP leaders have not for- Singh's chapter in SP is over now)." can become prime minister. One is if gotten his rather colourful campaign by Priya Sahgal and Ashish Misra

S

44

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

NEW

