Na tion

MAHARASHTRA
war launched the Rashtrawadi Yuvati Congress, a young women's wing headed by Sule, as an official wing of NCP. Sule has held rallies in various Lok Sabha constituencies across the state, in a bid to reach out to the grassroots. "During its launch, Sharad Pawar spoke of the power of women leaders such as Mayawati. This lead to speculation that he was promoting Supriya as Ajit's alternative," says a state Congress MP. The more telling sign of succession was when Sule's father vacated the post of president of Yesh-

CRACKS IN THE HOU SE OFPAWAR
Ajit Pawar's resignation is a threat to Sharad Pawar's succession plans as much as it is a challenge thrown at the Congress
By Kiran Tare and Priya Sahgal
MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com T.NARAYAN/ www.indiatodayimages.com

n September 24, Prithviraj Chavan, the Maharashtra chief minister, met Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar at the latter's Delhi home. Pawar casually referred to recent stories that targeted Ajit Pawar, his nephew and state deputy chief minister. The unstated implication was obvious: He thought Chavan had leaked the stories to the press. The Chief Minister adopted an equally casual tone and replied that in the age of Right to Information, nothing was secret anymore. Less than 24 hours later, Chavan was at the Mumbai airport on his way to board a plane to Pune, when a letter was delivered to his office and accepted by his Principal Secretary A.K. Jain. It was from Ajit Pawar, tendering his resignation. An hour later, all the other 19 NCP ministers in the state government handed in their resignations, not to Chavan but to NCP state unit chief Madhukar Pichad. A day later, 16 independent MLAs who support the Congress-NCP government affirmed that they would continue their support only if Ajit Pawar remained in the council of ministers. It was obvious who was calling the shots, and for once, it was not the senior Pawar. At a press conference in Mantralaya, Mumbai, soon after his resignation, Ajit Pawar said he had quit so that he would not be in a position to influence the ongoing enquiry against him in a multi-crore irrigation scam. He is accused of irregularities in clearing irriga-

O

A TURF WAR IS RAGING WITHIN NCP OVER WHO WILL BE SHARAD PAWAR'S HEIR. ON ONE SIDE IS PAWAR'S DAUGHTER SUPRIYA SULE; ON THE OTHER HIS NEPHEW AJIT.

SIPRA DAS/ www.indiatodayimages.com

tion projects worth Rs 20,000 crore, during his tenure as water resources minister between 1999 and 2009. It is alleged that he bent rules and allowed tenders for these projects without getting the requisite clearance from the governing body of the Vidarbha Irrigation Development Council. In May this year, the Chief Minister announced that he would bring out a white paper on the scam, probing the years when Ajit Pawar held the portfolio. More than the white paper, what

irked Ajit Pawar was that documents incriminating him were being selectively leaked to a prominent national daily. NCP workers blame the Chief Minister's Office for the sustained campaign against their leader. A defiant Ajit Pawar claims his actions are within the frame of law. "I do not like keeping decisions on files pending. So I cleared the projects on the demand of the Opposition parties. The governor has given the minister special rights to clear the projects," he said at the Mantralaya

press meet. Ajit Pawar has refused to withdraw his resignation until the contentious white paper is presented and he is cleared of all allegations. The enquiry has been on for the last four months. Why did Ajit Pawar wait so long to confront his alliance partner? One reason is that his resignation is as much a message to the Congress as it is to his uncle. Ever since NCP supremo Sharad Pawar indicated that daughter Supriya Sule could be his political heir, his nephew has been trying to assert

(FROM LEFT) AJIT PAWAR, SHARAD PAWAR AND SUPRIYA SULE

control over the party, with some degree of success. Fifty of NCP'S 62 MLAs owe their allegiance to Ajit Pawar and not his uncle. Perhaps realising this, Sharad Pawar brought his daughter to Delhi, giving up his own, carefully nurtured Baramati constituency for her. "There has always been a division of turf. Supriya Sule at the Centre and Ajit Pawar at the state," says an NCP MP. However, in June this year, Sharad Pa-

wantrao Chavan Pratisthan trust on September 21 for her. For the record, Ajit Pawar says, "Pawar vs Pawar is created by the media. We have given saheb (Sharad Pawar) the right to take the final decision. There is no friction." Sule is always the first to scotch such speculation. The 43-year-old refers to Ajit Pawar as dada (elder brother). She claims they talk every day, but when asked about what they discuss, she says: "It is a conversation between a brother and a sister. You don't need to

40

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

41

NEW

NEW

Na tion

MAHARASHTRA
VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

know what we talk about." The two cousins are worlds apart. Dressed in ethnic chic, the affable Sule is comfortable with limelight. She is building her image as a woman with a cause--women's rights, education and malnutrition being main concerns. The telegenic Sule is the one explaining NCP'S stand on various issues to the media nowadays. In contrast, her 53-year-old cousin is a taciturn presence. Before joining politics, he ran the family's business of milk and poultry. His conversation tends to be blunt and monosyllabic. After becoming the deputy chief minisBHASKAR PAUL/ www.indiatodayimages.com

HOURS AFTER BEING ASSURED BY SONIA THAT HIS JOB WAS SAFE, CHIEF MINISTER PRITHVIRAJ CHAVAN FACED MUTINY FROM HIS ALLYAND DEPUTY, AJIT PAWAR OF NCP.
ter in 2010, he appointed a tutor to teach him English, but soon gave up. There has been no direct confrontation between the two cousins. In 2009, when the Congress appointed Ashok Chavan as the state chief minister, Pawar opted for Chhagan Bhujbal as NCP'S candidate for deputy chief minister, overlooking his nephew's claims. In 2010, when Congress replaced Ashok Chavan with Prithviraj, the young Pawar orchestrated a show of strength among NCP MLAs, and ensured his uncle

made him the deputy chief minister. Sharad Pawar underplayed the mass resignations of the NCP ministers by telling the media that "my party workers would have done the same for me under the circumstances". He also said the state government was "stable". By engineering the mass resignation drama, Ajit Pawar has ensured that the Maharashtra government is no longer as stable as his uncle would like to claim. Sharad Pawar has also told Chavan to accept his nephew's resignation. Acknowledging Ajit Pawar's clout, he has also said that NCP will not be filling the deputy chief minister's slot. Ajit Pawar has not resigned as NCP legislative party leader. He has even recommended names for the two portfolios that he has vacated--finance and power. This is significant because portfolio allocation is usually the older Pawar's prerogative. Party sources also point out that Ajit Pawar was unhappy with the tame end to the recent NCP revolt against the Congress. In August this year, Sharad Pawar and Praful Patel had resigned from the Union Cabinet, claiming they had been treated shoddily by the Congress both in Maharashtra and Delhi. The nephew had been pushing for the chief minister to be changed, but the uncle did not take the demand to its logical end. Ajit Pawar had hoped Chavan would be shifted to Delhi in the impending Cabinet reshuffle. But during his September 24 Delhi visit, Chavan met Sonia Gandhi, who assured him that, contrary to rumours, his job was safe. This was not good news for Ajit Pawar. Known for his rough-and-ready style of politics, Ajit Pawar had initially thought he would hold sway over the more gentlemanly Chavan. But he was wrong. Backed by 10 Janpath, the affable Chavan took on his deputy. He hit Ajit Pawar's money power by appointing administrators in the Maharashtra State Cooperative Bank in September 2011. This took control of the bank's funds away from Ajit Pawar. Ajit Pawar has hit back. Sharad Pawar and Chavan know that has he has the potential--and the chutzpah-- to wrest the state away from their control. The writing is on white paper. I

BJP

BJP LOOKS FOR VISION THING
The party is yet to firm up its vision document even as it claims to be battle-ready for the General Elections

By Bhavna Vij-Aurora
JP was all aggression and bluster at its National Executive meet that began in Surajkund on September 26. Sharpening its attack on the Congress-led UPA Government, party President Nitin Gadkari called it a "sinking ship" and spokesman Ravi Shankar Prasad claimed they were ready to go in for elections "at a month's notice". Brave words that belie the ground reality. Even as BJP opposed FDI in retail and criticised the Government for its anti-people policies, its own Vision Document 2025 got pushed back by another three months. BJP has struggled with its blueprint for a "resurgent India" in terms of governance and reforms since May 2010, when Gadkari conceived the idea. Ironically, the delay is due to a raging debate among its framers about the way ahead--free market or Gandhian socialism.

B

Gadkari had roped in several independent experts, setting up various groups to contribute to the document. One of them, headed by Rajya Sabha MP Rajeev Chandrasekhar, submitted its report last November. "Our focus was on reforms in governance and redefining the citizen-government relationship, where it's the citizen's right to demand, not beg, for a service," he said. The group favoured removal of all subsidies except to those who really need it, and recommended measures such as scrapping the Planning Commission "that has no relevance in today's world" as well as a centralised health ministry, which contributes little, health being a state subject. Columnist and BJP ideologue Sudheendra Kulkarni, who spearheads the Vision Document with Gadkari's associate Vinay Sahasrabuddhe, tries to downplay the differences. "A debate is natural," he says. Kulkarni prefers Antodaya, as envisioned by Deen

Dayal Upadhyaya, to socialism. "Economic growth is a must, but it should be Antodaya-oriented," he says. The Vision Document was to form the foundation of BJP'S poll manifesto, but the party will go to the Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka polls without it. "We probably underestimated the magnitude of the task. It requires more time," says Kulkarni. Gadkari says the document will be ready in the next three months. "Some chapters are already complete. I'll talk about them publicly on October 2. In economic reforms, highest priority will be given to agricultural growth. We have done it in BJP-run states. Growth rate of agriculture in Madhya Pradesh rose from 2.4 per cent two years ago to 18 per cent," he says. FDI in retail is not for India. Gadkari talks about his visit to a Walmart outlet during his two-week holiday in Canada in early September. "There were 80,000 items there, of which 70,000 were

ARUN JAITLEY, NITIN GADKARI AND ADVANI AT BJP'S SURAJKUND CONFERENCE

from China. Is this what we want in India?" he says. "Inflation and FDI in retail will destroy local traders and farmers," he adds. However, it is not a blanket opposition to FDI. "We don't oppose FDI in civil aviation. Wherever there is scope for positive gain, we must forge joint ventures with foreign firms," says Gadkari. Discussions within the party indicate that BJP has put the leadership crisis on the backburner. Some party members favoured going in for Lok Sabha polls without projecting a prime ministerial candidate. Others felt it would give the Congress undue advantage. "There are advantages and disadvantages in both cases. The options have to be weighed properly. A clearer picture will emerge only after the Gujarat polls. A lot depends upon Narendra Modi's performance," says a senior party leader. I

42

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

43

NEW

NEW

