Nei ghbours PAKISTAN
AFP

(FROM LEFT) ASIF ALI ZARDARI, HINA RABBANI KHAR, BILAWAL BHUTTO ZARDARI

IN PRAISE OFOLDER WOMEN
Racy gossip suggests Hina Rabbani Khar loves more than just her Birkin bags
By Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad

n September 23, an utterly nonviolent series of stories rocked Pakistan. A Bangladeshi website vouched that Pakistan's Foreign Minister and South Asia's best known unofficial ambassador of Birkin bags, Hina Rabbani Khar, had turned cougar. The object of her affections, the Daily Blitz claimed, was Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, 21, chairman of the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). Blitz stories ran for three days. It quoted Western intelligence sources to allege a torrid affair between the 34year-old mother of two and the young political scion, in detail worthy of a Lollywood potboiler. Rabbani Khar had written love notes to Bilawal, the website alleged; the duo were caught "in a compromising position" in the presidential palace by an enraged President

O

Asif Ali Zardari; that the foreign minister had precipitated a cold war between father and son; and that the lovestruck duo had planned to flee to Switzerland after the foreign minister divorced her husband Feroze Gulzar. By a strange coincidence, the three protagonists were in New York when this story hit the headlines. President Zardari addressed the United Nations General Assembly with Rabbani Khar and Bilawal in tow. Days earlier, Pakistan's foreign minister met lawmakers on Capitol Hill and, in press interviews, urged the US to relook at freedom of expression in the context of the anti-

BLITZ ALLEGED THAT RABBANI KHAR HAD WRITTEN LOVE NOTES TO BILAWAL BHUTTO.

Islamic film Innocence of Muslims. This is not the first time Pakistan's politicians have been involved in passionate affairs of the heart. In May this year, TopStoryOnline, a Pakistani website alleged that Punjab Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif had married a police officer's wife after cajoling her to divorce her husband. Blitz, a website which thrives on salacious stories on South Asian movie stars and politicians, had timed its "scoop" well. The alleged Rabbani Khar-Bilawal affair spread as a distraction through weeks of bad news in Pakistan: Twin fires that killed 289 people, terror strikes and ballooning 12-hour daily power cuts. The mainstream media steered clear, just as it has from every scandal involving the private lives of Pakistan's rich and famous. But the story was devoured by Facebook, Twitter and SMSes. A Twitter

50

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

Nei ghbours
user speculated on the foreign minister's new surname--Rabbani Khar Bhutto Zardari. "Sharif forced a married woman to divorce her husband. Now, Bilawal is doing the same," bemoaned Benish Burhan on Facebook. Bilawal's seemingly playboy life, cavorting with girlfriends in liquorfuelled parties during his Oxford days, added a dash of plausibility to the gossip. Rabbani Khar, the daughter of powerful Punjabi landlords, on the other hand, is ultra-conservative. She did not even appear in public when she first contested the polls a decade ago. Taking over as foreign minister last year, she made a huge style statement with a collection of Birkins, Roberto Cavalli sunglasses and pearl necklaces. Her Islamic headscarf, however, was always in place. Blitz also claimed Rabbani Khar's husband Gulzar had requested the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) for call data records of "two suspicious persons". FIA denied having received such a request. But by now the story was far too interesting and soap-operatic to allow facts to interfere. A source close to Asif Ali Zardari, considered no slouch in generating saucy stories, denied the report but said the head of state smelt a political conspiracy. "The president's attention was drawn to this story in New York. He smiled and said he was aware of those conspiring against the PPP leadership," the official said. A parliamentarian confirmed Rabbani Khar was closely associated with Asif Zardari's family, but ruled out a love affair. Rabbani Khar and Bilawal have been spotted in public but always in official engagements at an appropriate distance from each other. Both Rabbani Khar and Bilawal have been silent on the accusations, fuelling speculation in Pakistan. Rabbani Khar's family is incensed. "We plan to sue the tabloid for publishing such a baseless story," says cousin Mustafa Khar. "Hina belongs to a noble family and has a happy married life," he told INDIA TODAY. Ah, yes, consider it a public service to a nation beset by economic and social woes, severely in need of entertainment. I

APPEAL

ASSAM RELIEFFUND CARE TODAY

A N I N D I A T O D A Y G R O U P I N I T I AT I V E

CARE TODAY appeals to citizens for contributions
REFUGEES AT BHOTGAON RELIEF CAMP NEAR KOKRAJHAR

UB PHOTO

are Today appeals to peace-loving individuals and corporate houses to reach out to people affected by the violence in Assam and contribute actively to Assam Relief Fund. Due to the ongoing violence many innocent people are still living in relief camps under difficult conditions. According to the latest reports, 96 people are dead and around 250,000 people are still living in 219 camps. People living in relief camps as well as those who have opted to return to their communities need our support.

C

IMPACT OF VIOLENCE  96 people lost lives  Over 400,000 people have been displaced and are living in fear  219 relief camps still in operation  Displaced children need special care and assistance

All contributions above Rs 5,000 will be acknowledged by mentioning the names of the contributors in INDIATODAY.All donations qualify for income tax exemptions as per the provisions under section 80G of the Income Tax Act. As of September 18,2012,we have received Rs 282,379.We wish to acknowledge the following contributions of Rs 5,000 and above:
Ashfaque Khan K. Maddi Reddy Brig Jagir Singh N. Krishnamoorthy Sant Prasad Sinha Rs 5,000 Rs 25,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 10,000 Rs 5,100 Narmada Switchgear Pvt Ltd Rajiv Kumar Awasthi Mrs Rajwant Sandhu Bhushan Maideo Vimal Hari Bhardwaj Rs 5,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 15,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,100

MAKE A DIFFERENCE
Please draw cheques or demand drafts in favour of CARE TODAY A/C Assam Relief Fund and send it to:

CARE TODAY FUND
INDIA TODAY MEDIAPLEX FC-8, SECTOR 16-A, FILM CITY, NOIDA-201301 [UP]
We do not accept cash or money orders. For details please contact: C. Balaji Singh at balaji.singh@intoday.com or call 011-23315801-04 / 0120-4807100

52

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

