Spe cial Report

MANGALORE
DANCE FLOOR AND MUSIC ARE A THING OF THE PAST IN MANGALORE'S PUBS AND CLUBS

THE CITYOF

IMAGINED ENEMIES
Vigilante groups wage war against western culture and `love jihad' , turning Mangalore's society into a communal tinderbox
By T.S. Sudhir

of undesirable people. The Hindu community should not be linked to such people," he said. For long, people like Hegde have been mute spectators to the aggressive posturing of Hindutva activists. Many feel he spoke up now only because the stinging slaps are beginning to hurt the region's education economy. With 100 colleges offering professional courses, 190 other degree colleges and 600,000 students, the sector is reportedly worth Rs 50,000 crore. "A lot of people are asking me if it is safe to send their children to Mangalore to study," says Hegde. That could hit local businesses too. "If the education sector gets affected, it will adversely impact the service industry. Thirty per cent of my customers are students, mostly outsiders," says Mukund Kamath, proprietor of the 37-year-old Ideal Ice Cream chain in Mangalore. If any group is seen as having the levers to control the Hindutva cyclonic storm constantly forming over the Mangalore coast, it is this business community. But it's easier said than done. Dakshina Kannada district has been a Hindutva laboratory for nearly 20 years now. The Sangh Parivar organisations started by roping in youngsters of the backward Billava and Mogaveera communities and encouraging them to take

to occupations hitherto dominated by the Muslims, such as fishing. Muslims exploited the Gulf boom to make money and move up the social ladder. Add religion to the equation and one is sitting on a tinderbox. The 1998 Suratkal riots, in which 18 people were killed, is seen as a turning point in Dakshina Kannada district's descent into becoming a communal hotspot. The HinduMuslim polarisation helped BJP come to power in Karnataka in 2008. If morality is one entry point for the Hindutva brigade's brand of politics, minority-bashing is the other tried-andtested formula. "They try to justify their acts by pointing to `Islamist radicals'. There are cases of Hindutva goons attacking minorities without provocation. I fear as state elections draw near, there'll be an escalation in communal polarisation," says Karavali Ale Editor B.V. Sitaram. One of the worst repeat offenders is Karnataka's senior RSS leader Kalladka Prabhakar Bhat. On January 22, he went hammer and tongs against minorities at a Hindu Samajotsava, prompting a PIL against him and a notice from the Karnataka High Court. Among his provocative statements were: G All the local Muslims are cent per cent demons. G Muslims say they follow the Sharia but they are thieves, robbers, cheats. G You Byari (Muslim) boys who love

Photographs by SHANKARI R. POSAVANIKE

ometime in mid-September, Tia (name changed) decided to spend time at Froth on Top, a popular pub in Mangalore. She was waiting for her friends outside when an employee of the pub cautioned her in a friendly but stern tone, "Women can't smoke here." Looking around, she realised what the reason was. A group of 15 youngsters was squatting on the other side of the road, keeping a close watch. Danger was just a zebra crossing away. Which is why Tia's parents do not want her to say `Thank God It's Friday' anymore. "I admit I felt scared after seeing the visuals of the attack on Morning

S

Mist Home-stay on July 28. I shudder to think what if I was also there," says the 22-year-old postgraduate student. Podige, or fear in the local Tulu language, is the word that you hear the most on Mangalore's streets. The swagger in Satyajit Suratkal's body language draws power from this four-letter word. The well-built South Karnataka convenor of the RSS-affiliated Hindu Jagarana Vedike denies any direct involvement of his organisation in the attack on Morning Mist, where activists barged into a birthday party, assaulting youngsters in the full glare of cameras. But he defends the vigilante action: "What is the meaning of so many boys and girls staying together in one house? Our tradition is to wear full clothes, not

like how they go to parties. People say whatever has happened was good." Suratkal is not entirely wrong. The `Dial M for Morality' Hindutva brigade finds popular support in the 484,000strong conservative Mangalore, cutting across age barriers. "Many asked why girls should go to such places. That this is a wake-up call for youngsters and parents," says Vidya Dinker of Citizens Forum for Mangalore Development. But not everyone is supporting the `crackdown'. Karavali Ale, a Kannada daily, was flooded with over 200 letters condemning the attack. An incensed Vinay Hegde, vice-chancellor of Nitte University that runs 26 colleges in and around Mangalore, called the vigilante group a mafia. "This is an act of a group

January 24,2009

Amnesia The Lounge
Sri Ram Sene activists assaulted a group of young men and women, claiming the women were drinking and dressed indecently in violation of traditional Indian values.Two of the women were hospitalised.

64

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

65

Spe cial Report

MANGALORE

Hindu girls, you better start lifting the burqa and looking at the faces of your girls. G The Christians build schools, hospitals and orphanages with the sole purpose of converting Hindus, don't send your children to Christian schools. One of the reasons why Dakshina Kannada district is such a fertile breeding ground for Hindutva consolidation is the religious character of the region. It has a significant minority presence: 22 per cent Muslim and 16 per cent Christian population, and with 94 per cent literacy, it is a politically very aware district. Add to that the proHindutva tilt of many leading dailies in the regional language and all it needs is a couple of rabble rousers on either side for things to reach boiling point. The Bajrang Dal, for one, is crying foul about what it calls the `land jihad', how 60 per cent of the real estate in the city is today controlled by Muslims. Though areas like Bundar, Faisalnagara and Ullal exist in and around Mangalore, where the two communities still live virtually cheek-by-jowl, the process of disintegration between the two main communities began in the 1990s. Till then the Hindus traditionally controlled the wholesale trade and the Muslims

TO COUNTER PERCEIVED THREATS FROM HINDUTVA GROUPS SUCH AS HINDU JAGARANA VEDIKE (LEFT), MUSLIMS HAVE BEGUN TO ASSERT THEIR RELIGIOUS IDENTITY

were largely the retailers. The problem began when the wholesalers decided to patronise fellow Hindus as retailers. Over the years, distrust has crept in because of this break in interlinking.

V

idya Dinker points out that when a friend was recently looking to rent out her apartment in an upmarket locality in the city, she was advised not to give it to Muslims. Another apartment society put it in writing but had to withdraw the diktat after protests from civil society groups. Suresh Bhat, president of the Dakshina Kannada unit of the Karnataka Komu Souhard Vedike (Communal Harmony Front), says the fears of the Hindu community are unfounded: "Real estate is a booming business. I do not see any design into using inroads into the sector to create any kind of `Islamic rashtra' in this part of the country." Chaitra sits forlorn, rolling beedis at her home in Souharda Nagar in Bajpe, 20 km from Mangalore. This 16-yearold eloped with a Muslim boy in November 2011. She was found after a week in Bangalore, having been

allegedly raped by the boy and his friends. Nalini, her mother, says Chaitra is now a nervous wreck, who threatens to jump into the well every time that episode of her life is mentioned. Sitting in his office that has photographs of the entire pantheon of Hindu gods, Sharan Pumpwell, the Dakshina Kannada district chief of Bajrang Dal, shows a video clip of a boy, Mustaq, being beaten by a girl, Ashwini, egged on by onlookers. Ashwini had eloped with the boy in December 2011 and returned a day later. The family filed a case of rape after a medical test established sexual intercourse. "We told Ashwini to call Mustaq and beat him in front of everyone. We wanted to set an example to all girls in Mangalore not to get swayed by pronouncements of love by Muslim boys because this is part of `love jihad'," says Sharan. `Love jihad' is a catchy phrase used to label any such romantic encounter as part of an organised movement allegedly by Muslim youth to `trap' Hindu girls and force conversion or simply exploit them. Ask Mangaloreans if this extreme radical right is what defines their city and the discomfort is palpable. Old-

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

67

Spe cial Report

MANGALORE

timers relate the story of Bappanadu Durgaparameshwari temple at Mulki, 29 km from Mangalore. Legend says it was built by Bappa, a Muslim merchant. The aggressive shouts of `Pehle qasaai, phir Isaai (First Muslims, then Christians)' fly in the face of such a secular past. Mangalore's tragedy is that radicals have managed to create fissures between friends. "The sacredness of the Church was violated and desecrated in 2008. Christians do not trust Hindus because none of our Hindu friends spoke up for us when it mattered most," says Celine Aranha, 80, who set up Shubadha, a shelter for women, in 1979. In September 2008, over 15 churches and prayer halls were vandalised by Bajrang Dal activists. Many link the rise of communalism to the decline of the Left movement. The first trade union in Karnataka was started in Mangalore in the 1940s. From a time when the region used to regularly elect Communist MLAs to the Karnataka Assembly, now they do not even retain their deposit. Newton's third law has been at work 24x7 in Mangalore. To counter the perceived threat from Hindutva groups, Muslims have organised themselves to assert their religious identity. A sea of women in veils greets you at many schools and colleges in Mangalore, which wasn't the case a generation ago. Radicals within the community insist on Muslim women wearing burqas to emphasise their identity. The influence of the Saudi connections and the cultural influences of those who have gone there

September 14,2008

Churches vandalised
Bajrang Dal activists went on the rampage and vandalised some churches and prayer halls in Mangalore and other places in Karnataka.The miscreants were protesting against alleged conversions and publication of literature derogatory to Hindus.
AP PHOTO

have played a part as well. Groups such as the Popular Front of India (PFI), a cash-rich Muslim party with roots in Kerala, have surfaced here. A confidential Union home ministry note in August stated that under PFI's watch, "radical outfits like SIMI (Students Islamic Movement of India) and IM (Indian Mujahideen) operate in collusion with LeT (Lashkar-e-Toiba) and JeM (Jaish-e-Muhammed)". In an affidavit submitted in the Kerala High Court in August, the Kerala Police's intelligence chief, Siddique Rawther, said: "Popular Front of India is the new face of banned extremist outfit SIMI and is engaged in anti-national activities." PFI has around 35,000 members in Karnataka. Its president, 49-year-old Ilyas Muhammed Thumbay, who runs

July 28,2012

Morning Mist
Protesters barged into a homestay where a birthday party was on, and attacked youngsters, claiming that they were indulging in immoral activities.

a timber and plywood business, tries to portray an NGO-like image of PFI, claiming it works for empowerment of Muslims and protecting them from alleged atrocities. "This is a conspiracy to suppress us," says Thumbay. "Hindutva groups attack just about anyone--be it someone transporting cattle, or a Muslim boy talking to a Hindu girl, or churches, alleging conversions are taking place." Then there are those who wonder who really is this angry Hindutva activist. Santosh M. Hangarki, who ran Amnesia The Lounge where girls were attacked by a mob of 30 to 40 Sri Ram Sene activists on January 24, 2009, says, "Some of them were students, some autorickshaw drivers, even electricians. Many were drunk when they arrived." The suspicion is that someone, perhaps a business rival, hired the men for a price to kill a new entrant into the business. Amnesia was just 26 days old when its licence was suspended. Walk around Mangalore and it would seem this culturally rich city and cradle of education is caught in a time warp. A city unable to come to terms with its potential for progress, pulled back by the strong gusts of conservatism and display of muscle power. At the fish market, a big banner of `Jesus never fails' greets the faithful. Mangalore, meanwhile, continues to be on test. I

68

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

