BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

ALONE ON THE BRINK
t all began with Mamata Banerjee. With a single tug she television screen, including Congress. When the drums of set in motion a series of reactions that opened up contra- war rumble, there is confrontation ahead. The thunder of dictions, fears, suspicions and ambition that can only be electoral battle first rolls out in advertising. Government resolved by another General Election. There has been media is already experiencing a traffic jam of slightly overinsufficient acknowledgement of her formative role because cooked songs, reheated from 2009, which seek to energise the middle class, and its playground, the media, dismiss her targeted Congress demographic segments: Muslims, women as a deviant when her core characteristic is independence. and the more generalised rubric of the poor. On a parallel She knows a basic rule of public life. The political clock line, Congress is trying to revive its "nuclear deal conis not set by the news cycle. A sensible politician factors in stituency" in the urban middle class with a slew of economic the news story but worries only about impact, which is an reforms and decisions, some packaged in misleading frames, aggregation of interlinked facts that slowly seep into the to push a stagnant economy as well as divert mass attention subconscious. A General Election is determined by what be- away from corrosive subjects like the coal scam. Together, comes embedded in perception, not an evening's flash. That this is a pitch for Congress, not UPA. UPA has imploded, and issue is corruption. Mamata Banerjee took command of the Congress is trying to reset its electoral compass. For the formal Opposition, it no longer matters much how vanguard space in Opposition ranks when she decided that association with a tarred Congress had become counterpro- long this Government lasts, because if you cannot govern, ductive. She said publicly what other Congress allies are be- then the longer you last, the worse it is for your prospects. ginning to admit privately. Mamata is not reticent: Her body Congress needs time to change the discourse, and would like language is often more descriptive than her sentence. She to wait till the last minute. But the party is old enough to is a high-voltage battery, ever ready. She did not bring down understand that it cannot function with an uncertain majorthe Government by withdrawing support, but she punc- ity, or every crisis like the Ajit Pawar insurrection will tured its confidence and set politics on the path to elections. compound an image of corruption bracketed with political Four days after Mamata's formal departure, Congress helplessness, if not ineptitude. Its core contradiction has not President Mrs Sonia Gandhi said that the UPA Government changed with circumstances; its allies occupy space once was stable. Within hours her ally in the west, Sharad Pawar's held by the party, which the party would like to recover. NCP, was destabilising the most important UPA coalition after The departure of Mamata Banerjee from UPA cleans up Delhi, Maharashtra. A local Congress-NCP conflict that had one such paradox, but even if the immediate cost is high the remained dormant for years erupted party can always hope for reward SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com because the environment was no when Mamata's support begins to longer in Congress control. Ambitions deflate. But its relationship with NCP that have learnt to wait will not remain has fractured, and sarcasm has quiet if opportunity becomes visible. entered the DMK refrain. On the same day, the steadfast A conventional belief is that BJP lost Congress friend in Tamil Nadu, DMK, in 2004 because its "India Shining" campaign finessed the plight of the told Prime Minister Manmohan Singh poor, and the poor taught BJP that they through the latter's emissary that it was not interested in proposing any were still masters on voting day. But new names for inclusion in the prothe BJP lost that crucial battle long beposed Cabinet reshuffle. The DMK's fore polling, when, in a display of message was simple: The days of hubris, they spurned their traditional telling us what to do are over; if you allies--Om Prakash Chautala in don't listen to us, we have other Haryana, Shibu Soren in Jharkhand options. Within a week of Mamata's and AGP in Assam. When the polity is move, the principal alliances of the as fractured as ours is, little drops Mamata's body language is Congress were in disarray. The English make the eventual ocean. Congress often more descriptive than her has lost one principal ally, and lamed language offers a descriptive phrase: sentence. She is a high-voltage two others already. Those who are Coming apart at the seams. The UPA was coming apart at the beams that battery, ever ready. She did not supportive in the survival game, like have held it up. The only chap hanging bring down the Government by Mulayam Singh Yadav or Mayawati, on loyally to Congress is Lalu Prasad will be ferociously antagonistic at the withdrawing support, but she Yadav, and they didn't even make him polls. If either the Congress or BJP punctured its confidence and set wants to conquer in General Elections a Cabinet minister in 2009. Everyone can see the writing on the politics on the path to elections. tomorrow, they must stoop today. I

I

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

11

