A SNEAK PREVIEW OF TRULY ENTERPRISING

A RAT
Much could have been said when Gujarat outdid China in Solar Power Generation with world's largest Solar park, but numbers have never been such a big deal for the enterprising people of Gujarat. It is interesting to see, a region of this size and territorial diversity managed to utilise its natural resources and human ingenuity to reaffirm its name in the global developmental, commercial and cultural roadmap. We have all heard about Gujarat, of its progress at various forums and in news, however, with all the mysticism surrounding the state's fairy tale growth in last decade and the charismatic, at times enigmatic, leadership of Mr. Narendra Modi leaves many in dilemma, whether to truly take Gujarat as a model for development or overlook it as an exc

Nation

SHAILESH RAVAL

I

t has been often observed that states which witness high agricultural growth are low on industrial output. Similarly, states which enjoy high industrial growth witness poor agricultural growth. Here, Gujarat makes an exception. It is perhaps the only state in the country where stupendous growth has been achieved on both the agricultural as well as the industrial front. The highlighted and projected development of Gujarat is often portrayed as very commercial, business driven and trade oriented, Something very

Formal education is no more found relevant. The youth have to be trained for specialized jobs, research and entrepreneurship, make them physically fit through yoga, pranayam and games, and at the same time keep them abreast about patriotism, spiritualism, culture, literature, and civic sense.
- Narendra Modi, Chief Minister of Gujarat

tangible and undeniable, of course. However there is a different side of this 'growth story1 apart from the usual cynicism with which the phenomenal rise of Gujarat is acknowledged. Yes Gujaratis are enterprising and they always have been. For long they have travelled, traded and worked hard to make a name for themselves in the country as well as globally, but there is a larger reason behind the fact that Gujarat chose not to complain and rather aligned itself with the aim of holistic 'growth of the nation through the development of the state'. It is not easy to set examples but when India won United Nations Public Service Awards in 2009 and 2010 a lot of it was understated. Both the awards were won due to initiatives by Gujarat Government. From the highly economy centric Vibrant Gujarat summits to absolutely tribal centric initiative like 'Van Bandhu Kalyan Yojna1 aimed towards actively improving the plight of tribal communities through better education and economic opportunities, Gujarat has made multidimensional efforts to usher in progress that reaches every section. Chief Minister Narendra Modi, who completed 4000 days in his office recently, has been an active ambassador for such initiatives with special focus on education, youth development, technology and agriculture. Alongside the development, Gujarati people have turned themselves to global avenues of business and frontline collaborations in various fields. With a rapidly westernising economy, India has lately seen a lot of financial and fiscal uncertainty. Rising inflation and fuel prices have added to the anxiety which makes the most rational minds seek a miracle. Gujarat is an exception because the interests of the communities were never overlooked.

AnllTIP

CTreature

What has happened in Gujarat in the last decade is no miracle, albeit a little overwhelming for some. The implications of United States Congressional Research Services mentioning Gujarat as an example of good governance in 2011 are two pronged. One that Gujarat has been able to check on corruption within the government machinery to create a transparent system. Second, the state has minimized bureaucratic inefficiencies to boost the entrepreneurial spirit of the people in the state. Maybe the need is to look at the development of Gujarat with a different pair of lenses. Undoubtedly the state has done extremely well financially. The massive FDIs that came in the last decade have jumpstarted the State's cash collection. The series of Indian and International auto makers that signed MoUs with the government in last 5 years have already pushed the state as an auto manufacturing hub. Although 17% of country's fixed capital investments may come to Gujarat, no welfare is possible unless the people, the citizens of the state enjoy the benefits of the progress and eradicate the ongoing issues that tend to diminish the quality of life in general. The socio-economic initiatives of Gujarat in the past decade have shown remarkable effects when it comes to improving the standard of

living for almost all sections of society. Success of Gujarat Government's initiatives in Education, Healthcare, Sanitation, Employment, Women and Child development, Gender equality, Public safety, Roads and Medical care has brought a visible and welcome change in the outlook of the state in the recent times. · IMPROVED LITERACY AND REDUCED DROPOUTS With primary school education programs like Shala Praveshotsav (Celebrating school admissions) and Kanya Kelavani (Supporting Girl child enrolment) being run state-wide, keeping rural and backward classes in consideration, Gujarat has made some headway in problem areas like girl child education and dropouts. From about 21% of students dropping out in 2000-2001, the figure has reduced to 2% within a decade. Under the visionary leadership of Chief Minister Modi, Gujarat has also introduced the EMPOWER programme which aims to improve computer literacy in the state. Seemingly, Gujarat has focused rigorously on vocational education as well. The number of ITIs have increased from 129 in 2001 to 756 within a decade. Vocational training is also included in the Rs. 13,000 Crore Garib Samruddhi Yojna which is a part of the 11th five year plan. Vocational training is also included in the Rs. 13,000 Crore Garib Samruddhi Yojna which is a part of the 11th five year plan. The efforts to run numerous minor and major developmental programs focused on education don't stop there. Commitment to provide proper infrastructure to these institutions have led to a 100% availability of drinking water and electrification of government primary schools. · WEALTH OF GOOD HEALTH For most people in Gujarat, the recent ban on Gutkha declared by Chief Minister Narendra Modi, didn't come with a shock. Gujarat government has always taken health and well being of the citizens quite seriously. By connecting Primary Health Centers (PHC) across the state and Community Health Centers (CHC) Gujarat is implementing cutting edge technological

innovations like telemedicine to provide medical information, consultation and even examine cases remotely through an audio visual medium. This is very useful for the people in deep rural areas who don't have easy access to medical facilities. A decade ago quality emergency services were lacking in Gujarat. Today with a fleet of 506 vans, 108 Emergency Services have spread out to all 26 districts of Gujarat. An example of 108's impact on society is the fact that more than 10 lakh women in Gujarat have had safe delivery owing to 108. An example of 108's impact on society is the fact that more than 10 lakh women in Gujarat have had safe delivery owing to 108. To improve the access to modern healthcare for BPL families, Mukhyamantri Amrutam Yojana is launched in 2012 which will help the benefiting families receive coverage of Rs. 2 lakh per year for quality medical help, hospitalization and even surgery. With drastic measures to improve medical and health care Infrastructure in Gujarat, the mortality rates for infants and mothers are on a decline. The state aims to achieve 100% immunization and institutional deliveries by year 2015. Government has been successful in implementing various programs to fight diseases like TB, Polio, Cholera, Typhoid, Cancer and Aids. Tanzanian citizens, Francis Munshi and his wife Rose, have made frequent trips to Ahmedabad since 2009. Reason: Rose's medical requirements. Back home, not much could have been done for her injured spinal cord in 2009 and her damaged knee in 2012. Recommendations from friends brought them to Ahmedabad. A spinal cord surgery and a knee replacement later, the Munshis swear by the healthcare here. Many such visitors find good care and specialised medical help every year and the quality of medical facilities available in Gujarat has led a steady medical tourism to the state. · WOMEN EMPOWERMENT & CHILD DEVELOPMENT What do rural and semi-urban household women do in a day usually? Work in a vermicompost farm that produces commercial quantities of organic fertilizer, organise courts for listening to women related issues, work at a stitching unit or just supply 'Khakhras' to companies that market their product? All these are real cases from the state as the various initiatives like Mission Mangalam, and Nari Adalats have brought a self reliance to women who couldn't ever imagine of becoming bread earners for their families. Rural women have also learned to take control of their finances through the Mahila Banks that operate across the state as women's Self Help Groups (SHGs). The manufacturing units operated by women are all the more interesting since some of these enterprises are even exporting their goods in overseas markets.

TRIBAL DEVELOPMENT
Van Bandhu Kalyan Yojana has brought the tribals of state together to participate and contribute in the state's progress. The purpose of Tribal Development Department of Gujarat is to ensure high quality social and civil infrastructure and sustainable employment the tribal areas of the state through a 10 point program (Van Bandhu Kalyan Yojana) A unique sports focused initiative called 'Eklavya Archery Academy' situated 200 kms south of Ahmedabad has been started to provide tribal youth state of the art training facilities in archery to prepare them to compete for global events like Olympics. It can be said that with such efforts to connect tribal population with the mainstream will bring about a positive change in the living conditions of people in the tribal regions of Gujarat.

With funds coming in through various schemes these units were set up about 2 years ago. After initial reluctance, the women members of SHGs realised the efficiency and good returns of organic fertilizers. We now have 42 functional units of vermicompost in Sabarkantha alone
- Tushar Rathore, Assistant Project Manager, Marketing Rural Cottage Services, Mission Mangalam.

Gujarat has not only empowered women but has also given them due respect and pride which they deserve. That is why; Gujarat is the first in the country to have a policy for mainstreaming gender concerns that has rightly been named Nari Gaurav Niti. In case of women's emancipation and justice, Nari Adalats (Women's courts) have done extremely well in Gujarat. These are block level autonomous tribunals for women, operated by women, to address their grievances. Today 35 Nari Adalats function across the state. The massive campaign against female foeticide known as Beti Bachao (Save the Girl Child) initiative started in 2005-2006 in Gujarat has shown extremely positive and encouraging results. Also the Woman and Child development initiatives like Balika Samruddhi Yojna (Girl Child

<»

^> s ^

SL^« -^f.J^^^^^^^^Hfebttbt^ ""*'*?* A.^f-x

·*»»

""""?*, *f**'v«r/

SHAILESH RAVAL

Development) and Sakhi Mandal Yojna have tackled the issues of gender equality, justice, health education, nutrition and family welfare in the state. To reduce avoidable child and maternity-linked deaths, Gujarat launched eMamta in 2010, which is a mobile phone based technology innovation and is now being adopted by other states. Gujarat also started large scale food fortification programmes under PPP model in 2005-2006 against malnutrition and micro-nutrient deficiencies. · FARMERS AND FISHERMEN The rapid rate of industrialisation in Gujarat hasn't affected the agriculture in the state. Through farmer friendly policies and programs like Water Shed Development and micro irrigation projects which emphasise on water conservation, farmers are motivated to adopt more efficient farming practices. This has over the last decade increased productivity and yield. Not surprisingly then, Gujarat's agricultural growth in the last decade was in double digits in contrast to India's agricultural growth of 3%. Also, food grain production has increased from 44 lakh tons in 1999-2000 to 100 lakh MT in 2010-11.

The Krushi Mahotsav campaign which is being held since 2005, covered 18,600 villages reaching to farmers with researchers, scientists, experts, agriculture officers and ministers, interacting and providing information and counselling on soil health, organic farming, technology and inputs, irrigation, etc., besides infusing a new spirit of change and mass mobilisation. The Government has set up four agro-climate zones and starting institutes for research and education in the field of agro technology. An innovative concept of 'Animal Hostel' is launched in Gujarat wherein villagers collectively maintain and manage a co-operative that takes care of all the animals in the village at a well supplied, central 'hostel' and no one needs to keep the cattle at home. Forfisherfolk, the Gujarat government has launched an ambitious programme called Sagarkhedu Yojana for the all round development of its coastal belts. The focus areas include capacity building and training, upgradation of technology in traditional professions, specific and time bound action plan for improving wage and self-employment, educational facilities, health infrastructure, drinking water, housing, salinity ingress, electrification and water conservation, creation of infrastructure and coastal security. This has brought about a sea change in coastal lives as more than Rs. 11,000 crore have been allocated in the last five years for uplifting nearly 60 lakh people living in 3000 villages of 38 coastal talukas in 13 districts. · SARDAR SAROVAR PROJECT ON NARMADA Going through initial concerns over the feasibility and the fate of the population displaced due to the villages submerging in the backwaters, the Sardar Sarovar finally stands amongst the top dams in the country. A project laid out in 1979, to fulfil the irrigation and drinking water needs of farmers in the water scarce regions of Gujarat, the Sardar Sarovar Dam has gone through a series of altercations. Not much work could be started on the project until the year 2000 Supreme Court clearance to the project, provided that proper relocation be carried out for people displaced by every

Chief Minister Narendra Modi, who completed 4000 days in his office this week, has been an active ambassador for such initiatives with special focus on education, youth development, technology and agriculture. Alongside the development, Gujarati people have turned themselves to global avenues of business and frontline collaborations in various fields.

:V

SHAILESH RAVAL

5 meter increase in dam's height. So far every relocation work has been carried out satisfactorily. Also the dam height has been increased from 90 meters in 2001 to 121 meters in 2011 and the dam today stands as a symbol of human effort to change lives through mega scale engineering. Gujarat also has world's biggest canal network which helps in irrigating about 18,000 square kilometres of agricultural land. It is worth mentioning that the main concrete gravity dam is world's second largest after the Grand Coulee on Columbia River, Washington, US. · CIVIC AMENITIES, INFRASTRUCTURE AND ROADS When it comes to Gujarat, a lot is being said about its infrastructure. Quite certainly the infrastructure development is and has been an outcome of rapid industrialisation. However unplanned and non-sustainable growth is dangerous and at times harmful. Thankfully the concept of 'Sauno Saath, Sauno Vikas' (All together, growth for all!) as put forward by the Chief Minister has lived up to its calling in Gujarat. What is most impressive in the whole infrastructure development of Gujarat, is the smart implementation and clever innovation which proved the ingenuity and enterprising nature of Gujaratis. Take for instance the Ahmedabad based Bus Rapid Transport System (BRTS). Unlike other implementations of BRTS in the country, the Ahmedabad version does not disappoint. Proper planning and involvement of institutes like CEPT has led to the success of this system. Similar cases of intelligent solutions are seen in the world's first canal top solar power project that saves land, prevents water evaporation from the canal and yields better electricity

output due to the cooler environment near the water body. The latest landmark added to the city of Ahmedabad is the Riverfront Project which has been praised as one of the '100 most innovative' projects towards urban regeneration worldwide in a report released by KPMG. This aesthetically marvellous reclamation project stretching 11.5 Kms on the banks of Sabarmati River provides great space for civic and cultural activities to Amdavadis. With India's largest network of canals, the unprecedented scale of dams and check-dams is surely an engineering marvel but the roads are no less taken care of. A world bank supported study in 2011; based on an analysis of about 40,000 km long state roads (including 18,500 km of state highways and 20,500 km of district main roads) concluded that Gujarat offers an example of international best practice in managing roads.

The multi-product Special Economic Zone (SEZ) at Dahej in Gujarat has made it to the world's top-50 'Free Zones', as per a survey of over 600 Free Zones in 120 countries by the prestigious FDI Magazine
- Saurabh Patel, Minister of State for Industries, Gujarat

LESH RAVAL

· URBANISATION AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING The social aspect of urban development in Gujarat is always kept at the top priority. How to deal with the problem of affordable housing for BPL and economically weak families in urban areas; was the concern that came up during 1991-2001 due to a high rate of urbanisation. The government introduced incentives to encourage PPPs to work towards regulating slum rehabilitation and redevelopment in 2010. Gujarat's current rate of Urbanisation is quite high at 42.6% in comparison to the national average of 31.16 % and is estimated to touch 50% by 2021. Rising urbanisation also means a requirement of skilled labour to cater to the jobs generated in urban areas. Keeping this in mind, Gujarat government introduced the UMEED programme, a specialised employability training program designed for skill development and entrepreneurship in unemployed youth of 18-35 years from poor urban families. · THE TURNAROUND IN POWER SECTOR In 2001, the newly appointed Chief Minister of the state Narendra Modi came out with a 5 point agenda for industrial and infrastructural turnaround called the Panchamrut Shakti. This plan included Electricity generation, Water management, People's empowerment, Education, and Security. Urja Shakti, as it is called was an effort to put behind the loss making days of government owned power generation machinery. This was possible by unbundling of the then Gujarat Electricity Board (GEB) into 7 separately operating companies, taking care of different aspects of power generation, transmission and distribution. Secure metering systems were installed and a well co-ordinated anti pilferage and anti theft drive was conducted to curb unaccounted power

From Industrial Clusters, Industrial Estates and SEZs, the State has now moved further to set up truly world-class huge-sized Special Investment Regions (SIRs)
- Narendra Modi, CM, Gujarat loss. To make sure that theft is replaced by affordable yet legal electricity usage, innovative solution of prepaid electric connections were provided to the economically backward areas. The ambitious Jyotigram Yojana, initiated in 2003 with the aim to electrify all of the, approximately 18,600 villages of Gujarat with 24/7 high quality 3 phase electricity is a reality now. Before 2001, the electricity shortage was such that people had to often have dinner in the dark using kerosene lanterns. Today, ample electricity has transformed rural Gujarat. Migration to cities has dropped, children in rural areas are learning computers in schools and rural economy has received a boost. Rural life is now comfortable and Jyotigram Yojana has ensured rapid development of small and cottage industries, agro processing industries. · PORTS AND SHIPPING Thirty five percent of India's exports are routed through Gujarat. By 2015, it is estimated that Gujarat's port will handle 400 million tonnes (39 percent) of the country's total output. Gujarat Maritime Board handled traffic of 259 million metric tons per annum (MMTPA) in FY 2011-12,73% of traffic of India's non-major ports and 28% of traffic of India's ports. With a 1,600 Km long coastline, Gujarat is a favourable shipping and logistics gateway.

There are 41 well planned ports in Gujarat with good rail-road connectivity.With a major port on the west coast in Kandla and the largest ship breaking yard in Alang, Gujarat surely has some maritime advantages up its sleeve. · SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES Special Economic Zones are engines of growth and Gujarat was amongst the first states to put SEZ Act in place as early as 2004. Today, as many as 60 SEZs are approved of which 13 are notified and functional and others are in various stages of development. Gujarat's Special Investment Regions are planned to take advantage of the upcoming Dedicated Freight Corridor between Delhi and Mumbai (DFC) and the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC). · CARS AND OTHER MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Ever since the Tata Nano plant shifted to Sanand in Gujarat in 2008, this region has fast emerged into an automobile manufacturing hub. Many other Indian and international auto makers like Ford and Peugeot have signed MoUs with Government of Gujarat and planning to set up plants in Sanand. Maruti Suzuki and Hero Motorcorp are also at different stages of their deals with Gujarat Government. Along with the boom in auto manufacturing in Gujarat, the ancillary industries have also come up. Auto parts, engineering and other manufacturing industries have emerged in the state, due to many factors like easy accessibility to ports and government's industry friendly policies and tax benefits offered to projects but the timelines have to be met and project must start production within specified period.

· RENEWABLE ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT Gujarat is one of the highest producer of renewable energy including Solar and Wind. With a power generation capacity of 600 MW, spread across 3000 acres of wastelands in Rann of Kutch, Gujarat Solar Park is the largest in Asia, superseding China's Golmud Solar Park.Gujarat with the first of its kind Solar Energy Policy is also the leader in solar power generation It is also worth mentioning that by implementing effective waste management systems, smarter ICT based systems, hazardous waste cleanup and shifting urban public transport to CNG, Gujarat has been able to bring down the levels of green house gas emission and other harmful pollution. · FORWARD GOVERNANCE Although the state has attracted massive investments through FDIs and Vibrant Gujarat summits, the strongest factor behind the rapid rate of development has been the attitude of the government. The state Government advocates 3 S (Scale, Speed, Skill) in the path of development and is known to be one of the most quick response governments in the country and is known for its fast implementation of policies. The model of success that Gujarat has can be applied everywhere but the leadership decision have to go hand in hand with the true cause of growth and development of the people of the state. We can notice the undying optimism turning into astonishing progress in Gujarat. An enterprising zeal that should now inspire the entire country, but the efforts have to be collective and made with the clarity which has ultimately helped in making the real difference in Gujarat.

'-

