UP FRONT

ARAVIND ADIGA

THE PROFESSOR OFCHIKMAGALORE
hikmagalur, a rainy and hilly district in southern quickly, and men who are used to coming to the wilderness Karnataka, draws a growing number of tourists from only for firewood or shikar grow weary of its monotony. The Bangalore, who come here for spectacular views of scientist revives them. He makes them see the forest with the Western Ghats, or to spend a night in Kemmanagundi, new eyes: He touches the branch of a tree, and lo!--it the local hill station. But for a few visitors--and I am one of sprouts a moustache and legs and turns into a worm. Under them--a trip to Chikmagalur is always accompanied by the the dark cover of the trees, the locals hold discussions with hope that we might spot its most famous resident, Professor Carvalho. Does God exist? Does He oversee Evolution? If all Carvalho. He should be easy to find: He's a Mangalorean creatures are subject to Evolution, how has this living fossil Catholic, somewhat unusual for these parts, sports a silvery alone opted out of the process? At last they find the lizard-- beard, and his Kannada, though formal, is interspersed with or something that might be their lizard--and give it chase English phrases like "My dear young man" and "Yesyes". So as it glides through the trees, slipping past their hands again we crane our necks out of cars and buses and stare at the and again to reach the very edge of the Western Ghats. Now locals, wondering if Carvalho is among them--though we Carvalho and the others think they have got it: The lizard is at a sheer cliff with nowhere to go. The mysterious reptile, know, of course, that he is not. He lives only in a novel. Published in 1980, Poornachan- however, has one last trick to play on its pursuers. Tejaswi--whose father, Kuvempu, was a celebrated dra Tejaswi's Kannada classic Karvalo is set around the town of Mudugere in Chikmagalur. A typical town in the Kannada poet--made his literary reputation in the early Western Ghats: The locals grow honey, rear cattle, and live 1970s with the short story collection Abachoorina Post a hard life, which is made harder by police and politicians. Office. Inspired by Ram Manohar Lohia's call for a social They have a stranger in their midst. Professor Carvalho, a revolution, these angry and poetic stories are as unsettling scientist posted at a nearby research centre, is a treasury of as anything by Manto. The multi-talented Tejaswi published information on all kinds of agricultural problems, an expert essays on astronomy and natural history, took photographs on glow-worms, and a man who receives photographs and of Chikmagalur (where he lived), and translated wildlife books from English into letters from around the world. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Kannada; by 1980, he had melThough the kindly Mangalorelowed enough to write Karvalo. an is always ready to help the The language is simple and locals, some of them are suspiprecise; the vision, genial and cious. What is this urbane, humanistic, rests equally on prosperous scientist doing in commitment to one's fellow the middle of nowhere? Is he a men and respect for the enviforeign agent? ronment. If he lacks the One day Carvalho confesnationwide reputation of U.R. ses. He is on the trail of a very Ananthamurthy or cult followrare lizard, one that can fly. The ing of S.L. Bhyrappa--the creature is a living fossil, a Mysorean novelist who is a relative of the dinosaurs that favourite of the Hindutva survived their extinction by crowd, Tejaswi, who died in growing wings. Though it was 2007--is adored in Karnataka last observed a hundred years as no other writer is. Both ago in Africa, Carvalho is sure it comic and cosmic, Karvalo exmatches the descriptions of a pands out of Chikmagalur. creature seen recently in the Wherever I am in the hills, in forests of the Western Ghats. He Mussoorie or Germany, there has written to the Smithsonian are times when leaves rustle Institute and the British Poornachandra Tejaswi wrote on astronomy behind me and I turn, expecting Geographical Institute, and and natural history, took photographs of they have jointly offered a re- Chikmagalur (where he lived), and translated to find an eccentric Mangaward for this amazing lizard-- wildlife books from English into Kannada; by lorean scientist in pursuit of a flying lizard that is as ancient as payable in pounds sterling! 1980, he had mellowed enough to write the dinosaurs. Now all the locals want to be Karvalo. The language is simple; the genial friends with Carvalho. A search vision rests equally on commitment to one's party, armed with a cook, heads Aravind Adiga is a Booker fellow men and respect for the environment. into the woods. Fatigue sets in Prize-winning novelist

C

16

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

