NA TION

BIHAR
Photographs by K M KISHAN

NITISH IN CASTE TROUBLE
Disillusioned with Chief Minister Nitish Kumar, upper caste voters in Bihar are desperately looking for an alternative
By Amitabh Srivastava

in the name of empowering the backward castes, has effectively disempowered us," says Urmila Devi, 35, who was the mukhiya (chief) of Makanpur panchayat during 2001-2006 but had to give up her seat as it was reserved for EBCs in 2006. Though the Nitish government introduced panchayat reservation only in 2006, the upper castes--which initially accepted the move as a prize for ousting Lalu Prasad Yadav--has been growing increasingly discontented with the practice. Their disappointment has only peaked with the subsequent increase in a mukhiya's financial and political clout.

am Ratan Prasad Ratnakar, 69, a venerable upper caste patriarch from Bihar's Nawada district, became a huge admirer of Nitish Kumar when he visited the Bihar Chief Minister after joining the Janata Dal (United) in July 2010. This was barely three months before the last Assembly elections in Bihar. "Nitishji was a picture of humility. He acknowledged my presence, served me sweets and even walked me to the door to see me off. I felt this modesty was uncharacteristic of a senior leader and I was floored," Ratnakar, tells INDIA TODAY from his home in Makanpur village, about 125 km from Patna. Before meeting Nitish, Ratnakar was not sure if joining the JD(U) was the right decision. But a flurry of phone calls from senior JD(U) leaders and subsequent prodding from his son--in whose house he was holidaying in Allahabad when he received those calls--finally convinced the former village headman to join the party. The meeting with Nitish assured him that he had taken the right decision. He worked hard for the JD(U)-BJP alliance during the 2010 assembly election in Bihar.

R

NITISH KUMAR AT JD(U)'S ADHIKAR RALLY IN BEGUSARAI

Ratnakar, who has been a headman for nine years, was a precious catch for JD(U) on election eve. He commands respect in Warsaliganj Assembly constituency where his community, the Bhumihars, account for 33 per cent of the votes. Overall, in Nawada as well, Bhumihars account for 22 per cent votes. Thanks to Ratnakar's support, the JD(U)-BJP alliance managed to bag all five Assembly seats in Nawada. Ratnakar has not heard from any senior party leader since then. "I understand that mine was a perishable utility. Once consumed, Nitish Kumar lost interest in me," he says, adding, "The upper castes--Brahmins, Rajputs, Bhumihars and Kayasthas,

that together account for nearly 16 per cent votes in Bihar--are disillusioned with Nitish Kumar but don't really have a viable alternative." The disenchantment of the upper castes is visible all over Nawada. Unlike in Patna, where banners and welcome arches for JD(U)'s November 4 Adhikar Rally have been put up in every nook and corner, there was not a single banner visible in Nawada on October 21. The upper castes have reason to be angry. Despite the setting up of a commission to study the condition of the economically and socially backward sections of upper castes in January 2011, the government failed to make a single meaningful intervention

for the uplift of the targeted section. This has deprived the government of any brownie points it hoped to get from the upper castes. More importantly, the 20 per cent reservation for the extremely backward castes (EBCs) in panchayats has deprived them of the traditional hegemony at the grassroot level. Priority given to the backward castes, the maha Dalits (most marginalised among the Scheduled Caste) and the backward Muslims has further piqued them. "Since the 1990s, representation of upper caste leaders in the Assembly and Parliament has declined sharply. We only had the panchayats to govern. But the EBC reservation in panchayats,

"The upper castes in Bihar are unhappy with Nitish Kumar. But they do not have an alternative."
RAM RATAN RATNAKAR, Former headman of Makanpur village, Nawada district

"There is no reservation for any top post in the country. Yet the post of a mukhiya, the chief of a panchayat, is reserved in Bihar. We had thought Nitish Kumar was the best leader for us but now we are looking for other options," Srinandan Sharma, 72, a retired principal in Nawada said. It is this absence of suitable options, as highlighted by Ratnakar, that has come to Nitish's assistance so far. Fiftyyear-old Srikant Sharma, a retrenched employee of the Bihar State Cooperative Marketing Union Limited (BISCOMAUN), says Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) without Lalu can be an option, but very few support this idea. While RJD continues to enjoy the support of the Yadavs, Lalu can no longer bank on Muslim votes the way he has in previous elections. The RJD chief is now trying hard to win over some of the upper castes. But despite blaming Nitish for practicing selective favouritism, most of the upper caste members, especially the youth, still support him for the improved law and order situation in the state. As Vivek Singh, 22, from Meghipur points out, "There is no love lost between communities. But at least we are not killing each other like before. The caste carnages are things of past thanks to Nitish Kumar." The Chief Minister knows very well that BJP's support is essential to maintain the status quo. While BJP always had an upper caste leadership, Nitish's JD(U) is essentially a party championing the cause of Dalits and minorities. On October 15, Nitish extended an olive branch when he set to rest speculation of a rift between JD(U) and BJP in Bihar, asserting that the two alliance partners will contest the next General Elections together. Reflecting similar sentiments, a senior BJP leader in Bihar said his party had initially backed Nitish in March 2000, trying to use him for secular votes and wider acceptance. "Unlike Congress, the BJP's central leadership is weak; so they depend on regional satraps. The current BJP leadership in Bihar is fine with the arrangement with Nitish Kumar, and so are the central leaders," a BJP MP said. That's at least some good news for Nitish. 

44

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

NOVEMBER 12, 2012  INDIA TODAY

NEW

45

NEW

