GLASS HOUSE

by PRIYA SAHGAL

WOMAN TROUBLE FOR NITISH

OVERHEARD
A Cabinet minister was heard quipping at the recent reshuffle: "I don't care what portfolio I get, whether it's minority affairs, external affairs or corporate affairs, so long as it has an affair." Oh dear.
SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

E

mpowerment of women has worked for Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar. But of late, he has been embarrassed by the husbands of some empowered women. On October 29, the police registered an FIR against Munna Shukla, husband of JD(U) MLA Annu Shukla. Munna was making extortion calls from jail to Santlal Yadav, director of a private engineering college. On September 28, the husband of another JD(U) MLA, Poonam Devi, brandished a police carbine at a Nitish rally and threatened protesters. This is woman trouble of a different kind.

BANG BANG BANG

PILOT

SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Corporate Pilot
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Food for All
hen the Citizen Alliance Against Malnutrition, a delegation of MPs, travelled to Lucknow on September 5 to meet Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav on tackling the issue in the state, he offered them lunch at his new home. Two months later, he's decided to announce a state nutrition mission. The reason for his alacrity? Wife and Kannauj MP Dimple Yadav is part of the group that includes Supriya Sule, Madhu Goud Yaskhi and Jay Panda.

W

AKHILESH (LEFT) WITH DIMPLE YADAV

hen the young ministers heard of Sachin Pilot's new portfolio, Corporate Affairs, there was some confusion, for Pilot comes from the predominantly rural Ajmer. Moreover, his USP has been fighting for farmers instead of the corporate sector. One of his colleagues, Milind Deora, who comes from corporate Mumbai, helpfully offered to exchange constituencies with him.

W

SPOTTED
Robert Vadra. He arrived five minutes before the F1 race began on October 28 and left soon after. For once it was not his real estate but hair-do that was the talk of the evening. His hair was tied in a small ponytail.

A Job for Mr Mistry
he low-profile AICC Karnataka in-charge Madhusudan Mistry, 67, is tipped to play a more proactive role in the organisation once Rahul Gandhi officially takes over as the No. 2. A Rahul aide claims that Mistry could even be made general secretary in-charge of Uttar Pradesh. Apparently what has clicked with Rahul is Mistry's NGO background rather than any special strategic skill. MISTRY
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

T

OUCH!
Narendra Modi Wah kya girlfriend hai! Aapne kabhi dekha hai 50 crore ka girlfriend (What a girlfriend! Have you ever seen a Rs 50-crore girlfriend)?
VS

Shashi Tharoor My wife is worth a lot more than your imaginary Rs 50 crore. She is priceless. But you need to be able to love someone to understand that.

12

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

GLASS HOUSE
SHRIYA PATIL SHINDE/www.indiatodayimages.com SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

A Clean Sweep

Party Matter
mbika Soni is tipped to play a bigger role in the Congress, yet she is not looking too delighted. According to a source close to her, this is because she is hurt at the way her resignation was orchestrated and she was made to quit along with non-performers in the Government. Soni is no under-achiever. She wrote a two-page resignation letter listing all her achievements, to ensure the Prime Minister got the point.

M

M. Pallam Raju, who was

MoS Defence for nearly

eight years, can boast of very few concrete achievements in South Block. One of them was the restoration process he initiated three years ago in the defence ministry. The paanstained, cable-lined corridors of the colonial structure were restored to their former glory--loose wires put in special trenches and interiors spruced up. Now as human resource development minister, can he please clean up the education sector and not just Shastri Bhavan?
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

A

AKHTAR

KUMAR

MEIRA'S FAVOURITE MP
ok Sabha Speaker Meira Kumar's favourite MP is not from the Lower House but from the Rajya Sabha. Lyricist and poet Javed Akhtar was chief guest at the Delhi art exhibition of Meira Kumar's artist daughter Devangana Kumar.Akhtar will be the chief guest for Devangana's Mumbai show next month as well, accompanied by wife Shabana Azmi.

L

MESSAGE
OF THE

WEEK
RAJU

At a rally of the Rashtrawadi Yuvati Congress headed by Supriya Sule, Sharad Pawar said women should turn into Goddess Durga when they see injustice. Is this a message for nephew Ajit Pawar, who was also at the event?

A Friendly Lunch

Plans Gone Awry

SONI
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

G

uess who was Manish Tewari's first lunch date after he took over as I&B minister? Communications Director in the Prime Minister's Office Pankaj Pachauri. The two were seen at Delhi's Basil & Thyme. Does this herald a new rapport between the PMO and the I&B ministry?

H
SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

TEWARI

is rivals in BJP are not the only ones relieved at Nitin Gadkari's public downfall. Congress MP from Nagpur, Vilas Muttemwar, couldn't be happier. The BJP chief was planning to contest the next polls from Nagpur. Now Muttemwar hopes that Gadkari's recent troubles will swing the votes in his favour.

SAY T H AT

AGAIN
At a function in Mumbai on October 28, Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar said he could not succeed in business as he did not pay much attention to it after joining politics. "The politicians in our country lack national character," he added. He was quick to clarify, however, that his statement should not be read in the context of any individual.Wonder whom he meant?

KAPIL SIBAL

Telecom Minister

"I was instrumental in bringing BJP to power for the first time in South India. Removing me was wrong."
B.S. YEDDYURAPPA BJP leader on his removal from Karnataka chief minister's post
SIBAL

with AMITABH SRIVASTAVA, ASHISH MISRA, KIRAN TARE, SANDEEP UNNITHAN AND DEVESH KUMAR

14

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

YASHBANT NEGI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

"TRAI is taking it up the pesky SMS issue. I also face lot of problem. Every two minutes I get such SMSes."

