LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

ARTOFTHE IMPOSSIBLE
One of Indian cinema's finest minds reveals his unmatched magic of movie-making
By Kaveree Bamzai

CONVERSATIONS WITH MANI RATNAM
byBaradwaj Rangan Viking Price: RS 799 Pages: 305 BETWEEN THE COVERS Baradwaj Rangan's bookhas a wealth of information on how Ratnam taught himself movie-making,on how he lights his films,and howhe can make films in so manylanguages.

rom Mouna Ragam, we learnt that a cup of coffee with a girl was boy-speak for a date. From Dil Se, we gathered that it was all right for a girl to ask a boy whether he was a virgin. In Roja, we were riveted by the music of a boy wonder called A.R. Rahman. And in Agni Natchathiram, we were dazzled by the "very fancy" action. For anyone who came of age in the 1980s and 1990s, Mani Ratnam was both a cinematic mentor and a life coach. He showed us the power of a Mumbai ganglord in Nayakan and the life of a man on the edge of depression in Geetanjali. In Conversations with Mani Ratnam, film critic Baradwaj Rangan engages the god of mainstream auteurs in India in a series of relaxed chats. The famously monosyllabic Ratnam is at his easy best. When Rangan mentions an interpretation of Velu's character from Nayakan, Ratnam immediately scoffs at him--gently, of course. At another point when Rangan talks of watching a film on a

F

MANI RATNAM (RIGHT) WITH AISHWARYA RAI BACHCHAN DURING THE FILMING OF RAAVAN

bad DVD, Ratnam asks, quite logically, "But why do you see a bad DVD print?" Yet again when Rangan asks Ratnam about writing in pencil, he says, quite baldly: "Are you trying to find meaning in the pencils too?" And when Rangan tells him that answers from a reticent filmmaker are worth their weight in gold, Ratnam says: "Hah. The price of gold is coming down." There's a wealth of information on how Ratnam taught himself movie-making. On how he lights his films, on whether he rehearses with actors, on whether he storyboards his elaborate scenes, how he makes music with Ilayaraja or with Rahman, and how he can make films in so many languages. A management graduate from Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies in Mumbai, he studied films from books borrowed from USIS and British Council. Coming from a film distributor's family, he grew up around cinema, but talks of being overcome by his first movie, Hatari; sneaking out of boarding school to watch Laurel and Hardy movies; and of being snubbed by his wife when he went to cast her in a movie. It's the most we have ever read about him, that too in his own words. Conversations with famous people tend to be straightjacketed by too much respectfulness on the part of the interviewer/fangirl and barely concealed boredom on the part of the interviewed. Rangan's fine book, thankfully, has neither. It shows a brilliant cinematic mind at work and more than that, a thoroughly real person. When Rangan tells him that Thiruda Thiruda didn't bomb, Ratnam asks: "It didn't? It was a mainstream commercial film and it should have done very well commercially." Such calm analysis can only come from a man who has truly mastered himself. 

NOVEMBER 12, 2012  INDIA TODAY

81

NEW

