AnllTlP

CTFB

CHHATTISGARH

USHERING IN
Besides several surveys and studies, planners and developers had to face many dilemmas and deal with many imponderables before zeroing on a large green-field city for its new capital, now called New Raipur

*

~~W~ A "JThen the new state of Chhattisgarh came into existence on Nov 1,2000, % t\ naturally Raipur being the largest city in the state was named its capital % / % / even though it was not well equipped to take on its newfound role of the \r \j administrative capital of a rapidly growing state. Even the civic T infrastructure was not good enough. Besides preparing master plans for existing cities/towns, the state's political leadership had a greater challenge of evolving a blue-print for planned development of new city centres/satellite townships, including building a new capital city, its strategic location, scope of the plans, mode of financing, infrastructure to match with its industries, consultative processes, administrative arrangements, and several other teething issues. Besides many surveys and studies, planners and developers had to face many dilemmas and deal with many imponderables before zeroing on a large green-field city for capital. They naturally confronted issues like how much of history & heritage, culture & tradition of the region be captured while designing a new city for future generations; how to balance tradition and modernity, how much of the land be kept as green cover and how much be dedicated for recreational purposes? Even though history has it that we had planned cities (such as Indraprastha, Pataliputra and Kurukshetra) as early as in 3000 BC, none of them survived long enough to inspire building of similar settlements in our times. Post our Independence, the first major effort by some architects and planners led by French architect Corbusier to develop a fully planned city bore fruit; and as a result Chandigarh came into being. The City Beautiful (as Chandigarh is called) did inspire the creation of two more planned capital cities of Bhubaneshwar and Gandhinagar, but fell far short of inspiring and building more such planned greenfield towns and cities across the country. Notwithstanding these dilemmas, Dr Raman Singh had his own inspirations and dreams to realize. Laboriously, he built a consensus among the people as well as political leaders of Chhattisgarh on new capital city, having all the features to become a megalopolis in future which can cater to all the

Dr. RAMAN SINGH
Hon'ble Chief Minister of Chhattisgarh

,imp
-

1-7

2012

A NEW ERA
infrastructural needs of industries and trade in the state. "Being a planned and eco-friendly modern city having state-of-the-art physical, social and economic infrastructure, Naya Raipur will serve not only as an administrative capital but also as an engine of growth for the state," boasted Chief Minister, adding "Its development plan, covering a total area of 237.42 sq kms out of which the core area alone is over 95.22 sq kms, would be done in phased manner, with a population target of 5.6 lacs by 2031." To develop and administer the capital city, a special authority named Naya Raipur Development Authority (NRDA) was created by the Chhattisgarh government under the Chhattisgarh NagarTatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973. Naya Raipur has been included intheJawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) as a Mission City with the city of Raipur. The City Development Plan (CDP) of Naya Raipur has been approved for Rs 749.52 crore. Naya Raipur has also been selected as a model city under the Global Environmental Facility (GEF)/World Bank-assisted Sustainable Urban Transport Project (SUTP) being implemented by the Union government. Elaborating the state government's dream plan for new capital city, NRDA chairman & Principal Secretary to Chief Minister, N Baijendra Kumar said, "Some 90-95 percent land acquisition has been completed. We will soon be shifting to a new state secretariat building in the 21st century's first high-tech modern city of India," adding "Bulk of the projects in Naya Raipur are coming up on public-private-partnership (PPP) basis". About 20 km from Raipur, Naya Raipur, being designed on the lines of Malaysia's hi-tech capital complex at Putrajaya, will have a mass transport plan by building an access controlled expressway from National Highway-6 and a short railway line to the new city from the Raipur (on Titlagarh/OrissaVisakhapatnam/Andhra railway line) and integrating the two with an intra-city Bus Rapid Transport System (BRT). Dedicated bus lanes, cycling tracks and safe pedestrian walkways would complement the BRT and help build an energy-efficient and environment-friendly city. The road sections and junctions would be children- and disabled- friendly. The new capital city has housing plans for its citizens in place. To ensure affordable and quality housing for all sections of the population, an appropriate land allocation policy has already been evolved. The existing

Chhattisgarh has infinite investment opportunities. We've seen good investment in power, steel and mineral-based industry sectors. Now, we are fully focused on downstream sectors. Chief Minister has organized road-shows in Bengaluru, New Delhi and Mumbai to woo investors. We are organising Global Investors Meet on Nov 2-3,2012 in Naya Raipur which will see major Fortune 500 companies' participation.

I RAJESH MUNAT
Hon'ble Minister for Environment, Housing & Industries, Chhattisgarh ; Generating Employment  IT & ITEs  Banking  Biotechnology & Pharmaceutical  Agro & Food Processing  Automotive & Engineering  Tourism & Healthcare Urban Infrastructure  Handicrafts  New & Renewable Energy villages in the planning area are being upgraded with modern civic amenities to integrate them with the rest of the city. New Raipur's development plan has earmarked a large green space as well as areas for all kinds of sports and other recreational activities, be it for cricket in stadium or a boat ride in a lake or a brisk walk in the park. It would enable people of all walks of life to come together. Given that huge government office complexes, proposed business district centres, educational institutions and entertainment complexes are coming up,

Our achievements have come through the transparent and investor-friendly governance and the hard work, vision and proactive nature of all the stakeholders. Continuing pace of progress and identifying newer areas for sustained growth will be our focus.
Maya Raipur surely promises an unprecedented employment opportunity for its citizen. The city also has plans for industrial parks for information technology, gems and jewellery, apparels, handicrafts and other non-polluting industries. With its high quality infrastructure, Naya Raipur is likely to emerge as a major educational and cultural hub for the entire state. To enrich the state's cultural landscape and capture its unique cultural diversity, Dr Raman Singh government has plans to have museums, libraries, exhibition halls and theatres for live performances in the new capital city. Though NRDA's development plan for New Raipur is a consequence of combined efforts by several city planners, professional outfits, various interest groups, stake-holders and elected representatives and a series of consultations by each one of them, yet new capital city will have to look up to the state government for parental guidance at every step.. .or at least till this green-field city has a constituency (of citizens) of its own, who would dream about its future and at the same time resist unsavory interferences in its future plans. With a good housing policy and various residential schemes, an efficient transport system, unprecedented employment opportunities, institutional space and industrial investment, the city slowly but surely will acquire a critical mass (vigilant citizens) of its own sooner than expected. Till then, we surely are not without friends. Besides well wishers from within and outside Chhattisgarh, the state government can surely be depended upon. After all, it amounts to realising Chief Minister Dr Raman Singh's own dream to make Naya Raipur a model city and a source of inspiration for city planners, architects, builders and policy makers anywhere in the world!

 렁*. have in fact distanced us further away from this goal. However, Chhattisgarh under the visionary leadership of its Chief Minister Dr Raman Singh has surely taken a revolutionary step by not only initiating various affordable housing schemes for the people of state but also establishing altogether a new city Naya Raipur. Chief Minister had a vision not only to create housing to fulfill its people's mere physical needs (security and shelter) but also to cater to their psychological needs (a sense of personal space/privacy), their social needs (a sense of togetherness), and even their economic needs. Precisely for the reason, the state government created Chhattisgarh Housing Board (CGHB) in 2004, which, within a span of eight years, proved its relevance by building over 51,000 dwelling units for the needy. This feat becomes all the more incredible when we compare it with mere 19,000 houses built by the erstwhile MP housing board in the Chhattisgarh region in 30 years. Its efforts were well appreciated and recognized when CGHB received HUDCO National Award for Best Practices to improve the Living Environment (201112) under the category of Social Housing, Urban Poverty Alleviation and Infrastructure for its various housing initiatives and projects for the poor and Low/Middle Income Group people at an affordable price. Unveiling the biggest ever and ambitious housing scheme 'Atal ViharYojana' since Chhattisgarh came into being, Chief Minister said, "This scheme reflects our housing policy which accords top priority to weaker sections of the society. Under this scheme, we will have 1,00,000 quality and affordable

"A house is a home when it shelters the body and comforts the sou!"
- Phillip Moffitt These words from the California-based world renowned Vipassana guru & Spirit Rock Meditation Center member seem to have inspired Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Dr Raman Singh who unveiled the biggest residential housing scheme 'Atal ViharYojana' named after former prime minister Sri Atal Behari Vajpayee recently. The right to a decent standard of living, as envisaged in our Constitution, cannot be realised without adequate housing, is beyond anyone's contention. Housing as a basic need has been well established and even recognized for years now. Various national and international policy declarations, such as Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), UN's Global Shelter Strategy 1988, our own National Housing Policy (1988) and its revision in 1998 and 2007, underline the 'right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of each one of us, including food, clothing, housing' and enjoin state public agencies 'to facilitate provision of affordable (shelter for all'. Significantly, even the welfare state model adopted by us requires the government to cater to the welfare, or the well-being, of its citizens. Yet, we are struggling to realize 'Housing for AH' goal. .Population explosion, rapid industrialisation and growing urbanisatioi

 One of the fastest growing states in India

JMH^IHR

WHY CHHATTISGARH?

-iflH^^^^^^HSHBHi

 Energy Hub: One of few power surplus states in India  Wide range of fiscal and policy incentives for businesses  Chhattisgarh globally recognized brand - Maximum investment intents in the country amongst new states and second overall  Robust social and health infrastructure  New capital city being built at Naya Raipur on 8000 hectares with integrated theme townships, golf course, five star hotel, convention 1} centre, BRTS, educational institutions and all modern facilities.

1-7 ^*첢

2012

houses built at an estimated cost of Rs 11,800 crore for the needy families. CGHB will construct 30,000 houses at block and district headquarters in the first year, another 40,000 in the second year; and the remaining 30,000 in the third year." Reiterating the state government's resolve to create greater economic equality and ensure a certain/minimum standard of living for all its citizens, the Chief Minister said, "In view of population explosion and rapid urbanisation, our government has taken unprecedented steps to ensure affordable housing to the people as per their income levels and even grant subsidies to those who cannot afford. We are committed to provide houses to the people at a cost that does not impede their other basic needs." As per chief minister's directive and in accordance with the state policies, CGHB under the stewardship of Commissioner Sonmoni Borah has undertaken the onerous task of providing affordable housing to every section of the society as per their requirements. Notably, the Atal Vihar Yojana meant to cater to the villages and semi urban areas having a population of more than 5000 takes us closer to realizing the chief minister's 'Housing for AH' dream. If winter comes, can spring be far behind?

ADVANTAGE CHHATTISGARH  Seventy percent of initial agreements already implemented.  New automobile policy in place...better than many other states.  New solar power policy to be unveiled soon.  Surat-Paradip pipeline passing through state promises adequate gas.  A decent per capita income of Rs. 44,000.  Highest per capita power consumption at 1,552 units in country.  A power-surplus state; electricity easily available.  With no labour disputes, cost of setting up industries lowest in country.  Plenty of land easily available.

GLOBAL INVESTORS MEET-2012 INCREDIBLE INITIATIVES
Credible Chhattisgarh's incredible initiative, the Global Investors Meet & Exhibition 2012 is scheduled to take place in the first week of November. Spread over an area of about 35,000 sq mtrs in New Raipur, the upcoming investors' conclave is aimed at focussing on investment opportunities in Chhattisgarh, showcasing available resources and opportunities for national and international entrepreneurs and highlighting Chhattisgarh government's pro-growth policies and investor-friendly image. Brain-child of Chief Minister Dr Raman Singh, the investors' meet proposes to introduce its new capital city of Naya Raipur to a host of Fortune 500 companies, and attract domestic and overseas capital investment to a land pool of some 1,500 hectares. After having well-established industries in sectors like power, steel and cement, the Chhattisgarh government now has shifted its focus to actively promote its overall industrial development in sectors like IT & ITEs, Biotechnology & Pharmaceutical, Banking, Agro & Food Processing, Herbal Products, Automotive & Engineering, Tourism & Healthcare, Urban Infrastructure, Handicrafts And New & Renewable Energy and wants investments in these downstream sectors. The state Commerce & Industry

Secretary Dinesh Srivastava says, "This kind of event is happening for the first time in the state. Themed 'Credible Chhattisgarh,' the proposed Global Investors Meet is scheduled to take place in Naya Raipur on November 2-3, 2012." Interestingly, downstream sectors do not require much investment but can generate high employment opportunities between 50,000-60,000 jobs. Lauding its achievements within a short span, Chief Minister Dr Raman Singh says, "Chhattisgarh is one of the youngest states in the country. Twelve years is not a big span for any state. Yet, we have made tremendous progress. We have now a land pool of 1,500 hectares ready for investment in Naya Raipur, which sprawls over 8,000 hectares," adding "we have just completed a series of road-shows in major cities to publicise the Global Investors Meet and invite industrialists. To our great surprise, investors have shown great interests in our state. It was first such exercise to market the new state." One of India's youngest states, Chhattisgarh is amongst the fastest growing ones, registering more than 11% average Gross State Domestic Product growth rate in last three years. With 28 types of minerals, this mineral-rich state alone accounts for about 16 per cent of the nation's coal reserves. For being the country's leading producer of rice, the state is known worldwide as "Rice Bowl of India". Consistently ranked amongst the top 3 investment destinations in India in the last five years, Chhattisgarh has plenty of reasons to smile. Above all, this mega meet will not only bring business leaders, investors, corporations, thought leaders, policy & opinion makers, and CEOs of major national/international companies under one roof but also augur well for the state. If nothing else, this event will surely prove to be precursor for many of our states and foreign countries to showcase their strengths, progressive stance and investment opportunities.

