SURVEY 2012

SMALLTOWN WOMEN

BODY BOUNTIFUL
PORNOGRAPHY, PRE-TEEN SEX, WIFE SWAPPING. SMALL TOWN INDIA IS EXPERIMENTING LIKE NEVER BEFORE. AND AT THE CENTRE OF THIS ARE WOMEN.
By Damayanti Datta

A FINE BALANCE WOMEN IN SMALLTOWNS AND 49% WOMEN IN METROS HAVE AN EQUAL SAY IN SEXUAL MATTERS.

60%

49% WOMEN ENJOYWATCHING
PORN WITH THEIR SPOUSE/PARTNER IN SMALLTOWNS,WHILE ONLY 34% WOMEN IN METROS DO THE SAME.

38%

SMALLTOWN WOMEN AND 24% WOMEN IN METROS NEVER USE CONTRACEPTIVES DURING OR AFTER SEXUAL INTERCOURSE.

eyond the Fafa Mau bridge stands Govindpur, a small suburb of Allahabad in Uttar Pradesh. On a normal day, cycle rickshaws and three-wheelers crowd the narrow streets, scattering cows, children, dust and pebbles. Men urinate nonchalantly on the sidewalks. Women browse through stalls overflowing with petticoats, pyjamas and cheap cosmetics. In this colony of government officers and small-time traders, people get back from work by 6 p.m. and go off to bed by 9 p.m. What happens once the lights are out? Hush. Sex is something they don't talk about openly. This year, the 10th annual INDIA TODAY-Nielsen Sex Survey lifts the lid on the love life of the nation's small towns. If one considered them to be the landscape of sexual taboos and inhibitions, where young lovers are reprimanded regularly on Valentine's Day, this survey will force a rethink. India's small towns are opening up. And at the centre of this topsy-turvy tale are women. Of the four metros and 12 small towns surveyed, Kota in Rajasthan tops in sexual fantasies, voyeurism and detaching emotion from sex. Kolhapur in Maharashtra consumes pornogra-

B

phy the most, reaches orgasm most frequently and has maximum pre-teen sexual experience. Jamnagar in Gujarat tops in blind dates, masturbation and oral sex. Aizawl in Mizoram falls in love the most and leads in sexual activity before marriage. Kottayam in Kerala has the most liberal take on extramarital affairs and use of sex enhancers. Moradabad in Uttar Pradesh is second to none on incest awareness. Ratlam in Madhya Pradesh peaks in getting a high out of watching partners undress. Salem in Tamil Nadu searches social media for partners and fakes headaches to put off sex the most. Guntur in Andhra Pradesh marches ahead in saying yes to one-night stands. Asansol in West Bengal scores highest in considering wife swapping an acceptable adult game. Coming up an alley in Govindpur is a young woman in T-shirt and jeans. Eyes slide off her high heels and parlour-straight hair. Let's call her Ms X, a 28-year-old marketing professional who left the town seven years ago in search of better opportunities. A matronly woman greets her with exaggerated pleasure. How is big city Mumbai treating the former colony girl? Has she found a man? "Chahe kahi bhi pahunch jaye, reh to gayi akeli hi (Whatever heights you may have
BANDEEP SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

54% MARRIED WOMEN
IN METROS AND 43% SMALLTOWN WIVES AVOID SEX ,ALWAYS OR SOMETIMES, BY FAKING A HEADACHE.
reached, you are still single)." Ms X stands there thinking, this is the same woman who always bragged about her bed behaviour. "I have never initiated sex in 30 years of my married life," she would say. Ms X sighs to herself: "Nothing has changed around here." She needs a rethink, like the rest of metro India, about sex in the small town. Govindpur is changing. It is evident in the Bajaj Chetak scooters and Maruti Alto cars that have started appearing on the roads. A brand-new shopping complex now adds a punch of urban modernity to the old-fashioned landscape and to women's clothing: The dupatta on girls is no longer de rigueur just as jeans are no longer off-limits. For the first time in India, Tier II and Tier III towns are leading the demand surge and shopping like the metros. Brands are multiplying, start-up ventures are opening malls and multiplex chains are screening the latest movies. From personal grooming to

24

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

SURVEY 2012

SMALLTOWN WOMEN

dirty downloads
A pocket girlfriend on demand. Strip poker. Naughty apps to spice up lives of the swish smartphone set. VIDEO STRIP POKER
This interactive app lets users play poker against a model dressed in a red dress and shorts. Each time you win a round, she drops a piece of clothing. Developer Arawella Corporation Price Rs 150 hobbies include flashing her midriff and sucking her fingers. Developer Atrium Designs LLC Price Rs 55

MEETING & MATING

21% SMALL
TOWN WOMEN HAD SEX FOR THE FIRSTTIME IN THEIR PRE-TEENS AND TEENS COMPARED TO 13% IN THE METROS.

42% SMALL
TOWN WOMEN HAVE SEXAT LEAST 2-3 TIMES AWEEK; ONLY 33% IN METROS HAVE SEX AS FREQUENTLY.
SMALLTOWN GIRLS HAVE HAD THEIR FIRST KISS BETWEEN 12 AND 21 COMPARED TO 60% IN METROS.

COUPLE FOREPLAY
In the mood for some fun? Turn on this app and discover over 100 foreplay ideas. The app recommends a different activity for each partner to perform in turn. The game will ask you for the person you are having sex with each time and will remember all the names keyed in previously. Developer Sinziana Matei Free

PASSION
So your phone is now also a judge of your sexual stamina. Users can lay the phone on the bed next to them, turn on the app and masturbate. Registering vibration levels from hand movements, the app determines your sexual stamina. Developer Chris Alvares Price Rs 55

74%

MYVIBE
This app converts your phone into a three-speed vibrator. What was designed to help you hear your phone on silent mode could now well be where your next orgasm comes from. Developer MyPleasure Free
Compiled by Sonali Acharjee
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

POCKET GIRLFRIEND
Imagine a girl who does not wish to talk about her feelings, drinks like a man, is always up for sex and sits silently. That's what this app brings to users. A brunette girl whose favourite

health foods, lifestyle spending is the new mantra. And small towns are loosening their purse strings as well as their sexual mores. Ms X grew up hearing how vital it was to have sons ("Ladka bahoot zaroori hai"). Theirs was the only family in the colony with just two daughters. With a railway trade union leader for a father and a schoolteacher for a mother, she was the only girl in the colony who had boys as friends. "Nobody else did," she says. "Girls would go up to the terrace on the sly to chat with boys next door or pass on love letters. But they would never speak to boys openly." That social restraint seems to have become a thing of the past. Over 67 per cent small town women admitted to kissing mem-

bers of the opposite sex. For 74 per cent, the first kiss came between the ages of 12 and 21. And for 18 per cent, it was not an expression of love and romantic emotions.

M

s X first fell in love in college, with another 19-year-old. "It was driven purely by passion, but did not last long," she says. She also came to realise the boy did not have what she valued most in a partner: Brains. She quickly fell out of love and in love with a series of boys more suited to her sensibilities, until she left for big-city Mumbai. She was a rarity, she thinks. Seven years later, she no longer stands out. About 21 per cent of women in the survey

claim to have "dated someone of the opposite sex"--40 per cent out of them with more than one man. Does dating lead to deeper intimacy? Yes. About 19 per cent women have had their first sexual experience as teenagers and 2 per cent even before, as pre-teens. What do they look for in a partner? Over 51 per cent women look for laudable virtues like "honesty and integrity" but 64 per cent are ultimately won over by a partner's "beauty". Ms X has not found her Prince Charming yet but 67 per cent of her sisters in the survey claim to have found their "ideal" sexual partner: The husband (Ms X says "Huh" to that). About 42 per cent engage in sex at least three times a

week, with 38 per cent reaching orgasm "always" or "mostly" and 52 per cent feeling "fulfilled". "Do they even know what fulfilment means?" asks Ms X. "Sex for most is a five-minute ritual and only with the lights off. Women talk all the time about husbands scolding them, shouting at them or poking fun at them." There could be some truth in it: The survey shows that small town women have very little time for themselves: 55 per cent devote "every bit of free time"

and 30 per cent "more than 50 per cent" of their time to the family. Is the image of swinging small town India a fantasy or reality? Is sparkling sex more a man's world? Are women really enjoying themselves, caught as they are between old-fashioned buttoned-up sexual mores and conventional marriages? Why do the numbers show them to be less satisfied than metro women--from social life to emotional life? And why, for that matter, do small town `virgin' respon-

dents report greater satisfaction with life than the `non-virgins'? At a time when Indian metros are busy celebrating the hook-up culture, the body seems to matter more than the heart even in the small towns. `Arranged love', the foundation of small-town romance for long, is being overtaken by sex and free-spirited adventure. Ms X's good girl/bad girl tugof-war may soon just become the default mode of self-expression for the upcoming generations of women. 

26

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

