NA TION

AYODHYA
looping footage on the small battered TV of a hawker, Suresh Kumar, 45, a few hundred metres away from the disputed spot. Kumar sells hour-long CDs featuring clips of the demolition set to the soundtrack of Kamal Haasan's `Hey Ram'. "This is like prasad for the pilgrims who come here," he grins. "If it was illegal, the police would have stopped me," he says. His stall is loaded with Ram kitsch. Holographic images that flicker between Hanuman and Ram and even a framed portrait from Ramanand Sagar's 1987 TV serial. Ram appears in BJP slogans only when the party is in utter political desperation. It was the war cry for the restoration of the displaced god of Ayodhya that propelled BJP to the mainstream of Indian politics--and eventually into power. The party has effectively put Ayodhya on the back burner. Though no senior leader of the party admits it on record, BJP knows the issue is not relevant any more. Economic development and good governance are the buzzwords. Leaders of certain vintage like L.K. Advani and Murli Manohar Joshi still make a cursory reference to the contentious issue, but other party leaders like Nitin Gadkari, Arun Jaitley and Sushma Swaraj steer clear of it. "It is just one of those things that people expect us to do. If we don't talk about it, they will say the party has forgotten its promise. If we do, then they say we are living in a time warp," a senior party leader says. In the twin towns of Faizabad and Ayodhya, which have a combined population of over 200,000, however, the issue matters only as a painful reminder of the past. Inside the 200-room Rajsadan, home of the erstwhile royal family of Ayodha, Yatindra Mishra, 35, sniffs at the mention of the date. "The December 6 date suffocates us," the scion of the royal family says. "Ayodhya and its people fade from public memory once this date has passed. There is no tourism, no investment and no business," says Yatindra, a prolific poet and writer. Adil Mustafa, 30, was 10 when the mosque was demolished. He remembers being slapped by his mother for suggesting retaliation. Today, he is a

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

YOUNGSTERS PLAYAT A GROUND NEAR A TEMPLE IN AYODHYA

The temple issue was more political than religious. Now, it's dead politically and in people's lives.
42
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

INDIA R OUTGROWS AYODHYA

By Sandeep Unnithan in Ayodhya

amji Mishra, 45, a trinket vendor, sits cross-legged amidst religious souvenirs-- tiny brass maces, conches and bells. He sells these to devotees who visit the site of the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid barely 100 metres away. Mishra vividly recalls the afternoon of December 6, 1992. The roar of the kar sevaks, the clanging of their pickaxes and, finally, the red dust that rose from the collapsed onion domes of the Babri Masjid. "It was like a double Diwali for us," he says. That was then. Mishra is more circumspect now. During the state Assembly elections in March this year, he did the unthinkable. He voted for Samajwadi Party (SP) candidate Pawan Pandey. SP wrested the seat from BJP's four-time

MLA Lallu Singh but Mishra's family of four never understood his decision. Lord Ram, after all, was their livelihood. Mishra, however, had moved on. "I voted for a candidate who promised to deliver on civic amenities, not those who promised but didn't build a temple for so many years," he says. India has moved on too. Visitors from Lucknow can now drive down a new four-lane national highway in a little over two hours. It took over twice as long earlier. Over 8,000 security personnel guard the 2.77-acre site in Ayodhya, one of the most contested religious spots on earth after Jerusalem's Al Aqsa mosque. Visitors are subjected to a gauntlet of four patdown security checks that strip everything away--mobile phones, pens and belts--before they are propelled into a steel and wire mesh enclosed pathway

to the makeshift shrine where the kar sevaks had hastily installed three idols. They hesitantly worship at the shrine set on a mound over 30 feet away. Most just stare at the tarpaulin-covered structure. A dome-shaped CCTV camera stares back at them. "Anything that happens in Ayodhya reverberates around the country," a policeman at the shrine says. Over 2,000 people died in the orgy of violence across the country that followed the demolition. The issue now mainly simmers in the courts. On May 9 last year, the Supreme Court stayed a September 2010 decision of the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court. The Supreme Court ordered a status quo on the high court's decision for trifurcation of the disputed site between Hindus, Muslims and the Nirmohi Akhara. The demolition flickers as shrill

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

GUEST COLUMN

MARK TULLY
PUSHKARNA PRAMOD/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE DISTANTDOME
any claim to have known that the Babri Masjid, as of `the republic besmirched', and `the nation's shame'. But the controversial mosque at Ayodhya was known, the international press asked `will India fall to the zealots?', would come down on December 6, 1992. I have to and wrote of `centuries-old religious hatred'. When I was say I did not. Perhaps that's due to my gullibility. Maybe I interviewed as a BBC correspondent, I was asked whether should have taken more account of the ugly mood among India would become another Belfast or even Cyprus. I the supporters of the Ayodhya movement camped near replied firmly `no', saying, "In my experience, anger rises the mosque in the days before it was pulled down. But very rapidly in India but it dies down equally rapidly." standing on the roof of a building with a clear view of the The reason for this, I believe, is because there is no Babri Masjid on the day itself, watching men clad in saf- `centuries old religious hatred', that is a historical myth. fron robes jostling with each other to get on to the plat- Nor indeed, in spite of the efforts of Hindu and Muslim form where the ceremony was to be conducted, I still zealots, is there widespread religious hatred in India thought it was possible the mosque would survive. today. I am convinced that India is naturally a secular The uncertainty didn't last long. Trouble broke out in nation, that its culture is multi-religious. the space below me when young men wearing bright yelThe riots which followed the destruction of the low headbands broke through the barriers and started at- mosque, especially those in Mumbai, might have chaltacking the press, smashing cameras and trampling on lenged my certainty, but they didn't, because I knew a tape recorders. Perhaps encouraged by this first victory, major reason for the riots continuing were the police. a crowd surged towards the mosque shouting "Jai Shri Saying there is no widespread religious hatred doesn't Ram". The police cordons put up no resistance, and there mean there aren't some people in India who do hate peowas no sign of the large paramilitary force held in reserve ple of other faiths, and given the chance they do give vent in Faizabad. Within what seemed like no time at all young to that hatred. It's the duty of the police to prevent them men were clambering onto the mosque. As the last of the from doing so, but all too often the police fail to do their police walked away, showered with bricks and stones, two duty. Sometimes, as they did in Mumbai, the police make young men scrambled onto the top of the central dome, matters even worse by siding with one community in riots. planted a saffron flag there, and started hacking away the So, on the twentieth anniversary of Ayodhya, am I cermortar. It was clear the mosque was doomed. tain the chicken is dead? All the evidence goes to suggest On the day of the destruction my BBC colleague from it is. In the six years when it was in power at the Lucknow, Ramdutt Tripathi, said to me, "These people Centre, the BJP did not take up the issue of building a Ram have killed the chicken which lays Temple, nor is it a prominent issue in the egg." By that he meant the Ram politics today. Mandir movement was inspired by But it would be foolish to say the hatred of the mosque, rather than issue can never be revived. If it is, I the desire to build a temple there, believe the situation can be conand so it would be difficult to maintrolled provided the law against tain the movement's momentum. spreading religious hatred is enAfter all, to Hindus it's not the temforced. That doesn't just mean the ple building which is sacred so much police taking unbiased action during as the site on which it stands. Thoriots. It means taking action against ugh there is still no grand temple on those who make inflammatory the site where the mosque stood, speeches which provoke riots. There Ram and Sita are installed there and is one more proviso. The Ram they have plenty of worshippers. Mandir movement was political, and The death of the chicken is, in my it wasn't only the BJP which played view, one of the reasons why the politics with it. The Congress should worst fears expressed after the deremember Rajiv Gandhi launched struction of the mosque have not his campaign in the 1989 election In the six years when it was been realised. There is also, I think, with a speech from Faizabad where in power at the Centre, the BJP a more profound reason. Plenty of he spoke of Ram Rajya. Ayodhya did not take up the issue fears were expressed in the aftershowed that mixing religion and of building a Ram Temple, math of the destruction of the politics is playing with fire. nor is it a prominent issue mosque, especially in the internain politics today. tional press. The Indian press wrote Mark Tully is a veteran broadcaster

M

practising dentist in Faizabad and zips between his clinic where he sees five new patients each day and a cantonment board dispensary where he works free of cost. "There is no religious sentiment attached to the Babri Masjid-Ram Janmabhoomi site," he says. "It was a political issue and now even the politics has been taken out of it. Let the courts decide," he says. "We are reminded of December 6 when we are stopped for security checks four or five times a day, every single day of the year," says Dr Madhu Mishra, 30, a doctor at the Faizabad medical college. The date is an unofficial holiday in the twin towns. Students stay away from school and college. Shopkeepers down shutters, people stock up on food and medicines. The queue of visitors to the disputed structure turns into a trickle. But this fear of the unknown doesn't last very long. "The youth are staring at the electronic age. They see India as a superpower. They don't know anything about the history or the mystery of the Ram

KAR SEVAKS IN AYODHYA IN 1990

Ayodhya and its people fade from public memory once December 6 passes.There is no tourism and no investment."
YATINDRA MISHRA
Ayodhya royal family scion and poet

" "

The youth are staring at the electronic age. They don't know about the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid issue."
MANZAR MEHDI,
Editor, Aap ki Taqat

Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid issue," says Manzar Mehdi, editor of Aap ki Taqat, an Urdu-Hindi newspaper that preaches communal harmony. The last concerted and most direct attempt to reignite the issue came from the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT). LeT used videos of the 1992 demolition to indoctrinate Indian youth in its training camps. In July 2005, five LeT suicide attackers armed with assault rifles, grenades and explosives breached the disputed structure's outer perimeter. All five were gunned down by paramilitary personnel before they could inflict any damage. Faizabad's largely peaceful communal milieu that remained undisturbed even during the violence of December 1992 was shattered by riots on October 24 this year. The riots broke out during the immersion of an idol of Goddess Durga. Over 40 shops belonging to Muslims were burnt and a curfew imposed in the town for the first time since 1992. The disputed site less than seven km away was, however, not the provocation for the riot. Muslim leaders saw it as as an attempt by vested interests to create a fresh communal divide ahead of the General

Elections scheduled in 2014. BJP, they say, is torn between trying to consolidate the Hindu vote and driving Muslims away from SP. The party may have already found a new mascot. The Ayodhya unit has started putting up banners not with pictures of Lord Ram but of Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi. "We want UP to grow like Gujarat. We need Modi here. Let's see how it becomes possible," Ram Krishna Tiwari, BJP's Faizabad district president told Mail Today. The Vishwa Hindu Parishad, which commemorates December 6 as Shaurya Diwas (Day of Valour), released a slogan: "UP mein Gujarat hoga, Faizabad se shuruat hoga (There will be Gujarat in UP, it will begin in Faizabad)." But on December 5, the big news in the twin towns was not about the obtrusive security ahead of the 20th anniversary. It was that the state government would hire 72,825 primary schoolteachers this year. "Unemployment is rampant and the attractive pay scales after the Sixth Pay Commission mean young people seek the comfort of a government job," says Mirza Shahab Shah, head of the commerce faculty at Faizabad's RML University. Ayodhya, like India, has moved on. 

44

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

