NET FLUX
tweet tweet

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

Ruling the Roost
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on November 27: Netizens mourned India's loss against England in the recent Test match in Mumbai.They also questioned M.S. Dhoni's captaincy skills. People tweeted about their dislikes ranging from `people with attitude'to `doing homework.' Ram Jethmalani's suspension from BJP and his verbal attacks on Nitin Gadkari, seeking his resignation, dominated the social networks.
#IndvsEng
1,427,111

DANCE FOR FREEDOM
web wow Indian-born British sculptor
Anish Kapoor has come up with a video where he replicates the `Gangnam Style' for a cause. Supporting Chinese dissident artist Ai Weiwei's campaign to promote free speech, Kapoor, 58, has done a remake of the popular song with international artists like Tom Phillips and Mark Wallinger dancing handcuffed. The video, titled Gangnam for Freedom, has been supported by Amnesty International.

GANGNAM FOR FREEDOM

viral video
The most-viewed video this week was a safety campaign for metros in Melbourne. It featured animated characters singing about the dumbest ways to die. Other popular videos included a spoof on nightclub songs, most of which sound the same, and a video on what life would be if our friends started acting like cats and dogs.
Dumb ways to die 24 million Club songs sound the same 401,000 Cat friend, dog friend 218,595

#BJP
*Figures denote number of followers

990,305

#20thingsIdontlike
349,793

#Ramjethmalani
109,114

#MSD
25,379

app watch

net pranks
CasinoRoy,who belongs to social network Reddit, came up with an ingenious prank that has thoroughly spooked Facebook users.He searched for people with the same name as him and perfectly replicated their profile pictures-- from wardrobe to facial expressions.He then sent these people friend requests.

Child's Play
star of the week

Desi Doodle
Chandigarh-based Arun Kumar Yadav, 14,was crowned winner of the Doodle 4 Google India 2012 contest.Astudent of Kendriya Vidyala,Yadav picked up elements key to India's identity to create a Google Doodle,`APrism of Multiplicity' . The first letter `G'was a combination of India's popular sports-- cricket,football and hockey.For the other letters,he used elements including a kathakali dancer,gold jewellery,a peacock,a farmer and flowers.Yadav said he added the farmer because agriculture is the backbone of the Indian economy.His Doodle was displayed on Google's homepage on Children's Day.
YADAV (RIGHT) WITH HIS DOODLE

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for the organised, the app-crazy and the worried parent. Make your smartphone and tablet even smarter with these apps. JotNot Signature helps you sign documents in electronic format without having to print, sign and scan. The app has a built-in signature pad that drops the signature into your document directly. Todoist helps you manage tasks by sorting lists according to projects and priorities. Appsfire tells you about the latest and most popular apps. It curates apps based on your price range and interests.
DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

SHRAVAN (RIGHT) AND SANJAY KUMARAN

Catch Me Cop is an app made for kids, by kids. Brothers from Chennai, Shravan Kumaran, 12, and Sanjay Kumaran, 9, created a cops and robbers game.The app takes a con with a cop on his tail through a desert, a beach and a maze.The app already has more than 10,000 downloads.

newsnow
Turkish hackers shut down Google's Pakistan Website among 277 others, replacing the web page with a picture of two penguins walking along a bridge. Now, Indians can play games like Need For Speed, FIFA and Bejeweled on their mobile phones thanks to Disney UTV joining forces with EA Mobile.

81

NEW

