SPE CIAL REPORT

SACHIN TENDULKAR
tional runs from 193 Tests and 463 One-Day Internationals (ODIs) will become even more difficult to cross, as if it weren't already intimidating. Yet, if a rookie batsman manages to hit even one century, Team India's interests over the next few years will be better served. Persuading a national icon to relax his overstretched muscles, weary bones and time-torn tissues worn out by 23 years of hard toil, has never seemed so tough. It's not just about runs or hard work; Tendulkar has never shied away from either--a day after India lost the second Test against England in Mumbai, he went through a strenuous practice session at the Bandra Kurla Complex to regain his lost form. Unlike Sunil Gavaskar, who knocked just a few balls in the nets during his last years in international cricket, Tendulkar has gone on an overdrive by practising even harder at the fag end of his career which began with an ODI in Pakistan in 1989. No matter, it's time now. Time to go. Like VVS Laxman did in August this year even though he was picked again by selectors for the New Zealand home series--because his conscience felt he was blocking the way of a youngster. Like Rahul Dravid did in March because "it was the right time to move on, for a new generation of cricketers to play and take the team forward". The Australia series early next year will be an ideal platform to test a new batsman in place of Tendulkar. The newcomer will have the comfort of playing at home but will be dealing against quality opposition. It would give everyone an insight into his abilities to cope with tougher challenges abroad. In the last two years and leading up to the Kolkata Test which began on December 5, Tendulkar's record has been abysmal. He has played 28 innings without a century. There had been no half-century in the last 10 innings prior to Eden. An astonishing 42 per cent of his dismissals have been bowled in the last two seasons and 25 per cent have been leg before wicket (LBW), suggesting what experts say is diminishing reflexes. Former Indian opener Chetan Chauhan says: "From a batsman's point of view, it could be a technical error but it has a lot to do with his reflexes slowing down with age because of which he's coming late to the ball. The bat is 4.25 inches and when you play across the line, which he does a lot of times, he's showing just one inch of the bat. When your reflexes are better, you are able to meet the ball early. Also, I have a feeling his right hand is dominating and his left arm is weak, maybe because of an elbow problem, so he's playing across the line and getting LBW or bowled." A comparative study of Tendulkar with contemporaries like West Indies's Shivnarine

By G.S. Vivek

T

he stoic expression on his face defied the occasion. On December 5, Sachin Tendulkar pointed his bat towards the dressing room after reaching his halfcentury at Kolkata's Eden Gardens. It was a gesture of thanksgiving to his teammates, who have stood by him in this season of struggle. For him, 76 in the first innings of the third Test against England was partial redemption--he had managed, yet again, to tell his body to do what his mind so desperately wants. He didn't manage a Test century, which has been eluding him since January 2, 2011. But he

TIME TO GO
He's 39. At the Eden, he has redeemed his reputation. Why shouldn't the maestro now leave with grace?
did manage to re-stitch his tattered dignity. Now comes the test. Will Tendulkar presume the return to form is fresh licence to delay his departure? Let's assume Tendulkar manages to put a lid on his longest lean patch in international cricket with a century in this England series. Assume that he slaps it back to his critics by devastating Pakistan in the brief three-match series that begins on December 25. So what? Tendulkar, the only person to score 100 international centuries, will make his 101st international century. He will score 50 centuries in the shorter format--he has 49 currently. His record of becoming the first man to cross 34,000 interna26
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

PTI PHOTO

SACHIN TENDULKAR WALKS BACK TO THE PAVILION AFTER LOSING HIS WICKET ON DAY 1 OF THE THIRD INDIA-ENGLAND CRICKET TEST MATCH AT EDEN GARDENS IN KOLKATA ON OCTOBER 13, 2008  INDIA TODAY 00 DECEMBER 5

SPE CIAL REPORT THE CONTENDERS
AJINKYA RAHANE

SACHIN TENDULKAR
Proven perfomers on the domestic circuit, these young and not-so-young players wait in the wings to fill Tendulkar's big shoes

WHO WILL BELLTHE CAT?
CRICKET BOARD FINDS ITSELF IN A FIX
In recent times, legends of the game like Kapil Dev and Sunil Gavaskar have suggested the selectors have a word with Tendulkar on his future. Ian Chappell and Imran Khan have been categorical in saying he should have retired by now while Sourav Ganguly suggested an alternative avenue, quitting ODIs to save his Test future. Former Indian all-rounder Manoj Prabhakar feels the decision could come any time, any day. "Age is a big factor. At this age, he can't get any better. The ultimate thing is to get 100 centuries and he's got that. We should give him his own time to decide because Tendulkar is in a different league altogether," says Prabhakar. He should know. He helped Tendulkar get to his first hundred in 1990 and was his opening partner in ODIs. Tendulkar cannot be part of the 2015 World Cup, rather he should not. But by playing in the Pakistan or England ODI series he would harm a deserving candidate with a chance of making it to the quadrennial event. And if Tendulkar decides to pick and choose, as in the recent past, he'll reiterate he's bigger than the game, lording over the selectors as well as the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI). The selectors, unfortunately, have little say in anything. Vikram Rathore has played a mere six Tests, Saba Karim has played one and Rajinder Hans, left-arm spinner who played for Uttar Pradesh and former junior national selector, never donned India colours at any level. Only Roger Binny and chairman Sandeep Patil have the stature to speak to Tendulkar or decide on dropping him. Patil, who made Tendulkar a member of Mumbai's Cricket Club of India and was the national team's coach when Tendulkar was skipper, could be the best

SUBRAMANIAM BADRINATH
32, RHB The most obvious choice to bat at No. 4. The Tamil Nadu batsman has been unlucky not to get an extended run despite scoring runs against all opposition, across all formats and in all conditions. Badri is known as Mr Consistent in domestic cricket. WHY HIM He has the ability to soak in pressure and deliver.

MOHAMMAD KAIF 32, RHB
The most experienced of the contenders, with 13 Tests. Kaif last played a Test against the West Indies in 2006, and scored his best (148) in his last series for India.The Uttar Pradesh batsman is Anil Kumble's choice to replace Tendulkar. WHY HE WORKS Agile at 32, he's the best short-term bet. the bench in ODIs for almost a year despite having got a hundred in his last game. WHY HE COULD WORK Has always cashed in on opportunities and shown hunger to excel.

24, RIGHT-HAND BATSMAN (RHB) Made a good first impression filling in for Tendulkar in ODIs. The Mumbaikar was kept in the Test squad as a reserve opener for almost a year without being able to break in. Selectors now want him to play in the middle order. WHY HE'S GOOD Is young and has been a consistent scorer.

SURESH RAINA
26, LEFT-HAND BATSMAN Currently fighting for the No. 6 slot with Yuvraj Singh. Scored a century on Test debut and has seven half-centuries in 17

Tests.The Uttar Pradesh batsman is India's go-to man in ODIs and T20s but had to wait five years for his Test debut. WHY HE'S GOOD India has invested heavily in him.

MANOJ TIWARY 27, RHB
The Bengal batsman has been consistent in domestic and India A games and has made the most of limited opportunities. Was made to warm

Chanderpaul, South Africa's Jacques Kallis and now-retired Australian Ricky Ponting is instructive (see table). Since 2010-11, Tendulkar has only six half-centuries to his credit in 27 innings whereas Ponting, who decided his time was up because "he wasn't contributing enough", had two centuries, including a double century, and six half-centuries in 28 innings. Chanderpaul, who is 38, and boasts of an average of 74.22-- almost double of Tendulkar's--has five centuries to his name in the same post-2011 period. The 37-year-old Kallis has scored four centuries in just 22 innings. Tendulkar's contemporaries have also had an extended lean patch--Chanderpaul has had the worst with 41 innings without a century but the West Indian was 28 in 2002 when it ended. Tendulkar is 39 at the time of fighting off the worst crisis in his two-decade-old glittering career. He

WHERE OLD IS GOLD
Tendulkar's Test form might have plummeted since 2010-11 but other old warhorses have excelled at the fag end of their careers. PERFORMANCES POST 2010-11 Mts Inns Runs Tendulkar 15 27 870 Ponting 16 28 1,015 Chanderpaul 17 30 1,633 Kallis 13 22 1,033 HS 94 221 203* 224 Avg 32.22 37.59 74.22 51.65 100 0 2 5 4 50 6 6 6 2

*Stats by Rajneesh Gupta ** Before the Eden Gardens Test

will be 40-plus when he goes to South Africa by 2013 year-end and thereby reach his magical 200-Test mark--yet another record. But what will it mean to Team India or its gradual progression? One of the biggest fears that seems to have gripped Tendulkar is life after retirement, for he's seldom thought about anything other than cricket all these years. He seems to be unsure whether he will be able to enjoy the view from the tinted windows of his Perry Cross street bungalow. Will it be as exciting as the view from the middle of the Wankhede? He admits he has no clue to what life would be after retirement. "It is going to be hard because I haven't experienced anything close to what I might go through when I retire. I cannot relate this moment with any other moment in my life," Tendulkar said in a TV interview in September. "I am already 39 and no one expects me to go on playing forever," he added. Tendulkar has been tossing around his post-retirement plans, accepting a Rajya Sabha nomination, perhaps seeking to veer towards a path already walked by Mohammad Azharuddin, Navjot Sidhu and Kirti Azad. He's taken the veil off some of his philanthropic ventures quietly pursued all these years to hint at a career in social service. But if he does want to remain rooted to the cricket field, he can always become a member of the Mumbai Indians think tank or groom the next Tendulkar, his 13-year-old son Arjun, literally waiting in his own living room.

Is falling brand value the writing on the wall?

FADING STAR

17

Number of brands endorsed byTendulkar at an estimated fee of Rs 6 crore per year per client.The brands are Adidas,Amit Enterprises Housing,Aviva, Canon, Boost, Castrol, Coca-Cola, Indian Broad Federation,Jaypee Cement,Joy of Giving Week, Kasperksy Lab, Luminous, Reynolds, ITC Sunfeast,Toshiba, Ujala and Unicef.

50%
is the extent to which Sachin's brand value is expected to dip within two years of retirement, according to sources in the advertising industry.

6 5 3

endorsement deals are expected to end in 2012, subject to renewal.The deals are with Aviva, Castrol, Kaspersky Lab, Luminous, Ujala and Reynolds.The deal with Canon wasn't renewed. more endorsement deals are expected to end by 2013. These are with Amit Enterprises Housing, Boost, Coca-Cola, ITC Sunfeast and Toshiba.

contracts were signed by Sachin this year, with the brands BMW, Live Pure and SMAASH.

Rs

IS SACHIN'S TOTAL ESTIMATED BRAND VALUE.THIS INCLUDES ENDORSEMENT FEES, IPL MATCH FEES AND GOODWILL.

200 CRORE

28

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

SPE CIAL REPORT

SACHIN TENDULKAR
placed to take the call. But will he? BCCI, too, seems to be in a quandary. Accused of ill-treating several legends, the board has been overtly cautious with regard to Tendulkar's retirement policy. The board also seems to have its own commercial compulsions in delaying Tendulkar's farewell. With Virat Kohli not yet the next icon and captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni losing some of his aura, the board will find it difficult to keep spectators flocking to the stadiums.

23 Years of Wear and Tear
The Master Blaster has taken several body blows in his epic career ABDOMEN
2009 Hit by a rising delivery from New Zealand's Ian O'Brien in the second ODI but played on and aggravated the injury. Missed the fourth ODI.

SHOULDER
2006 Suffered a posterior labrum tear on his right shoulder and underwent surgery in London. Was ruled out of the West Indies tour.

ELBOW
2004-05 Had surgery after a tennis elbow injury. Had to sit out ODI series in Holland and England, the Champions Trophy and two Tests against Australia.

THE BUSINESS OF CRICKET
SACHIN'S BOX-OFFICE APPEAL UNMATCHED
Commercially, Tendulkar has a lot riding on him. At present, he is endorsing 17 brands and 11 of those contracts run till 2014. Experts contend that contracts with Amit Enterprises Housing, Coca-Cola and Toshiba end in 2013, subject to renewal. Advertising industry professionals estimate that his brand value--said to be around Rs 200 crore annually at present--could dip by 50 per cent within two years of retirement. "Sachin's brand value will definitely diminish after he retires. That had happened to Kapil Dev and Sourav Ganguly. It's simple--jo dikhta hai woh bikta hai," says Sanjay Shukla of Percept D'Mark, a celebrity management company that handles cricketers. Canon, for instance, has already hired 24-yearold actor Anushka Sharma as brand ambassador. "We had a good five-year association with Sachin but did not renew it this time," says Alok Bhardwaj, senior vice-president, Canon India. He says five years ago the average age of the customer was 35 which has now dropped to 27. Tendulkar won't bow out while everyone is baying for his blood. For, it would mean the media will decide on retirements, and in a country where cricket starts at an early age, life for 30-plus cricketers will be insecure. That's perhaps why teammates reportedly urged Laxman and Dravid not to retire after a poor Australia series early this year. But they did; now it's Tendulkar's turn. Tendulkar might want to prove a point here but this is beyond numbers, or short-term prospects. Team India needs long-term investments that would see someone join the league of Cheteshwar Pujara and Virat Kohli to form a stable middle-order like Tendulkar, Dravid, Laxman and Ganguly did for all of the last decade. The argument would then dwell on his immediate replacements. The list can be exhaustive and the arguments about who will fill Tendulkar's big shoes can be never-ending. Yet, India needs to find one, just as it managed to find replacements for Dravid and Laxman. But for that to happen, Tendulkar has to go.
with Shravya Jain

BACK GROIN
2008 Suffered a groin injury in the first Test against South Africa. Skipped the first few matches in the IPL. 1999 Aggravated a chronic back injury during the Chennai Test against Pakistan where he scored a century.

FINGER HAMSTRING
2002 Strained his hamstring while scoring 176 against the West Indies. Needed rest for three weeks. Missed the ODI series. 2011 Injured his right hamstring during the second ODI against South Africa. Ruled out of the remaining series. 2010 Leading Mumbai Indians, split the finger webbing during IPL semi-final. 2003 Despite pain in the ring finger of his left hand, went on to become Player of the Tournament in the World Cup. Had surgery in the US. 2012 Struck by a rising delivery on his left hand by Doug Bollinger during an IPL match.

KNEE
2007 Sustained a knee injury while fielding during the second Test against Pakistan. MRI scan revealed a surgery wasn't needed.

TOE
2001 Fractured the sesamoid bone on the back of his right big toe. It has broken into pieces. It will never heal, according to doctors.

ANKLE
2003 Sprained his right ankle while ducking a bouncer from Sreesanth during practice. Missed four ODIs against New Zealand.

30

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

