NA TION

UTTAR PRADESH
PTI PRAMOD SRIVASTAV

TRAIN FROM NOWHERE
Despite the recent inauguration of a rail coach factory, industry in Sonia's constituency is in a dismal state
By Ashish Misra

mid great fanfare, Sonia Gandhi inaugurated a railway coach factory at Rae Bareli, her constituency, on November 7. As the Congress president climbed into one of the 20 brand new coaches flagged off that day, it was meant to symbolise the return of industry to the VIP constituency. But dig underneath the hype and there isn't much to celebrate. All 20 coaches that the Congress president flagged off, were made at the coach factory in Kapurthala, Punjab, 900 km away, and were merely painted in Rae Bareli. The factory that Sonia inaugurated only has denting and painting facilities as of now. The cost of transporting the coaches from Kapurthala added an extra 10-15 per cent to the Rs 2.5 crore-per-bogie cost. Construction of the Rae Bareli factory, spread over 541 hectares of land in the Lalganj area, began in March 2009. But after three years, only the first phase--the finishing and furnishing workshop--has been completed. Currently, there is no rail coach manufacturing unit in this factory. The project was to have been completed by April 2013, but locals estimate it will be completed only in 2014. This has raised questions about the hurried launch. Delhi has a budget of Rs 1,685 crore for this factory spread over four years, of which only Rs 800 crore has been spent. Says BSP leader Ram Lakhan Pasi of Rae Bareli, "Sonia Gandhi has fooled the public by launching the coach factory, as it doesn't have any machines related

A

to manufacture of rail coaches." Sonia promised that one person from every family whose land had been taken for the factory would get a job here. So far, 350 workers have been engaged, but of these, as many as 275 are from the Kapurthala Rail Coach factory. The 1,436 families which sold their land, from villages such as Ehaar, Yusufpur, Govindpur, Biswapur, Dakwamau are unhappy. Jagat Pal of Yusufpur said that when officers were acquiring land for the factory, they had promised one job per family. So far, 136 people from Rae Bareli have got jobs, but none will be posted at the new factory. Not wanting to be named, an official from the factory pointed out that the jobs that were offered were with the Lucknow division of Indian Railways while the villagers were under the impression that they would get jobs at the local coach factory. This is not the only development story that has run into hurdles. In the last month, two big factories--UP State Spinning Company and Sheena Home Tech Private Limited--have shut down. In 2004, when Sonia first became MP from Rae Bareli, she too wanted to encourage local employment for women. A carpet factory, Sheena, was set up in October 2005 on the Rae Bareli-Sultanpur Road, by taking 30 acres of land on lease from National Textile Corporation. The USP of this factory was that it was run by 800 women workers. During the first four years, this factory became famous for producing quality carpets, and found a market abroad, specially in the US. By 2009-10, though,

IN THE LAST MONTH ALONE, TWO FACTORIES, UP STATE SPINNING COMPANYAND SHEENA HOME TECH, SHUT DOWN IN RAE BARELI.
Gupta, "After 1989, when a nonCongress government came to power in the state, all exemptions ran out." Another tale of neglect is the UP State Spinning Company, set up in 1975. On November 5, its employees got a shock. When they reached the factory, they found a lockout notice pinned to its main gate. The reason for closure was that the factory, which made thread, was running at a loss due to poor quality of raw material. The shutdown left all 450 employees without work a week before Diwali. Although this is a state government decision, locals are taking out their ire against their influential MP by staging protests against her. The district industry centre claims that during last 10 years, as many as 855 small and medium-sized factories, out of 2,312 in the district, have either closed down or are on the verge of closure. Of the 12 big ones, six have shut down. As a result, 10,000 workers became unemployed in the last 10 years. Take the case of Nandanganj Sugar Mill at Dariyapur, spread over 97 acres, which has been closed for the last two years. The mill was set up in 1979 and had the capacity to crush 15,000 quin-

demand fell due to global recession. As a result, the factory, also known as `Sonia Factory', was closed. The issue was raised by out-of-work employees during Sonia's visit. It was former prime minister Indira Gandhi, then an MP from Rae Bareli, who first created an industrial buzz here. Between 1973 and 1975, she set up two industrial belts in the district-- on Sultanpur Road and on the Rae Bareli-Amawan Road. In 1975, UP Small Industries Corporation and Bank of Baroda, in a joint initiative, selected 15 graduate engineers from across the country to establishing industry in the region. They were given cheap bank

(ABOVE) SONIA AT RAE BARELI RAIL FACTORY; THE DERELICT UP STATE SPINNING COMPANY FACTORY IN THE CONSTITUENCY

loans and high subsidies. As a result, two dozen factories, making electronics, fabrics and iron works, were set up. At that time, there was a Congress government both at the Centre and the state. Both gave infrastructural support to these industries. Y.K. Gupta, an industrialist, set up an iron works factory in Rae Bareli in 1975. He recalls that the district neither had raw material for factories such as his, nor a market for the products. But due to high subsidies, cost of production was low enough to make them viable. Says

tals of sugarcane daily. But it was unable to procure raw material, and went into loss. During the last season, it got only 3.25 lakh tonnes of sugarcane, when it needed 15 lakh tonnes. All 800 workers have been laid off. Fear of unemployment is also troubling 3,000 workers of Indian Telephone Industries (ITI). Set up in 1973, its workers have little work today. D.S. Misra, district president of Indian National Trade Union Congress, said that from 2004 till now, ITI had been given a budgetary provision of Rs 4,000 crore, but no new machines were bought. Pradeep Azad, founder-member of the Indian Industry Association says, "Indira Gandhi held development seminars at the district council. Sonia has not held one meeting with industrialists." K.L. Sharma, Sonia's local pointman, says, "Not only in Rae Bareli, but in other districts as well, factories established during Congress rule in the state are now in trouble." He adds, "We arranged for another industrialist to take over the Sheena factory, but the present management is not interested. We have spoken to the state government to reopen the spinning mill as well. An All India Institute of Medical Sciences can be set up in the land once used by the Daryapur Sugar Mill." Sharma's word and Sonia's recent visit has triggered hopes of revival. But India's most powerful MP will have to deliver more than rhetoric. The people of Rae Bareli have put her on notice: In the 2012 Assembly polls, the Congress lost all seats here. The General Elections are a little over a year away. 

70

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

