NA TION

REFORMS

What's Next
The Government needs to get these Bills off the ground for the vote to translate into growth

FDI in Insurance
The Bill will raise the FDI cap in the insurance sector from 26 per cent to 49 per cent. If implemented,it will give the much needed financial boost to private insurance companies and help expand insurance coverage. STATUS Pending in Parliament

Pension Bill
The Bill will provide a regulatory framework in law for the Pension Funds Regulatory and Development Authority.It will permit foreign investment in pension funds up to 26 per cent. If implemented,it will provide greater choice to consumers who inevitably drift to the stateowned Employees Provident Fund Organisation. STATUS Pending in Parliament

Companies Bill
The Bill will amend the antiquated Companies Law from 1956. If implemented,it will ensure better corporate governance standards and prevent frauds of the Satyam kind. STATUS Pending in Parliament

PRIME MINISTER MANMOHAN SINGH WITH FINANCE MINISTER P. CHIDAMBARAM
PTI

Banking Laws Bill
The Bill will allow RBI to give out new banking licences and increase voting rights of large shareholders from a maximum of 10 per cent to 26 per cent. If implemented,it will improve banking penetration in the country. STATUS Cleared by Cabinet

LICENCE TO DELIVER
Parliamentary victory on FDI puts the onus on UPA to keep the promise now
By Dhiraj Nayyar

t 6.45 p.m. on December 5, BJP's motion against FDI in multi-brand retail was defeated in Parliament. The prospects of the country's sputtering economy received a shot in the arm. That the economic reform exercise was given a lease of life by the instinctively anti-reform Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party, both of which spoke eloquently against FDI in retail before walking out ahead of the crucial vote, is an ironic yet crucial fact. The reluctance of the Uttar Pradesh heavy-

A

weights to either bring down the UPA Government or vote with BJP in Parliament should give Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Finance Minister P. Chidambaram the necessary political room to push ahead with more reform measures in this session and the next. The Congress party and the Government are on the same page. Speaking for the Government, Jyotiraditya Scindia, minister for power, said, "This is a message for the reforms process to continue." Congress MP Sanjay Nirupam reflected the party's gung-ho mood after the victory:

"The FDI vote has sent a strong message to the Government to go ahead with the planned reforms." MP and Congress spokesman Sandeep Dikshit said, "Pension and insurance reforms are next." A visibly unhappy Trinamool Congress MP believes the die is cast for reforms: "Of course, they will go ahead with reforms. They have the ISI stamp from the Lok Sabha." The Government needed some good news. On December 1, it learnt that GDP growth in the second quarter of 2012-13, between the months of July and September 2012, had slid to 5.3 per cent from 5.5 per cent in the three

months between April and June. The economy had not performed worse in a decade. On December 4, investment bank Morgan Stanley raised its India growth forecast from 5.1 per cent to 5.4 per cent for the financial year 2012-13. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects India to grow at just 4.9 per cent in 2012. The prospects of an early recovery are dim. Morgan Stanley pre-

dicts a growth rate of just over 6 per cent for 2013-14, the year in the leadup to the General Elections. IMF predicts 6 per cent. That is bad news for a Government which won a second term in office after an average growth rate of over 8 per cent per year between 2004 and 2009. In 2007, UPA brought India close to the cherished growth rate of 10 per cent, before imploding in its second term. Corruption and policy paralysis have pushed the economy into a hole. It will take months, if not years, to get out. Still, by staking its political future on FDI in retail, the Government has at least shown intent. That has boosted investor confidence. The stock markets began to incorporate the Government's new intent first. On November 27, the day the Government agreed to a vote on FDI in Parliament, the Sensex soared past 19,000, rising by more than 300 points in a single day. The Government had finally signalled it would not be bullied by the Opposition. Economist Surjit Bhalla believes the FDI vote is an important victory for reforms. More importantly, he says, "This will end opposition for opposition's sake" on BJP's part. It may persuade the party to back at least two reformist Bills it supported while in government: The Bill to raise the FDI cap in insurance and the one to open up the pension sector. Neither is as politically contentious as FDI in retail. Neither has a broad resonance with the man on the street. The passage of both Bills, pending since NDA's time in government, will be yet another indicator of the Government getting back to business. Others are not as sanguine about the prospects of reform. Says economist Bibek Debroy, "I don't see the parties which abstained in the retail vote backing FDI in insurance and pension." He argues the real obstacles to higher growth are not legislative, but in fact executive. "To get from 5.5 per cent to 6.5 per cent growth, the Government

needs to sort out the National Investment Board and see speedy environmental clearances are given. That's not happening. Also, the big fiscal deficit is an executive issue, not a legislative one," he says. One reform that requires both legislative and executive action is land acquisition. It is unlikely that the Government will be able to forge a broad consensus on this issue, perhaps more contentious than even FDI in retail. There is, so far, no consensus on whether the Government should acquire land for the private sector, even for a deemed `public purpose'. There is also no clarity on what the appropriate price is to buy agricultural land for industrial use. The Congress is unlikely to take the risk of pushing the land acquisition Bill when it will likely need the support of allies and opposition parties for its pet Food Security Bill. Shortly after the FDI vote, Congress spokesman Rashid Alvi said FDI in insurance was very much on the agenda. Tellingly, he did not say anything about the land acquisition Bill.

EVEN A LIMITED ROLLOUT OF THE FDI POLICYWILL TAKE 12-18 MONTHS AND YIELD NO BENEFITS BEFORE THE GENERAL ELECTIONS.

n the short run, the retail FDI policy is unlikely to have real impact on the ground. For one, only 10 states are permitting FDI in retail, which is in any case restricted to cities with a population of over a million. Some of the largest states, including Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh, will not implement the policy. The size of investments and the extent of supply chain development will therefore be constrained from the start. Second, even the limited rollout will take at least 12-18 months. The Congress is not likely to reap any benefits before the General Elections. However, it would have pacified nervous rating agencies and foreign investors about its commitment to reform. Any downgrade of India's sovereign debt rating is now unlikely. UPA has won itself a lot of breathing space with its victory in the FDI vote. It still has to make deft use of that space to power the economy and return India to the path of prosperity it had abandoned in 2010.
with Priya Sahgal

I

40

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

