UP FRONT

CHRISTOPHE JAFFRELOT

THE FADING SAFFRON
he recent attacks on Nitin Gadkari by senior BJP nobody in the Parivar knew how to fight a political battle members for the alleged financial irregularities of better than the BJP leaders. He was right. But the RSS may be the group he heads reconfirm the leadership crisis less interested in winning elections than in retaining its within the party. But the implications of this crisis are influence over the party. becoming more compelling by the day. Today, the RSS is facing new kinds of problems. It is eager The crisis is not new. The party is looking for a successor to impose Gadkari for a second term against the wishes of to Atal Bihari Vajpayee--who still appears as the number one many party leaders; but the man is not made of prime leader on the BJP website--and L.K. Advani for some time. ministerial material and is facing charges of corruption. The There is no obvious successor to this duo among the main fig- Sangh Parivar is experiencing the same decline of public ures of the next generation--Arun Jaitley, Sushma Swaraj morality as the rest of post-liberalisation India--and the RSS and Narendra Modi, who are locked in factional fights. realises that it has selected a businessman at its own risk. We need to look beyond this tamasha, at more structural Why is the RSS adamant? Because its leaders badly need tensions inherent in the functioning of the Sangh Parivar. someone they can fully trust--not a `politician'--to cope Most of the political parties of India are their own masters. with the rise of Modi. Certainly, the Chief Minister of Gujarat The BJP is not. Like its predecessor, the Jan Sangh, it is sub- is a zealot of Hindutva and a former pracharak, but he is too servient to the RSS, its mother organisation. It is one element independent-minded for a movement where egos are of the Sangh Parivar among others, as evident from the fact supposed to merge with the organisation. And he has also that after the 2009 defeat of the NDA, the RSS imposed become too big, as evident from the way he forced Gadkari Gadkari as party president. The RSS then exerted enough to get rid of his arch enemy, Sanjay Joshi. If Modi becomes pressure on the BJP to amend its constitution in order to make BJP president, he may try to liberate the party from the a second term possible for Gadkari. And in reaction to the influence of the RSS more than any of his predecessors. most recent attacks on the party president, the RSS asked Anticipating a hat-trick in Gujarat, Modi is steadily asserting himself as the BJP's one of its senior swayamsevaks, SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com S. Gurumurthy, to conduct an prime minister-in-waiting--by inquiry, which resulted in a clean default, and because of his chit. Finally, a senior Sangh popularity among the middle officer, M.G. Vaidya, went on the class nouveaux riches. Who else, offensive by suggesting that Modi for these children of Indian was responsible for the campaign reforms, can re-energise a paraagainst Gadkari. lysed economy? Few parties have their interModi is not only a problem nal fights monitored this way by for the RSS, it is also one for the `outsiders'. This situation may not BJP and the Indian polity at be a problem for the BMS, the ABVP large. Not only because he is the only chief minister with two or the VHP, but it is structurally ex-government members (Maya problematic for the BJP. As a politKodnani and Amit Shah) subjecical party, the BJP needs to be on ted to judicial investigation/ prosits own for two reasons. It is a ecution for bloody crimes, but question of credibility--and even also because he is not acceptable of democratic credibility (This is to other NDA partners, including what was at stake in the Janata Party `dual membership' controthe JD(U). If Nitish Kumar refuses versy in 1978-79 when ex-Jan to rally behind him and leaves Why is the RSS adamant? Because its Sanghis elected on a party platthe NDA, he may form a winning leaders badly need someone they can form were accused of promoting coalition with other state parties. the agenda of a non-elected body, It is high time the BJP put its fully trust--not a `politician'--to cope the RSS). It is also a question of house in order, not only for its with the rise of Modi. Certainly, the own sake but for the sake of strategy, as Advani emphasised in Chief Minister of Gujarat is a zealot of India's political stability. 2005 during an eventful National Hindutva and a former pracharak, but Executive meeting. Objecting to he is too independent-minded for a the diktat of the RSS, he argued Christophe Jaffrelot is a French that Sangh's control over the BJP political scientist and has written movement where egos are supposed was counterproductive because extensively on RSS and BJP to merge with the organisation.

T

06

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

