SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

IN THE CITY
RESTAURANT

Bite of China
A decade or two ago, Chinese food for many Delhiiites meant chop suey, fried rice, Manchurian and drinks with paper umbrellas stuck in them. Even today, the number of authentic Chinese fine-dining restaurants in Delhi can be counted on the fingers of one hand, which makes China Doll a welcome entrant, as it brings traditional Hunan cuisine to the city. The restaurant boasts of a band of chefs straight from China, who are more than willing to come to your table and help you order. The food at this month-old restaurant is a real winner. A lightly spiced chicken wonton soup makes for a great start for an appetising evening ahead. Hunan flavours work well with chicken, so for main course, try the Chicken Hunan Style--a dish prepared with a generous sprinkling

Smokin' hot
Located on the rooftop of Crescent Mall is Delhi's first all American barbecue stop, Smoke House BBQ. On offer are barbecue delicacies ranging from contemporary classics to Smoke House's own creations. The smokey aroma, soft music, and winter chill fill the air as you arrive. With a spectacular view of the Qutub Minar, we suggest you let the ambience and music sink in before you order, because the food and exotic cocktails definitely steal the show. Grab a drink, sit back and unwind. We began our evening with the Colacolada--two scoops of frozen Pina Colada topped with freshly chopped pineapple, served along with a tiny shot glass of rum and fresh coconut milk. A visual delight, it's equally exciting on the palate. For appetisers we sampled the Loaded potato skins--flavourful and tender, with a smokey aroma; and Corn on the

cob--baked with parmesan and mild spices. Once the food arrives, a rack of homemade barbecue sauces will be placed on your table. Choose from Beer Barbeque, Spicy Rum and Piri Piri BBQ Mayo. They all have a distinct flavour, and go well with their meats. For main course we strongly recommend the BBQ Smoked Spatchcock Chicken, slowly grilled, it's tender and juicy, and full of flavour. Served with a portion of barbecued potatoes and some salad, this is a whole meal in itself. End your meal with the Banoffee Pie--do not think you can skip this--moderately sweet and delicate, it just melts in the mouth. And if nothing else, this pie will turn you into a regular here. Average meal for two Rs 2,400 plus taxes At Third Floor, The Crescent Mall, Lado Sarai, Mehrauli Tel 8800777074
by

Ekta Marwaha

of pepper. Barbecued Peking Duck, tender and juicy underneath the crispy skin, is also a good main course option. End your meal with not-too-sweet date pancakes, which are served with a generous scoop of vanilla ice cream. Average meal for two Rs 2,500 plus taxes At D 14, 3rd floor, South Extension Part 2 Tel 43333666
by

Ekta Alreja

s-12

SIMPLY DELHI  DECEMBER 2012

SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

PHOTOGRAPHY

ANKUSH MARIA

Don't say cheese!
Blame digital cameras for bringing out the amateur photographer in most of us. But when you need a professional photographer for special occasions--be it a milestone birthday, wedding, or even a corporate function, you need someone who will do justice to the function. These days, stiffly posed pictures with fake smiles are no longer in vogue. Instead, people prefer candid shots, taken when people aren't expecting it. The idea of conceptual photography is to capture real moments, events and emotions and to play with angles and light. It's been a while since photographers took

to this style of capturing pictures, but it's never been as wildly popular as it is now. Delhi-based photographer Avin Chhabra (his work, above right) explains that he started photography with basic portraits, but soon got bored of it. "I wanted to click unique pictures that were out of the ordinary. No one wants stand up pictures with the usual poses anymore. They want different angles, wigs, fancy make up and more." So, he tied up with stylists and make up artists who were ready to conceptualise along with him. Ankush Maria, another citybased photographer (his work, above left), points out that people

BRA are more receptive to such shoots now than they were earlier, though this is still more prevalent in studios. "If you notice, wedding photography has also changed drastically over the years. Earlier it was very posed and stiff, but now the bride and groom want candid photographs, prewedding and post-wedding shoots," he explains. So, the next time for your big day, plan ahead to have some candid memories. For more information, go to: avinchhabra.com; ankushmaria.com by Ekta Marwaha

AVIN CHAB

EVENTS
DECEMBER 9
Gear up
Based on the concept of Tour de France, come and be part of our country's first cycling marathon Godrej Eon Tour de India presented by Hero Cycles. This 130 km long cyclothon will be held at the Buddh International Circuit, where bikers from over 54 nationalities will participate. The money generated from this event will be spent on purchasing bikes for women in rural parts of the country. Registrations open. Log on to: tourdeindia.asia
by

Ekta Marwaha

s-14

SIMPLY DELHI  DECEMBER 2012

