SIGNATURE
B O T T O M L I N E

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

THE ICKY IKEA PRINCIPLE

I

t's getting icky for Ikea. On Friday, November 23, the Government of India's top economic policy mandarins, who also constitute the Foreign Investment Promotion Board, decided that while it was okay for the Swedish multinational to sell its chairs and tables in India, it was not okay for Ikea to sell its iconic meatballs. The bureaucrats, in their narrow wisdom, decided that the company, which has proposed to invest $2 billion in India, would have to stick to its "core" business, furniture. In-store cafes would not be permissible. Perhaps the instinctively protectionist mandarins were worried that Ikea's meatballs would wipe out the indigenous kofta-making industry. Evidence suggests otherwise. The once-dreaded McDonald's failed to wipe out thriving local fast food chains like Haldiram's. In fact, Indian fast food chains upgraded their standards of hygiene to compete with McDonald's and other foreign food retailers. They ended up delivering superior quality food at lower prices to consumers because of competition, not protection. Perhaps the bureaucrats, all of who joined the Government in the heydays of socialism in the 1970s, were just doing what they were originally trained to do--micromanage the economy. Until economic liberalisation in 1991, bureaucrats decided who could set up which business, in how much quantity goods and services would be produced, and at what prices they would be sold. Clearly, the hangover lingers two decades on. The ironically named Foreign Investment Promotion Board is also set to enforce stringent local sourcing requirements on Ikea. The chosen Indian suppliers will get a free ride, even if their quality and prices do not match the best in the world. Without bureaucratic intervention,

Indian suppliers would have no choice but to upgrade to global standards if they hoped to win orders from Ikea. That would be good for India, much better than supposedly `enlightened' Government diktat. It would not be surprising if Ikea were to withhold, or downsize, its investment plans after reading the fine print. Fortunately, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs can overrule the advice of its mandarins. It should. Nobody knows better than the ruling Government's politicians what a mess economic micromanagement can land them in. This Government was engulfed by the telecom spectrum scam because it insisted on pricing spectrum on discretionary ministerial wisdom. It was burnt by the coal scam because a committee of bureaucrats arbitrarily decided who was to be allocated which mine. It is caught in an embarrassing fracas with India's largest corporate, Reliance Industries, because the Ministry of Petroleum sets the price at which private explorers have to sell their gas. Long ago, the bankruptcy of the Soviet Union ought to have been enough to convince even die hard control freaks that governments, as a rule, do not make good decisions on prices and allocations. Markets do. For once, it may be in the self-interest of a government which stands accused of rampant corruption and rank crony capitalism to change course decisively. In 1991, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Finance Minister P. Chidambaram were core members of a team that unleashed the energies of the private sector. Twenty-one years on, they can secure a place in history by breaking the umbilical cord of government that continues to strangle India's true economic potential. They can start by disbanding the Foreign Investment Promotion Board. 

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

IT WOULD NOT BE SURPRISING IF IKEA WERE TO WITHHOLD ITS INVESTMENT PLANS. FORTUNATELY, THE CABINET COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AFFAIRS CAN OVERRULE THE ADVICE OF ITS MANDARINS. NOBODY KNOWS BETTER THAN THE RULING GOVERNMENT'S POLITICIANS WHAT A MESS ECONOMIC MICROMANAGEMENT CAN LAND THEM IN.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Govinda Pillai, veteran CPI(M) leader from Kerala, in Thiruvananthapuram on November 22 after a prolonged illness. PILLAI He was 86.
16
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

APPOINTED Syed Asif Ibrahim, as the new Intelligence Bureau (IB) chief. Ibrahim, the first Muslim to head IB, will take over from Nehchal Sandhu on December 31. NAMED Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar, in US news

magazine Foreign Policy's Top 100 Global Thinkers list. He was ranked 77. APPOINTED IPS officer Alok Joshi, as the new chief of the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW). Joshi will succeed Sanjeev Tripathi on December 30.

NAMED Arvind Kejriwal's political party, as Aam Aadmi Party (AAP). Manish Sisodia, Prashant Bhushan and Yogendra Yadav are among the 21-member national execuKEJRIWAL tive of AAP.

