UP FRONT

ANANYA VAJPEYI

MODI AND THE MAHATMA
ater this month, Narendra Modi seems poised to sweep and "the desire to harm"--as a necessary tool of goverGujarat's Assembly elections for a third time. He is nance and development. It is not so much the fact of positioning himself as the prime ministerial candidate violence as the wish to dominate the weak, put minorities from the BJP in the 2014 General Elections. But in the moral in their place and establish Hindu supremacy that makes conscience of secular Indians, Gujarat 2002 remains a Modi's politics irredeemably anti-Gandhian. In spring 2002, the administration became a source of calamitous setback for our diverse and democratic polity. The conviction of Maya Kodnani, a former minister in Modi's threat for, rather than the refuge of, Gujarat's Muslims. The Cabinet, for her role in the Naroda Patiya massacre, dented term deployed since colonial times to describe sectarian Modi's insistence that no harm was done to Gujarat's violence whilst absolving the state of both blame and responMuslims with his government's complicity. The Naroda sibility, is "communal riot". Delhi 1984, Bombay 1992-93, and Patiya verdict rekindled the old trauma of why, how and Gujarat 2002 have been cast as spontaneous "rioting" rather when Mahatma Gandhi's Gujarat became the theatre of than as the planned, targeted murder of minority communities with the cooperation of the law and order machinery. religious politics, sectarian strife and atavistic violence. When Gandhi advocated ahimsa, he was teaching his The term that Gandhi used to spell out his political creed of non-violence in the first half of the 20th century followers to curb their violent tendencies, to fortify themwas ahimsa. We now think of ahimsa as a Gandhian selves against the urge to "riot" contra the overbearing coinage, but the term and idea have both existed for three force of the British colonial state. The idea that violence will millennia in Indian religious and philosophical thought, erupt like lava from underneath the skin of the body politic particularly in Jainism and Buddhism. The significant has been misused routinely by politicians. After Indira presence of Jains in elite Gujarati society exposed Gandhi Gandhi's assassination, Rajiv Gandhi spoke of the gruesome to the concept of ahimsa, literally "the absence of the massacre of nearly 3,000 Sikhs in Delhi in November 1984 desire to harm others", from a very young age. As the as inevitable--the earth that shakes "when a big tree falls". leader of India's nationalist movement, he transposed Modi talked about the horrors visited upon Gujarat's non-violence out of the esoteric and ascetic doctrines of the Muslims in 2002 in terms of "action" and "reaction", applying the pseudo-Newtonian language of inevitability to Jain philosophy into popular politics. For Gandhi, India's political goal was swaraj, which was killings that had taken months to orchestrate and realise. It would seem that state institutions, political parties and not only emancipation from foreign rule, but also the effort to liberate the self from the desire to harm others, and civil society are arranged in a circle, and sometimes--in thereby to achieve a real mastery over one's violent moments that are not quite predictable, but not utterly impulses. In the Gandhian struggle, ahimsa and swaraj had preposterous either--at the centre of this circumference to be inextricably wedded to one another--there could be of linkages, there opens up the abyss of unimaginable violence. Gandhi apprehended that no true freedom, for the individual or SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com violence is the appalling hub of both for India, without non-violence. social networks and individual conThe violent partition of British India sciousness. The sovereignty of the self in August 1947 undid Gandhi's leaderlies in its mastery over deep, primordial, ship of a non-violent nationalist moveand adamantine violence. True swaraj ment. Scarce six months later he was does not reside in the sovereign state's shot dead by the Hindu fanatic Godse, establishment of its exclusive monopoly who represented the resentful hope of over violence, but in extinguishing the many Indians that without Gandhi desire to harm from the very orientathere would be no more archaic talk tion of the self towards the other. of ahimsa hampering the unambiguThere is alas a mutually enabling ously violent advance of the new nation relationship of modern hate and the into its postcolonial future. In keeping modern state: Two entities with which with this cruel volte-face of history, the citizens of democratic India must faGandhi's home state was the first to It is not so much the fact of miliarise themselves to a far greater exforget him and move on. tent than they might have hoped at the Today the symbol of Gujarat is no violence as the wish to put time of the founding of their republic. longer Gandhi but Modi, who could minorities in their place and hardly be a more Manichean Other to establish Hindu supremacy the Mahatma, so committed is the Chief Ananya Vajpeyi's new book, Righteous that makes Modi's politics Minister to the unashamed deployment Republic: The Political Foundations of Modern irredeemably anti-Gandhian. of himsa--etymologically, both "harm" India, is published by Harvard University Press

L

14

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

