NA TION

DEFENCE

INDIAN BIG GUNS READYTO FIRE
Indigenous industry steps into the buying freeze to fulfil the Indian Army's need for Rs 27,000-crore worth of heavy artillery

BHARAT FORGE
BABA KALYANI CMD
In the reckoning for towed artillery contracts for 400 guns worth Rs 3,200 crore, with another 1,580 to be built subsequently. Target of 2015 for completion of first towed gun.

DRDO
VIJAY SARASWAT DIRECTOR GENERAL
Launched Advanced Towed Artillery Gun Programme last year. First prototype, being developed at the Armament Research & Development Establishment, Pune, to be out by 2015.

ORDNANCE FACTORY BOARD
SUDHIR KUMAR BERI CHAIRMAN
Bagged Army order for 200 Boforstype towed artillery guns. Will deliver four prototypes of these guns by early next year. Further orders depend on performance of initial batch.

RAHUL CHAUDHRYAT THE MANEKSHAW CENTRE, DELHI CANTONMENT, WITH THE 155 MM HOWITZER MOUNTED GUN

TATAPOWER SED
RAHUL CHAUDHRY, CEO
In the fray for the mounted gun system contract for 814 guns worth Rs 8,500 crore. The prototype rolled out this year has over 50 per cent indigenous content. metall, have been blacklisted by the Ministry of Defence (MOD) over allegations of bribing defence personnel. These allegations have severely hit the Army's bid to acquire five different types of howitzers--tracked, wheeled, towed, mounted and air-droppable ultralight guns--over the past decade. The MOD blacklist has constricted the Army's options, casting, as one military official puts it, a `Bofors jinx' over purchases. Bofors, now owned by Britain's BAE Systems, opted out of the contest because it was not confident of offering the cheapest options. Over the past five years, the Army has repeatedly rung alarm bells over its dwindling artillery arsenal. Finally, last year, Defence Acquisition Council decided to look within the country for speedy augmentation. It asked OFB to start manufacturing howitzers.

RAJWANT RAWAT/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Sandeep Unnithan and Lemuel Lall

n a crisp New Delhi winter morning, Rahul Chaudhry, 48, the soft-spoken bespectacled CEO of Tata Power Strategic Electronics Division, regards his firm's newest product with pride and trepidation. Standing before him is the culmination of five years of development: A 155 mm Bofors-type howitzer mounted on an eight-wheeled Tata truck. The mounted gun system (MGS), as it is called, can fire a volley of six rounds at a target 40 km away in less than three minutes. It is India's first indigenously designed and developed howitzer. "We haven't asked the Government to fund this project. We have invested our shareholders' money," says Chaudhry. The 1999 Kargil conflict, where the

O

Swedish-made Bofors howitzers shelled the heights occupied by the Pakistani army, demonstrated why the Indian Army needed such firepower. Nearly half the 400 Pakistani army soldiers who died were killed by Indian artillery shells. In 1999, the Army kickstarted an artillery requirement programme to import 2,200 Bofors-type artillery guns for over Rs 27,000 crore. This was because no Indian firm made the guns. Now, the sheer size of the Army's artillery buy, the world's largest, has prompted Indian industry to invest in gun manufacture. The $100 billion (Rs 500,000 crore) Tata Group is not the only one to venture into the howitzer business. In week long trials that concluded on December 6 this year, the state-owned Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) test-fired the first of howitzers manufactured at its Jabalpur factory.

The guns were the first lot of 200 such howitzers for the Army. Private sector firm Bharat Forge has a deadline of 2015 to complete a towed version of a 155 mm howitzer it is quietly developing at its Pune facility. The Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), too, hopes to field its own design of a 155 mm howitzer by 2014. These indigenous gun projects have given the Army a host of indigenous options to choose from. Indigenous capability is not however the only reason the Army has been unable to buy a new howitzer in the 25 years since it acquired the Bofors guns. A series of corruption cases in artillery procurement, beginning with the Bofors scandal in 1987, has scuttled new purchases. Four international howitzer firms, Soltam, Denel, Singapore Technologies Kinetics and Rhein-

Defence Minister A.K. Antony flagged off a gun manufacturing facility at OFB's century-old Gun Carriage Factory in Jabalpur on September 22. The Army has welcomed the entry of multiple players even though it will take at least five years before it gets Indian-made guns. "Our artillery requirement is so huge and running so late that we will need multiple players and production lines in order to buy all our guns even by 2022," says a general. The private sector has tried to compress time schedules by buying technology from overseas. Bharat Forge, for instance, bought gun technology from Austrian and Swiss howitzer makers for its indigenous gun. Tata Power used the experience it gained from two projects--a 2006 order worth Rs 172 crore for 20 Pinaka multi-barrelled rocket launchers for the Army and a modest project for a truck-mounted 105 mm howitzer. It imported the gun and firing mechanism from abroad but mastered the critical technologies of fire control systems and ballistics required to accurately fire the shells. The gun system awaits government clearance for firing trials at an MOD artillery test range in Rajasthan. If they are successful, they can bid in the Army's tender for 814 such truck-mounted guns worth over Rs 8,500 crore. The firm has presented the Government with a detailed roadmap for the indigenous production of its mounted gun. It could well be an escape route out of the Army's Bofors jinx. 

30

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

