AnlFTlP

CTleature ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDOCATION

FACILITATING OKlb-CLASS TECHNICAL EDUCATION
'

Hid

* in ow

Dr. SJ, ftfa

rmn, jtJCtl leSIs t« r«or«,,»
· How in your opinion has technical education in India evolved over the last few years? Technical Education in India has seen a massive expansion in the last 5 years so much so that in certain sectors the expansion has been three times over. This has certainly improved access. However this massive expansion has brought in challenges like finding quality staff or even required number of faculty, some amount of commercialisation and falling standards. · However with some institutions wishing to close shop and the regulatory process in the quest of quality closing some, consolidation seems to be taking place. The good ones will prevail and the bad ones will close shop, strengthening the maxim of "Provide quality or perish". · You have been associated with AICTE since 2009. Tell us about the I challenges you have faced in this tenure? The real challenge has been to provide the stake holders a credible system I,, that delivers. A regulatory process that was short on robust practices and ;:: procedures also brought about several incongruities while implementing many of its objectives like inordinate delays, unfair practices and corruption, in the past. The public opinion was at a low when AICTE embarked on a massive makeover in 2010 that led to comprehensive e-governance being implemented. · What kind of changes have you brought in the organization in terms of performance and execution?

We
in all the the eco at AICTE are have ft purely

was
that was on

to a The and
of the

and is
This has

to
is one of its the

and RT1 and is the

with ease of use, is

and

AICTE thus created a web-based system with secured online access to the institute providing a channel for submitting online applications for various approvals and subsequent tracking of the application by the applicant. It also provides a reporting and analytical tool for AICTE that handles complex

and dynamic requirements. The ability to send automated notifications via email, sms etc has further improved the stakeholder confidence. Online grievance redressal mechanism has helped in furthering the credibility. This effort has something for every stake holder like the online scholarship applications for the students, online approval for the Institutions, Online Experts Database and Online Schemes, their applications and processing for faculty and MIS Reports for the society. Today there is an improved brand perception of AICTE as a brand ambassador for Technical education in the country. i What are your ambitions? How do you plan to expand the reach of the organization? Entropy in the Universe should rise indicating that the well being of the Universe is improving. If I can contribute to the well being of our society and make an addition to the entropy, I am happy. On a different note, we have now developed the National Vocational Education qualification framework (NVEQF) in association with MHRD, which we see would be the future for this Country. Several quality initiatives are also put in place to improve quality of Technical education. Promoting Community college concept in our Polytechnics to reach out to the marginalised is another. i What should the public know about AICTE approved colleges and the quality of education and infrastructure they should expect vs those that are not approved? AICTE Web Portal lists both the approved and the non-approved institutions. As a regulator, we have several procedures in place to check unfair practices, to improve faculty quality through various schemes and also to improve Infrastructure. We have surprise visits to improve performance. In future we would also have mentoring visits. My advice is to go to credible Institutes and do a data check on our website and avoid the non-approved Institutes. i At what position do you think our technical institutes stand on the global platform in comparison to those considered the best in the world? Where do you think we lack, and how can we cope with our shortcomings? Top end of our Institutions are as good as any in the World. However the big difference is the industry interaction. In the west, there is a much bigger synergy between an Institution and industry in terms of research and training. The finances required for this is also forthcoming from the Industry. I would like to see the Industry contributing much more in India not so much in terms of funding as in terms of real time projects and consequent participation in research. i Education has become quite technology friendly these days. Be it distance education, e-learning or even m-learning, there are plenty of methods being adopted and AICTE itself is welcoming and adapting to this change. How effective or ineffectual are such learning methodologies for technical education in particular? Is classroom learning more effective in comparison to such methods of study? There is no substitute to a good teacher. I completely believe in "Gurur Brahma Gurur Vishnu Gurur Devo Maheshwara, Gurur Sakshat Parabrahma Tasmai Shree Guruvey Mamaha. However, with good teachers coming at a premium, value added propositions need to be explored. Technologies for distance education, e-learning or even m-learning, though have a great potential to provide education to unreached sections of the society are not a substitute for formal learning methods and should be exercised with caution when purely technical subjects that are conceptually strong in content are sought to be given through these technologies. i Vocational education is being seen as a major point of employment generation in our country. How well are these programs being received? AICTE is actively engaged in the Skills development which is an extremely important activity for a growing economy such as ours. Every student who goes through higher education will be well served if he or she has additional

skills acquired along with his / her studies. It enhances the employability opportunities. On the other hand skills acquired for a student who does not go through a formal education would provide a means of self employment and also a chance for employment in the formal sector. Focused skill development, with employability as the maxim is the need of the day. AICTE with MHRD has developed a scheme for Vocational education where a student can learn competency based skills along with general education in seven certificate levels starting from 9th class going all the way upto graduate level. Bachelor degree in Vocational Education is now duly constituted. A student in this mode will be able to study for a Diploma or a Degree in Vocational education along with acquiring skills. The most important feature is that the student can also avail of multi point entry and exit between formal or vocational education or the Job market. Setting up Community colleges new or in our existing polytechnics also needs to be pushed aggressively so that competency based skills with basic life skills is imparted to enhance the employment potential of our youth. i Please throw some light on the role of finishing schools or institutions meant for personality development in technical education. How will these benefit our economy? Finishing schools coined in Switzerland, were known for serving to prepare girls for marriage. We have used this concept to improve the presentation and communication skills amongst our students so that their employability improves. Students from the vernacular schools often find it difficult to progress effectively and hence the intervention. However I believe this will be effective only when the student is conceptually strong in his / her subject area. I also feel that a massive investment in our construction, manufacturing and service sectors needs to be made to improve employment avenues. The primary, secondary and the tertiary markets need to be explored much more for employment opportunities. i Please throw some light on the additional endeavours made for the physically challenged. We have made it mandatory for all our Institutions to provide for barrier free environments, adequately designed toilets, ramps etc. We also have mandated a percentage of seats reserved for them in our institutions. i Could you please tell us if there are any other facilities that female students have been sanctioned? Or in what ways does the institute support women empowerment? AICTE allows concessions in requirement of land when women only institutions are setup further to a certain relief in processing fee or the security fee. Women empowerment is a very important aspect of the approval process. i What factor should one (student) consider while choosing courses and a quality institution? What is your advice to both parents and students? The trend today is a return to core engineering branches like civil, electrical and mechanical. This was expected because of the versatility of these courses and inherent opportunities these courses provide in employment and entrepreneurial ventures. With a slowdown of general IT, ITES sectors and economic slowdown that we are witnessing it is a time consolidation and return back to basics. With a GDP at 5.5% and still falling, and a growth rate of about 1.5% the purchasing power or the per capita income is a measly 4%. Add to this an inflation rate of 8% we have a difficult economic scene in the country. Hence it makes great sense to return to basics. This does not mean that it is a finish for our IT journey. These would pick up once the global recessional tendencies wane. A massive investment needs to be actively wooed in all 3 employment sectors and let the economy take a leap forward. Students and parents are advised to visit the Institution that they shortlist and experience the campus academic ambience before actual admissions are made. They should also visit the website www.aicte-india.org and other statutory sites for additional information.

Top end of our Institutions are as good as any in the World. However the big is the industry interaction. In the is a bigger synergy an Institution and in of and training. The lor this is also from the i like to see the Industry contributing much more in not so much in terms as in of real time and participation in research.

