SP ORT

IOASUSPENSION
as India's nominated representative in used his clout in the international body to get the election nullified and IOA suspended. "Randhir is responsible for the entire mess. He can do anything to save his chair," says Chautala. "He conspired against the nation. Being an IOC official, he should have helped the country, but he had vested interests," he adds. Randhir counters that. "These people don't understand IOC is not run by the whims and fancies of one person. There's a system in place and these people don't follow it. Even in boxing, these people (Chautala's group) tried to force their way and the Indian boxing federation itself is suspended. I knew the problem would arise and wrote to the Government and IOC. When I knew we would have a problem, I withdrew," he tells INDIA TODAY.
IOC,

LOWAFTER
Randhir Singh and Abhay Chautala's battle for IOA supremacy costs India its Olympic recognition
By G.S. Vivek

LONDON HIGH
I
ndia was derecognised by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) on December 4, ironically in the same year it basked in the glory of its best Olympic medal haul. IOC cited contravention of its charter and statutes for the extreme step. The Olympic charter, last amended in 2011, says there should be no government interference in the election process of national sports bodies. The Indian Olympic Association (IOA) follows the government sports code of 2010. Central to the suspension story is veteran sports administrator Randhir Singh, 67, and his battle for the IOA president's post against influential Haryana politician Abhay Chautala, 49. Chautala successfully lobbied to reduce Randhir's vote to a minority in the run-up to the IOA election and got elected unopposed. He claims Randhir,

I A QUESTION OF TIME
INDIA COULD HAVE BEEN SUSPENDED TWO YEARS AGO. WHY NOW? But the timing of IOC's suspension on December 4 lends credence to Chautala's allegations. Even when Randhir filed his nom-

CHAUTALA CLAIMS RANDHIR USED HIS CLOUT IN IOC TO GET IOA SUSPENDED AND ITS ELECTION NULLIFIED.

SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

SP ORT

IOASUSPENSION

NO SPORTING SPIRIT It's a familiar cast of characters at play in India's sporting officialdom
Randhir Singh, 67
Five-time Olympian, former Asian Games gold medallist in shooting and secretarygeneral of IOA since 1988. Decided to contest for the IOA president's post in August this year but withdrew later.

Abhay Singh Chautala, 49
Indian boxing chief since 2001 and a powerful Haryana politician, Chautala won unopposed as IOA president in an election on December 5 deemed null and void by IOC.

Suresh Kalmadi, 68
The invisible man behind the scenes.The Congress MP decided not to contest elections to sports bodies after being accused in the CWG case but played a pivotal role in Chautala's election.

Lalit Bhanot, 57
Out on bail in the CWG scam case, his nomination as IOA secretary was condemned by the IOC ethics committee.Won unopposed and played a big role in garnering votes for Chautala, which eventually forced Randhir to pull out.

Shamed by Ambition

Rs 25 cr

is roughly what IOA has in its operating account. Clearly, the fight is not about the money. Then why the battle? Purely for power and prestige.The IOA head gets ready access to international forums and corporate giants.

ination, he knew the election would be held under the government sports code, which would be in contravention of the IOC charter. The code is a diluted version of the controversial sports Bill, first introduced in 1975 and reworked in 2010, which keeps a cap of three tenures of four years each and also fixes the maximum age of 70 to hold posts in sports federations. Before the election, Randhir had invited every member of the association for a get-together but just five to seven officials attended. A day before, Chautala had extended a similar invitation for the official announcement of his candidature. That event saw a huge turnout--attended among others by controversial sports administrator Suresh Kalmadi. The writing was on the wall. After hectic parleys appeared unlikely to succeed in getting votes, Randhir and members of his group announced their withdrawal one after the other. All of a sudden, they noticed violations of the IOC charter. Randhir allegedly used his influence in IOC. Soon, the sword of suspension, hanging over IOA for two years, fell without further warning. Sports ministry officials had explained their stance on the officials' age limit and tenure issue and their censure on sports federations to IOC in 2010--but IOC still saw it as government interference and the explanation

was not accepted. IOC had sent its first letter threatening suspension on November 23, just two days before Randhir withdrew his nomination. The timing was eerily coincidental. Interestingly, Randhir had decided to call time on his career as an administrator last year and sent an emotional letter to the media, expressing his desire to move on from IOA and IOC. However, his wish to pass on the IOC representative seat to his daughter, Sunaina Kumari, ruffled feathers. Officials felt the seat wasn't a family preserve--his father, Raja Bhalender Singh, was an IOC member for 45 years--and there were candidates worthier than his daughter, the president of the Lawn Bowling Association.

I KALMADI'S LONG SHADOW
THE FORMER IOA CHIEF USED CHAUTALA AGAINST FORMER ALLY RANDHIR Sensing opposition to his proposal, Randhir felt it was in his best interests to contest again and establish his authority. Suresh Kalmadi, who in the post-Commonwealth Games (CWG) scenario--having served time in jail and faced corruption charges--had effectively been forced into early retirement, sprang into action behind the scenes to prevent Randhir from getting elected as president. Kalmadi and Randhir have never been great friends. They were a con-

venient doubles pair aiming at individual gains. Their nearly two-decade collaboration took a bitter turn after CWG. While Kalmadi was upset at Randhir playing only an ornamental role in staging the Games--and subsequently escaping with a clean image --Randhir felt he was sidelined. Kalmadi saw in Chautala the ideal candidate to pit against Randhir. The Haryana politician was the right match for Randhir in power and influence--who could forget his dazzling party in Sydney during the 2000 Olympics and the silver gifts to all the guests when he celebrated his election as the boxing federation chief. But someone still had to ensure enough votes went in his favour. Kalmadi's trusted aide Lalit Bhanot, also chargesheeted in CWG scam cases, came into the picture and played negotiator. Randhir says he had warned IOA on several occasions about the consequences. "I had merely asked them to postpone the election till the time all the parties involved in the process, IOA, IOC and the Government, could sit together and resolve it. But they didn't budge." He says it is time to clean the system by weeding out people with no sporting background. "When IOC had said they could not hold any meeting or election, they still went ahead. So who is to blame?" asks Randhir. That question is open to debate. 

50

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

