MAIL

Between the Sheets of Small Town India
DECEMBER 10, 2012

Exclusive Sex Survey 2012: A Decade of Mapping Sexuality

Watching pornography is acceptable among small town youth today. It gives one an idea of how to satisfy his or her partner and there's nothing shameful about that.
A N N U A R O R A , Bangalore

End the Hypocrisy
Your cover story on India's changing outlook towards sexuality ("Between the Sheets of Small Town India", December 10) reflects the dichotomy in opinion and perception that the country, especially its small towns, continue to have towards sex. While the Internet boom and globalisation have helped people shed many inhibitions with regard to sex, several stereotypes continue to exist. The very fact that small town men would rather ogle at women than ask them out on a date points to this very dichotomy, which borders on hypocrisy. India still has to go a long way before it can overcome this hypocrisy. For a healthy society that is safe for women and bereft of sexual perversion, free and frank discussion on sex is important.
ROHAN SAWANT, Mumbai

Telecom Scam
The confession by the retired directorgeneral of CAG, R.P. Singh that he signed loss figures in 2G spectrum dealings as he was under pressure from higher officers, points to a serious breach of duty ("Caught in the Numbers Game," December 10). All his post-retirement benefits should be stopped for negligence PTI of duty. He should have informed authorities concerned of these irregularities when he was on duty and not after he has retired.
SUBHASH CHANDRA AGARWAL, Delhi

By confessing to the irregularities in the 2G case after retirement and by stating he was forced to do so, R.P. Singh is trying to evade his role in the scam. His confession does not negate the fact that he was guilty of signing loss papers in the 2G case.
SUNIL KUMAR, Chennai

Several factors contribute towards small town India's willingness to experiment with sex. Firstly, technology boom has brought innovative sex right to one's bedroom. With a small smartphone in hand, one can access any information from any remote corner of the world. And sex tops the list of subjects that people seek information on. Secondly, the dissolution of the joint family structure has meant an increasing number of people live in nuclear families and have greater scope to experiment. Sexual urge and the desire to experiment is natural. It is only that people previously didn't have the opportunity or the knowledge which is no longer the case.
MANMOHAN BHATIA, Delhi

While it is a positive sign that Indians are becoming

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

``

``

MAIL
increasingly experimental when it comes to sex, the fact that we still shy away from discussing it openly and prefer stealth and secrecy remains a worrying factor. Sex is natural and unless we treat it so, India--be it the cities and small town--will not be able to get over stereotypes that often lead to victimisation and abuse of women.
MOHANA GHOSH, via email

35
publicity. When Gadkari has already said in a press conference that he is not guilty and is open to the idea of investigation by an agency, Jethmalani should desist from making baseless allegations till further investigations. Politicians should air their opinion at party meets, not in public.
RAMESH MAYA, via email

mercial considerations should not be given importance when it's a question of safety of air travellers. If flight operations are allowed to continue, ignoring the norms, Indian aviation's international ratings would certainly be downgraded. It is essential for DGCA to instil a sense of security in travellers.
RAMESH D., via email

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
DECEMBER 16-31, 197 7

A Friend in Need
The absence of a suitable Indian response has been among the more remarkable phenomena associated with the latest peace moves in the Middle East. While President Sadat has risked his neck and his country's security by going to Jerusalem, his so-called friends in New Delhi have been content with issuing only a lukewarm note of support for the Egyptian initiative. Twenty years ago, during the last big "story" to break in the Middle East, India's response was different. When Britain, France and Israel invaded Egypt during the Suez crisis of 1956, Nehru was in the front rank of those who provided in-

Aviation Alert
The aviation story relating to Jammu, Patna, Calicut and Mangalore airports is an eye-opener ("On a Wing and a Prayer", December 10).These airports are the most dangerous for travellers from the safety point of view and have serious deficiencies when it comes to flight operations. Mangalore and Calicut airports are located in a table-top area. Under such circumstances, extraordinary care should be taken for the safety of passengers. It is very unfortunate that India has not learnt a lesson even after the Mangalore crash.
R.D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

Fissures in BJP
Ram Jethmalani may not necessarily command a mass following to cause irreparable damage to the BJP's organisational and public support structure, yet his habit of frequently questioning the wisdom of Nitin Gadkari continuing as the party president is bound to dent BJP's image ("Battering Ram and Crouching BJP," December 10). What the top leadership of BJP fails to acknowledge, deliberately or otherwise, is that their persistent arguments defending Gadkari are likely to create more suspicion among the party's followers. In the party's best interest, BJP must resist any attempt by RSS to grant an extended term to Gadkari as president.
PRAMOD SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

It is very shocking that many of country's fully functional airports are flight-unworthy, thanks to politics and other commercial reasons. It is high time security and safety issues of the reported airports are dealt with in all the seriousness they deserve. DGCA must act fast to rectify the situation or own responsibility for any disaster taking place for want of action.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Right to Love
It is unfortunate that even in the 21st century, two person who love each other have to be constantly worried about their safety and feel threatened because they have married outside the community and against their family's wishes ("`They Will Come After Us'", December 10). Loving and marrying a person of one's choice is a fundamental right of every individual in India. Those who violate this law should be strictly dealt with.
ROHINI GUPTA, Nainital

Ram Jethmalani's attack on Nitin Gadkari is unreasonable and uncalled for. It is borne out of frustration and he is resorting to such tactics just to gain cheap

Although the Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council has made a number of recommendations to avoid accidents, the authorities concerned have not implemented the safe practices as recommended. The airlines also ignore the warnings and continue to operate flights, thus putting the life of passengers at risk. This needs to be stopped. Politics and com-

NASSER--EMOTIONAL RAPPORT

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

valuable psychological support for Nasser at a critical period in his country's history. Nehru's efforts at the time were of course complemented by the diplomacy of our then ambassador in Egypt, the gentlemanly Nawab Ali Yaver Jung. So shrewd was the Nawab's judgement, and so sure his timing, that President Nasser reputedly used to invite him to participate in the proceedings of the Egyptian cabinet.
by Shyam Bhatia

10

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

