LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

BEAUTIFULBETRAYALS
This exquisitely crafted novel grapples with the racial behaviour of Pakistan
and Irfan, best friends from childhood, and a pair of Americans, a man and woman, the latter being very once in a while, along comes a novel that Nadir's lover. Added to this mix is a bomber who, one reads more for the quality of its prose than on the run from an explosion in Karachi, is thought for its story line. Uzma Aslam Khan's Thinner to be hidden in the mountains, and is being chased than Skin is one such. It is clear from the get-go that with the full force of Pakistan's military might. All the author is in love with words. Every emotion, these stories intersect among the high glaciers of every sight, every sound, every taste is mined over Pakistan's north-west region, where a tragedy ocand over again for new analogies, fresh interpreta- curs that leads to an inexorable, deadly climax high tions, in what one may well describe as a virtuoso on the Ultar Sar glacier, where the various strands performance--a master class in the art of creative of each story weave to their conclusion amid lust, writing. Similes are a particular joy to the author-- treachery, shame, guilt and cowardice. Along the way there are several insights into and to the reader who experiences the most ordinary sights anew through the writer's way with racial and civilisational behaviour. In Pakistan as in words: "Star tulips and bell-shaped pussy ears with India, the foreigner is to be refused nothing, even if stems as thin as saliva"; "I was standing still, still as catering to him might result in beggaring oneself. a dried urine stain"; "Hunza lay nestled in the So, Nadir remarks on Wes, the American friend of Karakoram Range as sweetly as a cat in a closet"; his lover, being feted by his family: "I began thinkand the River Kunhar is "sometimes thin as a smile, ing how odd it was, the way the best-fed man at the sometimes wide as laughter". Khan is a writers' table... was the one being lavished, when threewriter and it matters little if the story gets some- quarters of the Pakistani population lived under $2 a day..." And again, when with his coldly observant what lost in her limpid, lucent prose. The novel comprises three stories. There is the eye, Nadir sees that "with Wes, my father was tale of Maryam and her family, members of the loquacious... Too loquacious... The way only a nomadic Gujjar herding tribes who are indigenous brown man sees a brown man become in the presto our subcontinent (and according to some are the ence of a white man... it embarrassed me, the way original gypsies). Their paths are crossed by a party he asked Wes's opinion on everything, while with of four expeditionists--two Pakistani men, Nadir me, it was the same taut silence..." Equally enjoyably, the narrative is packed with nuggets of information on random subjects (for instance, the prison island of Alcatraz in San Francisco's bay takes its name from the archaic Spanish word for pelican, derived from the Arabic al-qatras), as well as with folk tales of the jinns, princesses and goddesses who inhabit the glaciers. There are fascinating descriptions of the shamanistic practices of the Gujjars, sadly being stamped out by the relentless advance of inflexible Islamic dogma. And if one requires any further reason to read this absorbing book, there is an account of the mating of glaciers--an annual ritual ceremoniously conducted by high-altitude villagers in order to provide themselves with water for drinking and for irrigation of their terraced fields--that would make for a wonderful short story on its own.  SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com
By Bunny Suraiya

E

THINNER THAN SKIN
byUzma Aslam Khan Fourth Estate Price: RS 499 Pages: 345 BETWEEN THE COVERS The narrative is packed with nuggets of information on random subjects, as well as with folktales of the jinns,princesses and goddesses who inhabit the glaciers.

238

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

