CONVERSATIONS GENERATIONAL SAGAS, WHETHER THEY ARE SET IN POLITICS OR BUSINESS OR
By S. Prasannarajan

37 TheINFINITY of INHERITANCE
YEARS
CULTURE, ARE ABOUT LEARNING AND UNLEARNING, RENEWAL AND REINVENTION
3 1 2 10 4 onset of a new value system. Family values prevail. Transition heralds change only when the inheritor strikes a balance between tradition and modernity. The gravitational pull of tradition is stronger in Asia where family values are ingrained not only in political behaviour but in the business culture as well. Some of the marquee names in Asian industry are great family fables, always beginning with the visionary pioneer-patriarch, and the plotline of prosperity is powered by successive generations of heirs and heiresses. In his fascinating study of Asian capitalism, Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, Francis Fukuyama writes, "One of the most important lessons we can learn from an examination of economic life is that a nation's well-being, as well as its ability to compete, is conditioned by a single, pervasive cultural characteristic: the level of trust inherent in the society." Kinship capitalism is motored by trust, and its Indian variations are all too apparent across the boardrooms. Its growth is only matched by hereditary politics. What redeems the pervasive power of inheritance is the transformative energy of ideas. That is why the most gripping generational sagas, whether they are set in politics or business or culture, are about learning and unlearning, renewal and reinvention. The most successful sons and daughters in politics are not prisoners of their surname; they turn the privileges of inheritance into a mandate for future. Likewise, inheritors in business become masters of the marketplace only when they enrich family lesson with individual vision. The conversations that animate the following pages are excerpted from the enduring generational sagas of Indian life. They tell us why some of the boldest ideas of future are inspired by the wisdom of the past. They are also stories about leaders who dared in spite of the burden of tradition and pioneers who were not intimidated by the new. They tell us how the passage of power across generations is semaphored by ideas inherited and ideas acquired. 

D

NA is not destiny. But it helps. A recurring theme in the history of power is how genealogy defeats ideology--and even idealism. Many national stories are rewritten, for better or worse, by the exigencies of bloodline rather than by the finer instincts of democracy. In politics, this perpetuation of inheritance begins with monarchies: In the wreckage of empires lie multiple narratives of royal succession driven by the passions and pathologies of power. Democracies, built on the lofty ideals of equality and popular will, have not abandoned the uses of pedigree. Modern day dynasties in the so-called open societies are, for all political purposes, monarchies by other means. Even in revolutionary lands steeped in the pretence of egalitarianism, the Great Leader is followed by the Beloved Leader, as in the impoverished hermit kingdom of North Korea; or the highest offices are reserved for "princelings", as in the People's Republic of China. The Indian subcontinent is home to some of the oldest dynasties in politics, and the hottest political story currently animating the front pages is all about a crown prince's preparation to become king. Rahul Gandhi's struggle to live up to the legacy of Indian politics' most powerful surname is shared by, in varying degrees, other dynasts elsewhere in the country, be it Akhilesh Yadav in Lucknow or Omar Abdullah in Kashmir. The generational shift in Indian politics is not necessarily a break from the past or the
1. FAROOQ AND OMAR ABDULLAH; 2. LT-GEN JFR JACOB AND GEN V.P. MALIK; 3. KRISHEN KHANNA AND BHARTI KHER; 4. RAVI SHANKAR AND ANOUSHKA; 5. SHARAD PAWAR AND SUPRIYA SULE; 6. RANBIR AND RISHI KAPOOR; 7. KAJOLAND TANUJA

5

7

8

9

6

8. KAPIL DEV AND VIRAT KOHLI; 9. PIROJSHA AND ADI GODREJ; 10. ZAFAR IQBAL AND SANDEEP SINGH

72

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

73

