37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

ASHOK MITRA (RIGHT) WITH PRASENJIT BOSE IN KOLKATA

SUBIR HALDER /www.indiatodayimages.com

ASHOK MITRA AND PRASENJIT BOSE

"The Left is the only hope for the country, the rest are all scum"
Ashok Mitra and Prasenjit Bose represent two generations of the Indian Left. Mitra, 84, is a well-known economist. He was finance minister in West Bengal between 1977 and 1987 and chief economic adviser to Indira Gandhi's government. Prasenjit Bose, 38, is a former convener of the CPI(M)'s research unit. He criticised the party for backing Pranab Mukherjee's candidature as President and was removed from the party. Mitra and Bose have had their grouses with the party. Here they discuss what's left of the Left, in a session moderated by SENIOR CORRESPONDENT TITHI SARKAR at Mitra's home in Alipore, Kolkata. Prasenjit Bose (PB) We've seen a global economic crisis for the past four years. Francis Fukuyama announced the end of history after the Soviet Union fell. How would you look at such prognosis today in the light of the global crisis? Ashok Mitra (AM) Employment is

Ashok Mitra

"I would have loved to see the Left playing the role the India Against Corruption movement is playing today" Prasenjit Bose
falling, the rate of growth stagnates and suddenly we find that despite what the lyricists of capitalism might chant, the world is really taking a shape which was foretold by Karl Marx 150 years ago. PB I see Marxism returning. There have been popular movements in Europe and America. Spain and Greece have seen trade unions protests. Occupy Wall Street caught the global imagination. But do we see the revolutionary politics we saw 100 years ago

100

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS ASHOK MITRA AND PRASENJIT BOSE

BESTED IN BENGAL

"From 1977 to the 1980s to where we have arrived today,how do you look at this journey? Anewspaper survey quotes urban youth as saying Mamata is more Left than the Left.Isn't it ironic?" Prasenjit Bose

"I would make a distinction between the party in Bengal and the leadership of the party in Bengal. It needs a wiser leadership."
Ashok Mitra or are new trends emerging? AM There is a qualitative difference between what happened through the 20th century and now. That mobilisation took place under the leadership of the Communist Party and has faded away. Masses are groping for an alternative way for expressing their frustration, but not through communism. It's a major failure. PB This is a very interesting point. I remember reading a piece you wrote for Economic and Political Weekly where you said that in the last 15 years the biggest political upheavals against neo-liberal capitalism happened in Latin America. But none of them is ruled by traditional communist parties. The kind of Left that is making a comeback today is making certain departures from the Soviet model. Isn't it necessary? Don't you think so? AM Let me point out one additional feature of the Latin American developments. Even in Cuba, Fidel Castro did not really belong to the communist mainstream. PB Yes! PB A lot of people think that China has moved along with the times, adjusted itself to globalisation and has done a

going to correct it ourselves. The party may be satisfied but the people won't be. They would want to know the internal process through which we have reached a particular decision. But there must be a certain minimum modicum of discipline in a revolutionary party. Without discipline, a party cannot really move forward. The big challenge is how to sustain the discipline and yet modulate it so that it satisfies the urges of the people. PB Indians and Chinese are commenting and reacting freely on global developments. So this idea of some wise men sitting at the top deciding the destiny of a movement or a nation while people passively receive them is problematic. Are the communists or socialists alive to this? AM The lesson should have been learnt from the Soviet experience. It was the Voice of America which really was responsible for the downfall of the Soviet system. Because you can close your frontier, you can prohibit the import of books, you can prohibit the import of cinema which is not to your liking, but you couldn't stop the Voice of America. We should have started worrying about this development at least 40 years earlier. PB Don't you think that within India there is a big need and requirement for the organised Left to have a more close relationship with people's movements and that the political and the social Left must join hands? AM Admit that you have failed to solve the caste problem and since you could not offer leadership to those have been at the receiving end of caste discrimination, others have stepped in. Let us try to come to an understanding with them. Those who are not with us are not by definition our enemies. PB I would have, for instance, loved to see the Left playing the role the India Against Corruption is playing today. AM The Left does get involved in movements but it does not get enough coverage in the corporate press.
Video available on iPad

ASHOK MITRA (RIGHT) IN 1979

very good job of it. But there is a tendency to suppress dissent. The Chinese state seems to have become even more removed from the people. Does socialism itself need a rethink, become more democratic and open? AM There should be genuine give and take. Within our own country, it is not enough for us to state to the people that yes, there is a certain issue on which we have gone wrong and we had discussed the matter and are

LEFT BEHIND?

"Given the state of the Left today and the role of the Left in a democracy, how do you see the way forward?" Prasenjit Bose

"The Left will succeed only when it sticks to its own ideology, only when it sticks to the Left morality."

102

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

