37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

"I do not have the problem of backseat driving. My dad has never picked up the phone and called my officers. He doesn't even call my ministers to give them directions. If anything has to be done, he speaks to me." Omar Abdullah

FAROOQ ABDULLAH AND OMAR ABDULLAH

The summer of 2010 made Omar a leader
Farooq Abdullah

FAROOQ AND OMAR ABDULLAH AT THE FORMER'S HOME IN DELHI
VIVAN MEHRA/www.indiatodayimages.com

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS FAROOQ ABDULLAH AND OMAR ABDULLAH

SUMAN DUBEY/www.indiatodayimages.com

At 75, Farooq Abdullah has governed Jammu and Kashmir for 12 years over five terms. At 42, son Omar Abdullah has been chief minister for three years. Sheikh Abdullah, Farooq's father, spent much of his life in prison, either jailed by Maharaja Hari Singh or by the Government of India, but was still chief minister for 12 years over three terms. On a cold day in December, Farooq is in and out of his 11, Teen Murti Lane home, where peacocks roam and a cat with blue and grey eyes slinks about. Omar has just landed from Jammu, just in time to greet his two nephews (children of sister Sara and brother-in-law, Union minister Sachin Pilot) who are back from school. The two men couldn't seem more different. Farooq is far more gregarious and outgoing, says Omar, and "likely to go stir crazy if you ever place him in a room with a book and music''. Omar is as passionate, in his own words, but reserved. Omar praises his father for letting him run Jammu and Kashmir his way, not "backseat driving" as in some other cases. Farooq believes the 2010 crisis which saw the deaths of 117 people made Omar a "better person". Omar says he has the stomach for much more hard work and has no intention of going anywhere. INDIA TODAY EDITOR KAVEREE BAMZAI and SENIOR EDITOR PRIYA SAHGAL capture an extraordinary conversation between two generations who have witnessed Jammu and Kashmir at its turbulent worst. India Today (IT) You were in power for 12 years and Omar has been in power for three years. What is the difference between the Kashmir of then and the Kashmir of now? Farooq Abdullah (FA) Oh, it was a time

when Kashmir went through massive changes. My people died, my workers died, my ministers were bombed by IEDs (improvised explosive devices). They even attacked the Assembly to kill me. But the good thing was the people of India and Government of India stood firm with me. I resigned in 1990 and then the worst phase started from 1991 onwards. Many thought probably we will never ever be stable again and Kashmir will be lost forever. Things started changing in 2002. IT What changed? FA We fought terrorism head-on. We did not lie low; we said we have to fight them, there is no other way. The Army cooperated. Then I started the Unified Command. Then Pakistan realised that terrorism was affecting their own nation. Most of all, after 9/11, the world realised terrorism has become a global threat. IT What do you think of the way Omar has handled his three years? The first two years were very tricky. FA The worst phase Omar had was in 2010 when 117-odd young people died. IT Did he ever come to you for advice during that period? FA It is not a question of advice. He was at breaking point when that happened. It was only courage and friends. Thank God he overcame that. That taught him and made him what he is today. Omar Abdullah (OA) I don't think there is a similar responsibility at the state level anywhere else in the country. For various reasons. No other state has the sort of diversity that Jammu and Kashmir has. No other state is as

CHALK AND CHEESE

"Omar was very introverted in the beginning.People would complain `he doesn't meet us,he is a very different person from you'. I can laugh off crises,but he has a very different way. He is a different person."
Farooq Abdullah

affected by India's foreign policy with its neighbours as Jammu and Kashmir is. Also, I don't think there are so many non-political players anywhere else. IT How has Omar changed? How do you see him today? FA I think the summer of 2010 made a lot of change to his understanding of politics, of the way things have to be done. He became a better person. A much better person. That phase made a leader out of him. IT At any point, did you have a conversation with him even if he didn't ask you, did you sit down with him? FA I did. Like when he quit in the Assembly on the sex charges (in 2009 after the Opposition People's Democratic Party or PDP had alleged his involvement in a sex scandal that had rocked the state in 2006). I gave him as good as I could. I told him, `How dare you do something like this? You are a chief minister sitting with a coalition partner and if you have to do something, you have to talk to the coalition partner.' I just lost my cool. Then he said to me, `But dad, how will I face my children? How will I tell them that look, I am not what they have said I am? How will I face my wife and friends?' I said, `I understand, darling. Now that you have done it, you have to face it. Let the governor inquire into the thing but don't take any drastic measures till then.' He is very emotional. IT How was your relationship with your father, Sheikh Sa'ab? FA We were brought up more by my mother. My father was always in prison. But he was a strict disciplinarian. I remember being slapped one day. IT And your relationship with Omar? FA I was too soft. My wife brought him up. That's where he gets his discipline with time and money. Lawrence School, Sanawar, made him stand on his feet. IT Were you surprised when he wanted to become a politician? FA She (wife Molly) has seen my life. It is hardly any life--you go in the morn-

"My father is naturally gregarious. Put him in a room with a book and music and he will go stir crazy. I would love it. But yes, we are both passionate people. We just have different ways of expressing it. I have never hidden the fact that I am who I am. I am not my father and cannot mould myself on what he is." Omar Abdullah
BOON OR BANE?

"My father (Sheikh Abdullah) told me very frankly,`Look,you are going into this river,remember it will just carry you.If you have the courage you may fight it; swim against the current but it is very difficult.'" Farooq Abdullah

THE SNOW MELTS

"The younger people don't have the old anger. That has all disappeared." Farooq Abdullah
"Young people in Kashmir don't mince their words. You should see the people on my Twitter timeline. They are a lot more moohfat." Omar Abdullah
76
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

FAROOQ (LEFT) WITH FATHER SHEIKH ABDULLAH IN SRINAGAR IN 1982

"I have had the advantage of inheriting a lot that comes with the surname. But I also inherit a lot of things others wouldn't. I inherit enemies that are not of my creation. I inherit people who dislike me simply because of the family I belong to, which is unfair, but when you take the good, you've got to take the bad with it Omar Abdullah as well."

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

77

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS FAROOQ ABDULLAH AND OMAR ABDULLAH

IN THE HOT SEAT

"There was ethnic cleansing, terrorism increased, girls were prevented from going to school. All the things that are happening in Pakistan now." Farooq Abdullah

"My father has never faced a 2010-type situation. He has not really had to govern in a coalition the way I had to do, he hasn't really had to deal with the sort of Opposition that I have to deal with."Omar Abdullah
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

BLOOD AND BELONGING

"When Omar wanted to join politics,I rang my wife Molly up saying,`Moll,what do we do?' She said,`If he wants to,let him try.' I told him as best as I could.I said,`Good luck."
Farooq Abdullah

FAROOQ ABDULLAH (RIGHT) WITH OMAR AND HIS FAMILY IN 2001

"There is nothing like an election loss. It taught me humility. It taught me about the nuances of politics in Jammu and Kashmir."
Omar Abdullah

ing, by night you are back. Kahan khaana hai kahan nahi khaana hai. So when Omar wanted to join politics, I rang her up saying, `Moll, what do we do?' She said, `If he wants to, let him try.' I said, `Good luck.' When he lost in 2002, he took it very bravely. OA I don't think my father was surprised. It is the defence mechanism he has with my mother when things are not going as good as he wishes them to. IT How did the defeat in the 2002 Assembly elections affect you? OA I believe to go straight into office in 2002 would not have been in, in hindsight, the most appropriate thing. I was able to learn a lot more about the state. In terms of personal growth, there is nothing like an election loss to teach you a whole lot of lessons which you don't learn from winning. It taught me humility. I was perhaps a little cavalier in terms of some public pro-

nouncements which, as I said, the period of opposition helped temper and set right. And then I guess the biggest lesson is that all your contact with people is direct and on the ground. You don't have advantages of state planes and helicopters to buzz from place to place. There is no better way to learn about the geography of your state than to criss-cross it by driving across, which is what I did. It taught me the lay of the land, the way people think. IT Would you have been happy becoming a hotelier instead? OA I seriously doubt it. It would have been so boring. IT Have you understood the Kashmiri psyche now? OA Can one ever, given that I share that psyche as well and I see the complexities within myself? People who are out protesting in the summer

of 2010 are out voting in autumn. IT But what of the trust deficit Kashmiris talk of? Has that changed? OA Can you blame them? Look at what they have gone through in the last 20-22 years. Almost every institution that they could count on failed them, whether it is the courts, the police, the government, civil society or the political leadership. IT Do you see your sons becoming politicians in future? OA Honestly, I hope not. I sincerely hope I am the last of the Abdullahs to head the National Conference and that the party moves on and chooses someone from within its ranks. Should my children join politics, I hope it is when I have left and they can chart their own course.
Video available on iPad

78

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

