BUS INESS

RATAN TATA

CYRUS MISTRY (LEFT) WITH RATAN TATA

TIME FOR TATATO STEP UP I
had two chance meetings with Ratan Tata, ten years apart, during which his complete lack of protocol and hierarchy are still clearly etched in my mind. The first was in the Maharaja lounge at the old international terminal of the Indira Gandhi Airport in Delhi and the second time in the first row of the Regal Ballroom of the Trident Hotel in Mumbai for President Barack Obama's address to the Indian business community. On both occasions, he simply slipped into the vacant seat next to me virtually unnoticed. His democratic and open stance invited normal conversation. My conversations with him ended with him acceding to my request for reading some recent pieces/books I had written. And I must admit, that due to my own diffidence, with which I hope and think he will empathise, I

The outgoing Tata Sons chairman must become the moral compass for India Inc
courage but also a razor could not get myself to send GUEST sharp clarity of purpose and those to him. COLUMN a long-term vision. He sucThis self-confidence and ceeded in giving a coherence complete lack of pompousand driving Tata businesses ness, I suspect, comes from to global competitiveness and having been brought up emerge as a true multinaamidst plenty; going to the tional corporation. This also best schools and colleges; demonstrated his steely reand then returning to the shop floor and rubbing Rajiv Kumar solve that was nearly always well hidden from everyone by shoulders with ordinary workers at Tata Steel. Other family a reticent demeanour and a conscious businesses would do well to follow his effort to remain out of the limelight. In his modernity, his visionary outexample rather than helicopter their scions in to top level management po- look and in his concern for the counsitions. I am convinced that this expe- try's progress, he stands high amongst rience and feedback gave Ratan Tata his peers. Perhaps in the reach of his the courage of his convictions while vision he can be matched only by very taking on the mighty satraps who con- few in the current Indian business trolled large chunks of Tata businesses scene. He drove his senior manageafter taking over as chairman. The ment to keep their eye on long-term task required not only tremendous goals in the conviction that the market

34

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

GETTY IMAGES

BUS INESS

RATAN TATA
would catch up and reward these ef- lation and higher ethical standards in forts in due course. He achieved enor- Indian industry. This alone has the pomous recognition both at home and tential to improve governance and reabroad not only because he expanded verse the ongoing disastrous decline in an already well-established empire, the quality of public services including but because under him Tata became law and order. Quite clearly, he has preferred to lead by example rather synonymous with India's progress. Pursuing global benchmarks, he than by exhortation or taking public encouraged R&D, insisted on techno- positions on the issue. As the telecom sector episode relogical depth, and most importantly, gave his senior management the au- vealed, even he could not escape unaftonomy and sense of ownership. But fected from the overall business he combined this with strict account- environment in the country. This ability. He took the route of developing should make him realise the truth of his own brands in cars, hotels, the Indian saying that "kajal ki kothri software, etc and making Tata a global mein kitna jatan karo, kajal ka daag presence. In pursuing this strategy, bhai laage hi laage (one may try one's Ratan Tata recognised that Indian hardest, but cannot escape being industry could no longer hide behind blemished if one lives in a carbon protective policies. With Indian econ- store)". I am sure that I represent milomy's ever increasing integration with lions of middle class Indians in their the world economy, he pushed for desire for him to take the lead in global competitiveness, irrespective of changing the social image of Indian whether the particular company oper- business in general and especially of ated in domestic or foreign markets. A strategy worth seIN THE ONGOING rious consideration by other Indian business houses. MODERNISATION OF THE In the ongoing modernisaINDIAN ECONOMY, RATAN tion of the Indian economy, he TATA EPITOMISES THE epitomises the most modern and advanced segments of the MOST MODERN AND Indian society. In the passion ADVANCED SEGMENTS he brought to the Nano projOF INDIAN SOCIETY. ect, meant to serve the needs of the lower middle class, the Swach water purifier for providing large Indian business houses. I am cercheap solution for poor households tainly not suggesting that he joins poland by supporting the work of several itics (perish the thought) but simply foundations supported by the Tata that he leads India Inc into accepting companies and the Parsi community, and discharging its historical role of he demonstrated his concern for those becoming the vanguard of progressive inhabiting India. His approach has and ethical change in the country. And given his huge international been to bring the most advanced scientific and technological solutions to stature--reflected in numerous dismeet the needs of the poor and the not- tinctions and awards conferred upon so-well off. This is in complete contrast him--Ratan Tata could also lead the efto those who talk of the excluded with fort for global capitalism. I hope that he feigned compassion and offer only will find it worthwhile to lead a group of eminent persons to come up with a doles as solutions. It can be argued that Ratan Tata vision for global capitalism more relewas almost exclusively focused on vant in the changing times and sustainbuilding the Tata Group and not able in the coming decades. enough on broader issues facing corporate India. In his second innings, he Rajiv Kumar is an independent can use his stature and social reach to economist and former secretary general push for a greater degree of self-reguof apex industry chamber, FICCI

Big Daddy of India Inc
Tata Group is India's largest private corporation by revenue. More than 50 per cent of its revenue comes from abroad 475,721 471,045
2010-11 (Rs cr) 2011-12 (Rs cr)

379,675

374,687

313,960

373,026

Total revenue

Sales

Total International assets revenue

Market Winner
Tata companies account for 7 per cent of BSE's total market capitalisation
2010 (End March)

$76.2 bn*
2011 (End March)

2012 (End March)

$89.88 bn
2012 (As on Dec 6)

$89.71 bn
* Figures are total stock market capitalisation

Hiring in Hordes
The Tata Group is one of the world's largest private sector employers Personnel 2008-09 White-collar employees 261,388  Engineers 133,308  Postgraduates 33,980  MBAs 10,456  Others 83,644 Blue-collar employees 101,651 Total employment 363,039

36

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

220,277 $105.4 bn

280,840

