SPE CIAL REPORT

AGENDA AAJ TAK
Photographs by RAJWANT RAWAT; CHANDRADEEP KUMAR; YASBANT NEGI; QMAR SIBETIAN; RAMESH SHARMA; PARVEEN NEGI AND ADITYA KAPOOR/www.indiatodayimages.com

``
Imran Khan
Chairman, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf

 BJP Rajya Sabha MP

Arun Jaitley

The BJP is one of the few parties in India that is structured.The remaining regional and national parties suffer from parivaar ki bheed."

``

 Congress Union minister

Kapil Sibal

Wait for 2014. Good politicians will come forth and they will come from Congress.There is still space for honest people to enter politics."

``

 Senior CPI(M) leader

Sitaram Yechury

They both have been in the government and only they can tell us whether CBI is used as a tool by the government or not!"

Nitish Kumar

www.indiatoday.in/imran To watch the session video, click on www.indiatoday.in/neta

``
Nitin Gadkari
BJP president 

Chief Minister, Bihar

I am not part of the prime ministerial race. It doesn't feature even in my wildest dreams...Yeh thi khabrein aaj tak, intezaar kijiye kal tak! "

ARGUMENTS OFCHANGE ``
Power players from the world of politics, showbiz and cricket entertained, enlightened and often provoked at the first Agenda Aaj Tak summit
By Sharla Bazliel

Why should I resign? There is no CBI or high court case against me. My DNA is very different from the BJP's DNA. I am dabangg (fearless)."

T
62

wo days, 44 speakers, not a single dull moment. The first Agenda Aaj Tak summit was a powerhouse event that proved to be every bit as informative and entertaining as India's premier Hindi channel. From a subdued Arvind Kejriwal who found himself under attack from professional politicians to a defiant Nitin Gadkari to a sporting Lalu Prasad Yadav who laughed the loudest and longest at jokes inspired by him, the summit provoked argument and attitude. The two-

day event in Delhi on December 6 and 7 also saw Pakistani prime ministerial hopeful Imran Khan promising peace with India and star actor Aamir Khan vowing to visit if he won. Setting the agenda on Day One was India Today Group Chairman Aroon Purie who said in his welcome speech: "I hope that in the years ahead, Agenda Aaj Tak will become the definitive platform where issues of national importance will be debated and discussed in our national language." Minutes later the first session of the summit proved him right. In a panel discussion Desh Ka Neta Kaisa Ho with Leader of

Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Arun Jaitley, Union Minister for Communications and Information Technology Kapil Sibal, and senior CPI(M) politburo member Sitaram Yechury, the trio discussed dynastic politics, BJP's motion against FDI in multi-brand retail and the attributes of an ideal politician. Next up in the session Lok Banam Tantra, Aam Aadmi Party leader Arvind Kejriwal discovered to his dismay that he was in for a lecture on the art of realpolitik by Congress MP Mani Shankar Aiyar and BJP MP Ravi Shankar Prasad. "India is a democracy and the first rule of politics is to learn how to keep your
www.indiatoday.in/gadkari

flock together. You have barely started your political career but have already alienated Anna Hazare and Kiran Bedi," Prasad said, wagging an invisible finger at a glum-faced Kejriwal. Aiyar chose to sheath his sword in honey instead. "Kejriwal has just launched his political party and, if all goes well, may win a seat or two in the forthcoming elections. All I would say is `keep going son, don't give up'," he said. This session also witnessed a stormy argument between Kejriwal and Amar Singh who was sitting in the front row. Singh took offence when Kejriwal referred to scriptwriter Javed Akhtar as a seth. "Don't call him seth, he is a respected intellectual," Singh shouted at Kejriwal and then referring to previous allegations he had made said, "Stop trying to be so self-righteous. Tell your associate Shanti Bhushan to first return the money he has taken from me." At the luncheon keynote address, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar shared his political predictions claiming,

"The next government will be a coalition, be it a pre-poll or a post-poll one. But even such a coalition should be led by the leader of the largest constituent party. Any other arrangement would not have the mandate of the people." `Youngistan' was the theme of the next panel discussion with Congress minister Sachin Pilot, cricketer Suresh Raina and Bollywood actor Randeep Hooda. While Pilot spoke frankly about the role of dynasty, hereditary MPs and how he was lucky to have been given a chance to prove himself at a young age, Raina was all praise for IPL, attributing to it the big bucks cricketers are now raking in. Serial watchers of TV soaps in the audience were thrilled to see their favourite stars in the flesh in the next session titled Chota Parda Bada Star. Tele actors Sameer Soni, Sakshi Tanwar, Avika Gaur and Kritika Kamara spoke about TV soaps' unique connect with the public. Gaur said popular shows like Balika Vadhu made a deep social impact and nar-

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY


63

``

If you have a clean PM and ministers and a clear majority with one party, you can end corruption in even nine days."

www.indiatoday.in/nitish

SPE CIAL REPORT AGENDA AAJ TAK
Kapil Dev M. Azharuddin
Ex-India captain

Sourav Ganguly
Ex-India captain

Waqar Younis
Ex-Pakistan captain

Imran Khan
Ex-Pakistan captain

Wasim Akram
Ex-Pakistan captain

Ex-India captain

"When I first played Pakistan in 1978, it really was war.The motto on either side used to be jaan nikaal deni hai..."

" High-pressure matches, like the ones between India and Pakistan are good because both players and spectators get to enjoy the game."

"I think India has the edge against Pakistan in leadership and in terms of current form (on the forthcoming Indo-Pak series)."

"Media creates the maximum pressure, which always adds to the excitement in India-Pakistan matches."

"If my party comes to power next year, it will be able to deal with the vested interests that divide our nations."

"Players have to follow the government's diktat. But if India and Pakistan can play hockey, golf and cricket, why not football?"

rated her experiences in West Bengal and Rajasthan where people had pledged to oppose child marriage. Tanwar, star of Bade Achhe Lagte Hain, agreed, "After we had an episode on breast cancer, many women called me to say that they finally got mammograms done." Battlelines seemed to be clearly drawn in the run-up to the 2014 Lok Sabha elections as Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh and Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Sushma Swaraj took to the stage for the panel discussion Ek Anar 100 Bimar. Swaraj denied ever saying Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi was the BJP's prime ministerial candidate. "I never

said he is the candidate. I merely said that he is eligible to become prime minister," Swaraj said. "I don't believe it makes any sense for a political party to declare their prime ministerial candidate before the election results are in," she added. After weeks of silence on demands for his ouster from his party colleagues, BJP President Nitin Gadkari responded with remarkable aggression at the session Kab Khilega Kamal? "If I have done anything wrong, sack me," he challenged. Gadkari, who has faced flak for alleged irregularities in his Purti Group and his links with road construction giant IRB, said, "I am not scared of anyone. The media can't pass

``

 Bollywood Actor

Aamir Khan

When people ask me how I stay so fit, I tell them I follow a strict diet but they don't believe me.They all want the name of some cream."

Kajol
Bollywood actor

www.indiatoday.in/kajol

BABA RAMDEV AND KAJOL
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

64

www.indiatoday.in/aamir

``

The Son Of Sardaar vs JTHJ controversy has affected my relationship with Yashraj Films. I hope it's a one-off thing."

www.indiatoday.in/captains















Anna Hazare
Social activist



www.indiatoday.in/annah

"Earning money through power and power through money.That seems to be the aim of Arvind Kejriwal and his Aam Aadmi Party."
www.indiatoday.in/democracy

Arvind Kejriwal

Mani Shankar Aiyar
Congress MP

Ravi Shankar Prasad
BJP MP

Aam Aadmi Party leader

" We have no personal enmity with any individual. The aim is to expose deficiencies in the system that allow corrupt to thrive."
any judgment against me. I am an honest man, I will not resign." He added, "NDA will form the government at the Centre after General Elections in 2014. We are confident of the outcome. Once BJP crosses the 175 mark in 2014 polls, many parties will back us." Rashtriya Janata Dal supremo Lalu was the undisputed star of another session dominated by questions on the state of Indian politics today. Reminiscing about how he came into politics, Lalu said: "In those days, you could only get a ticket by the grace of the powers that be who lived in Delhi. With no godfathers, we really struggled to make a name for ourselves. Today regional parties have changed the face of politics in this country." Taking a break from raajneeti, author Chetan Bhagat, social activist Kiran Bedi and Congress minister Manish Tewari discussed the pros and cons of social networking and whether the Government was justified in play-

"I don't say that you (Kejriwal) shouldn't say all this. But I will say that business will go on as usual and dogs will keep barking."

"This is India. Elections are not won by SMSs and crowds assembling at Ramlila or Jantar Mantar but by going to the people."

ing Big Brother. "Social media is just an outlet for the Indian need to chit-chat. Indians love gup-shup," Bhagat insisted. "The intention of going after the bad people is good, but making anything on social media criminal is a different dimension altogether." Defending the Government, Tewari said: "This country has not just 851 broadcasters, it probably has 851 crore broadcasters--each person with a Twitter account or a smartphone can be one."

B

ollywood showed up in full force with superstars like Kajol and Aamir Khan but the cynosure of all eyes was comeback queen Madhuri Dixit who made quite an entrance dressed in a black jumpsuit with her famous megawatt smile firmly in place. Dixit, who was accompanied by husband Dr Sriram Nene, answered every question with grace and even sang Tumse Milke from
ALI ZAFAR SINGS A SONG FOR MADHURI DIXIT

Madhuri Dixit
Bollywood actor

``

Women have become a force in Bollywood over the last few years. Just look at the work of Farah Khan, Zoya Akhtar and Reema Kagti."
www.indiatoday.in/ali-song

Parinda for a bedazzled audience. A summit about Bharat and no singing? Impossible. Mile Sur Mera Tumhara, a panel which brought together artists from India and Pakistan, turned into an impromptu jam session as Pakistani singer Ali Zafar, his fellow countryman Shafqat Amanat Ali and India's own Kailash Kher serenaded the audience for an hour finally bringing their session to a close on a beautiful note with their rendition of Allah Tero Naam. The summit ended with a keynote address by Imran Khan, chairman, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party. Khan, the former captain of the Pakistan cricket team, discussed corruption and terrorism in Pakistan and promised to promote peace between India and Pakistan if his party was voted to power. "Inshallah, after the elections, our party will be in power. We will not shy away from taking big decisions," he said. "I don't want Pakistani soil to be used for any kind of terror activities," he added. Sitting in the audience, actor Aamir Khan complimented Imran Khan for the courage of his convictions. "I hope you get the support to win. If you do win, I'll visit Pakistan to celebrate and bring some friends too!" he promised.
with Shravya Jain, Aditya Menon and Rohan Venkataramakrishnan

For full coverage, visit: www.indiatoday.in/agenda





 

