AH

FHTUBE

GOOD SHEPHERD FINISHING SCHOOL
Subsidiary of GOOD SHEPHERD INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL
WOMAN - an ordinary word that defines an extraordinary being! A being who symbolizes strength and sacrifice! A being who embodies courage, conviction, and compassion! A gifted being who lives many lives in a single life time! A being far blessed than MAN and no less than GOD himself, owing to her significant and selfless contribution to the divine process of CREATION! For these reasons and more, reverence towards women is a virtue that is woven into the cultural fabric of the Indian nation.
This is the very fabric that for the longest time played host to a strange dichotomy - while it reserved GOD's status to its women and preached unbridled respect for them at one end, italso stifled their right to live by encouraging female infanticide, strangled their right to education by denying them even basic schooling, and killed their spirit by subjecting them to physical and emotional abuse. However, thanks to women-friendly laws, good governance, and exposure to the western culture where women are treated as equals, the environment now is far more conducive to the growth of women than ever before. But, to be able to completely break the shackles of oppressive tradition and put themselves and the country in the path of real progress, the women of this country, instead of looking for help elsewhere, should learn to help themselves. For nearly a decade now, one school has made it its mission to provide this level of learning to the women of India and enable their holistic development, so that they emerge as strong, self-reliant, and confident personalities....this is the Good Shepherd Finishing School, Ooty, The Nilgiris. Founded in the year 2003 by renowned academicians and founders of the Good Shepherd International School, Dr. RC. Thomas and his wife Mrs. Elsamma Thomas, the Good Shepherd Finishing School aims at empowering woman-kind and through them enable the country to rise above mediocrity and achieve all-round excellence. The founder couple are two of the rare few educationists who believe that the face of the girl child mirrors how progressive/regressive a society is, and that education should be used as a tool of CHANGE... .a change that can emancipate women and equip them to actively contribute towards the betterment of this nation. The school is located in the lush, green Good Shepherd Gardens, flanked on both sides by the pristine beauty of the Nilgiris-the ideal location for a residential school where young ladies are groomed into stylish suave women who can take on an imperfect world and make it perfect. The school's curriculum is an enticing array of options, each of which seeks to impart specialized soft skills to the Ladies - this includes programmes on personality development, protocol and social graces, housekeeping, physical fitness, beauty and personal grooming, fashion design, event management, effective communication, and the list goes on. Intensive practical and theoretical

AH

training is provided as part of every programme, so that the girls acquire all the knowledge they require in order to succeed at home and work. The personality development programme skills, for

master the art of presenting themselves well. Combine that with the capsule on physical fitness and you have the perfect package where good looks meet great health. The school also guarantees girls the admiration of their peers and the appreciation of their superiors by mentoring them on how to host or behave at social gatherings. The programme on protocols and social graces has been designed for this specific purpose. Want to score some brownie points with your mom, ladies? Take the course on housekeeping offered by the school and learn how to convert even a staid house into paradise; this is sure to turn that frown on your mother's face upside down. From interior decoration to cooking to planning meals to hosting parties to flower arrangements to house table decorations, a wide spectrum of special skills are taught as part of the keeping programme, opening up an

instance, covers everything from body language, self-esteem, communication leadership qualities, global perspective, career guidance, effective public speaking and many more, so that the Ladies who take the programme come out as confident, women. If you look good, you are sure to feel good! This is the maxim of the Beauty and Personal Grooming programme, which helps Ladies and hair, cultivate a good know their bodies, learn how to take good care of their skin sense of style, understand what clothes suit them and what don't, accessorize themselves accordingly, and in short, well-mannered, and sophisticated

AH

fHTURE

school, and with female coaches who were trained from the National Institute of Sports, India. Speaking of the faculty, some of the best minds in the teaching business have been recruited by the school to mentor its students. State-of-the-art classrooms equipped with world-class teaching aids double the joy of learning. Seminars, workshops, and outsourced lectures are frequently conducted by the school to enable its students to sharpen their axe. In addition to the above, music, dance, yoga, arts, and crafts are taught to the students so that they don't stop with just being specialists in specific

unbelievable range of business opportunities for the women. For those girls who believe that the English language is their nemesis, the Business English, Public Speaking, and Effective Communication programmes can help them make peace with the language. These programmes have been specially designed to not only enable girls to speak in English fluently at formal/informal gatherings, but also improve their oratorical and writing skills in that language. A Business English Certificate from the Cambridge University await students who successfully complete the Business English programme. All work and no play will make the girls dull dames! The outward bound activities and sports taught by the school provide the girls with the much-needed breather, at the end of a gruelling day's sessions. The school is the only one of its kind in India, imparting technical training for mountaineering. The school has an exclusive 9 hole golf course for use of its students. Lawn Tennis, Squash, Shuttle Badminton are the sports in which the students are trained by coaches qualified from National Institute of Sports, India. Equestrian skills are taught by highly skilled equestrians. A heated 25 meter heated swimming pool facility is available in the

areas, but aspire to be all-rounders. The students of music can even appear for the Trinity Guildhall Examination conducted by the Trinity College of Music London, as the school is an approved examination centre. All the aforesaid programmes are available as 9month, 3-month, and 6-week packages, where the 9-month package is an allencompassing programme that trains students in the entire line of soft skills that are on offer. The 3-month and 6week programmes naturally are more

AH

tf&ttl
Finishing School will very shortly carve an India that Mahatma Gandhi dreamed of...an India where a woman can walk on the road alone in the middle of night, decked in finery. focused programmes that help the students hone their basic skills. Students can take their pick based on their strengths and weaknesses. Like the courses offered, the accommodation provided by the school for its teachers and students is also top-notch. Well-furnished villas are provided for occupation by the students and the staff. The food is wholesome and tasty with almost all the products being grown in the Shepherd's Farm .The menu includes North Indian, South Indian, Jain, Thai, Chinese and Continental both in vegetarian and non vegetarian variety. "Life for a woman is like an endless The Certifications:
 Business English Certificate - BEC (Cambridge University)  DELF Al - French (Government of France)  Diploma in Fashion Design (National Institute of Fashion Technology)  Trinity Guildhall Examination in Music (Theory)  Duke of Edinburgh Award

' '

COURSES
9 Months
Mid July- Mid April

3 Months
Session 1 Mid July - Mid October Session 2 Mid January - Mid April

6 weeks
Mid April - End of May

decathlon....the hurdles never cease!" A woman achieves true emancipation only if she has the courage, character, and the ability to face these hurdles, fight them bravely, and come out trumps! With a unique curriculum that is keen on producing such liberated women and a campus that is supportive of the efforts of dainty young girls to morph into dynamic dudettes, the Good Shepherd

GOOD SHEPHERD FINISHING SCHOOL
M.Palada P.O., Ootacamund - 643 004 Tamil Nadu, India p : 91 - 423 - 2550371 f : 91 - 423 - 2442920 e : admissions@gsfs.ac.in / dean@gsfs.ac.in / info@gsis.ac.in / info@gsfs.ac.in w : www.gsfs.ac.in

