SO CIETY

COFFEE CULTURE
across the country and has even tied up with fashion designer Rina Dhaka to redesign the menu and introduce the Milano Collezioni collection, inspired by the fashion capital, Milan. "It's cool here because no one cares whether you're playing games on your iPad or that you are a celebrity catching up with friends," says Tejas Nanda, 31, an investment banker who reads his morning papers at the Gloria Jeans café in Bandra. He's spotted actors Katrina Kaif and Vidya Balan and also recounts how a top boss of Goldman Sachs would walk in every morning with a bunch of magazines and leave them behind for others to read as a gesture of sharing. "These cafes encourage sharing and building a community. Regulars treat the café as their second home," says Preeti Mehta, 38, a Mumbai psychologist who delves into her patients' minds at the Carter Road CCD (Cafe Coffee Day), one of the company's 1,300 cafes in India. "The aroma of coffee and the casual warmth of the café instantly put people at ease," she says. In Delhi, Baristas and CCDs are an inseparable part of college life. Cafes like the CCD opposite Gargi College have students sipping chai and munching chips as they squat on the floor completing tutorial assignments. Says Sikta Patnaik, 25, an alumnus of Lady Shri Ram College: "CCD and Barista were
RACHIT GOSWAMI

CELEB WITH COFFEE PLEASE
Spot your favourite star at one of their regular cafés Celebrities were just as keen as teenagers to be
seen at the launch of the first Starbucks café in October.Writer Shobhaa De, HDFC Chairman Deepak Parekh and actor Tara Sharma dropped in for a caffeine fix. And seen promoting Son of Sardaar was Sonakshi Sinha, in a T-shirt with the coffee chain's signature green mermaid logo.

LIFE OVER LATTE
Pick-ups and break-ups. Marriage proposals and job interviews. Scrabble games and musical interludes. Java junkies now have more to do as Starbucks stirs the neighbourhood coffee shop scene.
By Aditi Pai

When badminton player Jwala Gutta wants some
quiet time with her mother, she heads to the Banjara Hills café of Testa Rossa in Hyderabad for a mug of double shot espresso and chicken pesto with "less salt and spice".

PHOTO IMAGING BY AJIT BAJAJ; PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES

s a teenager addicted to the sitcom Friends where "everyone hung out at cafes", Radhika Mehta, 26, fell in love with Starbucks when she finally sipped on hot chocolate at the coffee giant's outlet in New York. Since then, she's visited over two dozen Starbucks cafés across the world in pursuit of her favourite glass of low-fat caramel macchiato, grande size. In October, the Mumbai media consultant joined a few thousand java junkies when she braved an hour-long queue to enter the just-launched 4,500 sq feet Horniman Circle coffee shop. Within seconds, she checked into the café on Foursquare, a location-based social networking site, and tweeted about her own historic moment. Others around her fervently updated Facebook and BBM status messages saying @ the 1st Starbucks! Within hours, the green mermaid signature cup became the hottest accessory of the city's swish set; Frapuccino became the `drink of the week' and the sandstone Palazzo-styled structure where the café stands became a pilgrimage spot for bean worshippers. Some soaked in the ethnic décor with hand-carved wooden screens, others rued the "cheap rates that brought in

A

the masses" and a few jostled to catch a glimpse of "what the fuss was all about". "Being at a café is an aspirational activity and coffee only forms a tertiary aspect of the experience," says Sahil Jatana, a coffee coach trained by the Coffee Board of India. With two more shops added in Mumbai in October, Starbucks now has three cafes in India. Across urban India, an entire generation of latte lovers is making the neighbourhood café their home, "coffice" and playground. Here, Eskimo and Nirvana stand for coffee; corner tables are the most sought-after, perfect for wooing a date or interviewing a prospective employee. Entrepreneur Jayveer Sabharwal, 27, met his wife at Testa Rossa, a sprawling café in Hyderabad, over cappuccino and cold coffee crème in 2011. Recently, the couple celebrated their first anniversary at the same table with the same coffee. "We often come here and order the same things to relive our special moments," says Sabharwal. The Austrian coffee house set up shop in 2010. It plays host to film stars and sportspersons and is the scene of proposals, birthdays and even meet-the-parent dos. "We see families discuss marriage proposals in our private dining area, something that traditionally happened at home earlier," says Rehan Guha, director of operations. The warm service, relative anonymity

and an unobtrusive, casual ambience is making cafes the mecca of the youth. When Barista opened in 2000, it encouraged customers to spend long hours playing Scrabble, browsing magazines or strumming the guitar. Piped music, wi-fi connection and a friendly but polite staff are some of the draws. Barista now has 180 coffee shops

Head to Costa Coffee at Khar, Mumbai, if you are a
Bollywood hopeful. Filmmaker Karan Johar's office is housed in the same building and he often sends his office boy for takeaway cups of latte and cappuccino. There's always a chance he might drop in too.

Ever wondered why the CCD at Bandstand in Mumbai
is always packed? That's because regulars have spotted Salman Khan at his favourite table with friends, journalists and even with ex-girlfriend Katrina Kaif.

The tiny Gloria Jeans café at Bandra, Mumbai, may not
make for a romantic date but it certainly is the spot for star-gazing. Vidya Balan hangs out here with pals; director Sujoy Ghosh is seen discussing scripts; and Katrina Kaif cradles a large mug in the company of friends here.

If you want to catch a glimpse of Ranbir Kapoor,
wait it out with a cuppa at the Khar Costa Coffee outlet. He is often spotted here when he isn't driving around Pali Hill.

CORNER SEATS MAKE FOR COSY CONVERSATIONS AT STARBUCKS, MUMBAI

54

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

55

SO CIETY

COFFEE CULTURE
the `Bean 13', a multi-city event where celebrities in Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata shared memories of their entry into the teenage club. Innovation is clearly the key. So, menus often flirt with smoothies and shakes to fend off coffee fatigue. Barista whips up fruity smoothies, shakes and sundaes to cool off the summer heat and brings out comfort foods like spicy creamy chicken and steaming brews during winters. CCD's best-selling Frappe has some serious competition from the just-launched pomegranate and cranberry Frosteas and dessert shots. Gunjan Bhatia, 25, treats herself to The Dark Temptation dessert, at the Bandstand CCD outlet after every tiff with her boyfriend. "It helps that I can spot celebs like Salman Khan; it lifts my mood instantly," she says. Coffee culture took off in the early 2000s when Barista opened its espresso bars. It became an instant hit, with college students completing projects in cafes rather than libraries, young lovers spending time over a cappuccino, and professionals conducting meetings with espresso for company. Figures from management consulting firm Technopak Advisors tell the story of how rapidly the coffee cult is brewing across India. The report pegs the country's cafe sector at $230 million (Rs 1,150 crore), up from $40 million (Rs 200 crore) in 2007. There are 1,950 cafes across the country, a sharp rise from 700 outlets in 2007. "Coffee is like wine in the sense that you need to understand it. It's only now that more and more people are open to experimenting, going beyond the usual cappuccino and latte to things like Americano and Affogato," says Guha of Testa Rossa. Innovations are only adding to the charm. Taking a cue from cafés in Japan that allow pets, Susheel Mehta, 26, and his girlfriend Akemi Roy, 25, are planning to set up a pooch café in Bangalore in a few years. "Lots of people love animals but don't have the time or space to keep pets at home. I think it's a lovely idea to sip coffee with a dog for company," says Mehta. India is waking up to smell the caffeine rush.
with Sonali Acharjee, Mona Ramavat, Tithi Sarkar, Ayesha Aleem and Ekta Marwaha

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com LOCATION COURTESY: BARISTA

CAFES ARE AN INSEPARABLE PART OF COLLEGE LIFE IN DELHI, OFTEN OUTDOING CAMPUSES WITH THEIR CROWDS

Coffee and

Conversation
There's a fix for every mood PICK-UP LINE When a guy texts you
saying,"Hey, u wanna have coffee?" he really means,"Hey, u wanna have sex?"

BREAK-UP LINE If your partner says
"Let's talk over coffee", it's a polite way of saying "I'm gonna break your heart but I'll do it in a public place so you can't overreact".

STYLE STATEMENT Want to sound cool,
Starbucks style? Just say,"One tall skinny latte with room for milk please."

COFFEE AS A THREAT "I drank my
coffee from the wrong side of the cup today." It's a threat that the mood is bad and an explosion is inevitable.

LATE-NIGHT COMPANION "I'll be
working late" means keep the coffee machine on because I need to down 30 cups to get this work done.

part of the student experience. They were our comfort zones." Even celebrities prefer the informal air of the Costas and CCDs to five-star lobbies and coffee shops. In Mumbai, Bandra regulars remember watching scriptwriter Mushtaq Sheikh poring over his scripts at the Reclamation Barista, which shut down in 2011. The Costa Coffee at Khar is a hotspot for Bollywood aspirants who wait in eternal hope that Karan Johar, whose office is housed in the same building, will spot them. In Hyderabad, badminton player Jwala Gutta is often seen at Testa Rossa since nobody "bothers" her there. And Bollywood stars like Ranbir Kapoor and Vivek Oberoi are often spotted hanging out at the Khar Costa Coffee outlet. To keep the young and restless glued to their café, chains are going beyond coffee and introducing fun events and contests. CCD's recent `Big Gaming Bird Challenge' saw consumers playing an online game on iPads to win a tablet. Its Mumbai cafés ran the fun `Frappe Bottoms Up' challenge where participants had to glug five Café Frappes in a minute to win money. Barista celebrated its 12th birthday earlier this year with

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

