COVER STORY

GUJARATASSEMBLYELECTIONS

MASTER OFTHE NATIO NALGAME
wowed by the energy and dynamism of Vibrant t was December 2002 and the last days of an GUEST Gujarat, a few oddball intellectuals detached extremely tense election campaign. I was COLUMN from the academic and media establishments with Narendra Modi in a small aircraft, flying and a handful of political activists exasperated by from Jamnagar to Ahmedabad where he the inability of the BJP to capitalise on the failures would address an evening rally with Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. of the Central Government. In the past six months Leaning across the aisle, he asked: "What do or so, as the drift in the BJP has become more palyou think?" "Looks very encouraging," I replied. pable, the `Modi for PM' constituency has grown He nodded and then lapsed into a reflective siexponentially and embraced not only BJP-inclined SWAPAN lence. Then, quite abruptly, he shot me another voters and the party's grassroots workers but DASGUPTA question: "And what if we lose?" I smiled warily even a largish section of elite opinion-makers. and he too smiled back. "But at least I fought a Modi's growing national appeal has even begun good campaign. I gave my best." to be strongly reflected in opinion polls. Modi had every reason to consider the worst-case sceThe trends don't reflect a contrarian fad. There are nario. The forces ranged against him in 2002 were formithree significant points of value-addition that Modi is dable. Apart from the liberal intelligentsia and media that likely to bring to the BJP table. The first is the youth vote. held him personally responsible for the post-Godhra riots, Gujarat has clearly demonstrated that Modi's most enit was an open secret that a powerful section around thusiastic support comes from the below-35s, which exPrime Minister Vajpayee was less than enthusiastic about plains why Modi's election rallies often convey a rock him. Any electoral mishap, including a failure to secure a concert mood. They are passionately attracted by his resounding victory, would have spelt the end of his politiability to both sell a development dream and translate cal career. For Modi, it was a do-or-die battle. some of this into reality. In a party often seen as being In hindsight, that short flight to Ahmedabad was also antediluvian, Modi stands out as the leader with strongly one of those rarest of rare moments: When a flicker of modernist impulses. His 3D campaign may have seemed doubt crossed the mind of a man who has today earned a a needless gimmick--akin to the helicopter that never reputation for being the last word in political decisiveness. fails to draw an incremental, gawking crowd at political Never before--not even in those dark days of the late rallies--but Modi calculated it would be viewed as an ex1990s when he was more or less barred from even visitample of his technology-friendly approach in tune with ing Gujarat--had I ever seen a hesitant Modi. And never Gujarat's aspirational ethos. subsequently have I seen his fierce sense of mission falter. Modi is a man blessed with astonishing self-resolve. No-nonsense alternative to venal political class On December 20, as the Electronic Voting Machines reThe Gujarat experience has also pointed to Modi's hold vealed the extent of Gujarat's determination to persist with over women's imagination. A social psychologist may be its longest-serving Chief Minister, there was a realisation able to better explain if this appeal is centred on raw that what was being witnessed was more than just another machismo, his status as a single man (something that has state Assembly election: Modi was on the cusp of becomalso worked to the advantage of Naveen Patnaik in Orissa) ing a national phenomenon. Even his fiercest detractors-- or something more complex. Whatever the reason, this and they still dominate the Indian Establishment--have appeal is advantageous for a party which sees women and grudgingly admitted that in this 62-year-old Gujarati they youth as weak links in its social architecture. are dealing with someone who has the potential of not The third feature of Modi's political strength is his abilmerely reshaping the rules of electoral politics but even ity to inspire the BJP's bedrock social constituency-- contesting the muddled ambivalence of India. the middle classes. This following owes to Modi's three Modi has emerged a leader you can either love or perceived strengths: His passion for rapid development, loathe but can't ignore. his decisiveness and his personal integrity. In the 1990s, In the aftermath of his third consecutive victory in a much smaller middle class rallied behind the BJP beGujarat, there is certain to be a clamour for giving Modi a cause it was seen to be `different' from the rest of the national role and even declaring him the BJP's prime minpolitical pack. Today, a much larger and more fiercely aspirational middle class may well view Modi as the no-nonisterial candidate for the next General Elections. Hitherto sense alternative to a bunch of narrow-minded, this insistence was confined to a group of enthusiasts acself-serving and venal political class. tive on the social media, a clutch of business leaders

Narendra Modi does not have to go begging to BJP. Pressure from below will compel BJP to come to him.
receive instructions and follow them, Modi is an argumentative Indian. Many RSS veterans are wary of his constant questioning of certitudes. Second, flowing from this is the belief that Modi lacks the flexibility to manage the disagreeable world of coalition politics. With Nitish Kumar determined to walk out of the NDA in the event of the BJP naming him as the candidate for the top political job, there is a fear in the party that the BJP would be left in `majestic isolation', as happened between 1990 and 1996. These are real issues and there is only one way Modi can confront them: By letting public support do the talking. This was precisely how Vajpayee handled very similar problems between the collapse of his 13-day government in 1996 and the election of 1998. Frankly, the BJP has no option but to anoint Modi soon, giving him the time to build his national profile from his Gandhinagar operational base. The alternative will be a BJP entering the General Election campaign with a sullen, listless and unenthusiastic support base-- an approach calculated to produce indifferent results and the subsequent inability to play a meaningful post-election role. Within the parivar, it is often said that Modi has unlearnt everything he imbibed as a swayamsevak. This is untrue. One attribute that he has never lost sight of is the strategic virtue of patience over impulsiveness. In his 12 years at the helm in Gandhinagar, he has rarely overplayed his hand. He has never been a man in a tearing hurry, even while aware of his ultimate destination. Modi does not have to go begging to the BJP. Pressure from below will compel the BJP to come to him. After that, the battle for India will formally begin. Knowing Modi, he will be fighting to win. He always has.
Swapan Dasgupta is a Delhi-based political commentator who has written extensively on Gujarat

I

In the past, Modi has successfully experimented with creating an all-embracing political community. After the 2002 riots which were attributed to a visceral majoritarian backlash against Muslims, Modi avoided the temptation of recreating the Hindu vote bank of the Ayodhya years. Instead, he invoked Gujarati asmita which incorporated the `garv se kaho hum Hindu hain' theme to something larger and non-contentious. In the process, he subsumed the caste mobilisation that had been a feature of Congress resurgence in the 1980s. It is said that Gujarat isn't India and that Modi's bid to invoke an India Pride will falter in the face of the fractious caste and community mobilisation of the Hindi heartland. There is some merit in the argument. At the same time, Modi's critics have failed to take into account the possibility that no meaningful national campaign can be a carbon copy of an approach evolved in the context of just Gujarat.

Letting public support do the talking
Modi has two cards that have been kept in reserve. The first is the element of class that Modi touched upon tangentially in the final stages of the Gujarat campaign, as a retort to Rahul Gandhi. "Your father, his grandfather and his mother were Prime Ministers," he said in a few rallies, "but my father wasn't even a sarpanch." This was a direct assault on both privilege and the Gandhi family's remarkable sense of entitlement. The second reserve card is Modi's membership of a backward caste. He has never invoked his OBC status, not least because casteism goes against his commitment to an all-embracing Indian nationalism. But this is a theme that is rarely proclaimed on public platforms. It is a message transmitted through the powerful bush telegraph. In theory, Modi has the weapon to replenish his larger appeal with the OBC card. The leaders of caste parties in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar know this and are awkward about confronting him frontally on the social justice theme. Modi's strengths are known to the BJP but yet there are misgivings on two counts. First, Modi is seen to be too much of an individualist. Despite being a former RSS pracharak who was trained to

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

28

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

