UP FRONT

BRAHMA CHELLANEY

THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OFXI
t a time when China's economy and society are under ceased to be a rigid monolith obedient to a single leader, has considerable strain and the country is embroiled in in- become dependent on the military for its political legitimacy creasingly tense border disputes with its neighbours, and to ensure domestic order. With incidents of rural protests the relatively peaceful once-in-a-decade political transition increasing officially by more than 10 per cent a year and in Beijing has helped deflect attention from the underlying separatist unrest growing in the sprawling Tibetan plateau, turbulence in the Chinese system. The fact is that China is at Xinjiang and Inner Mongolia, China is now the only impora crossroads, and the next decade under the new leadership tant country whose annual internal security budget surpasses its national defence spending. of Xi Jinping will decisively shape the country's trajectory. The rise of a new dynasty of "princelings", or sons of Power transition without bloodshed and chaos is rare in Chinese history. From the first Shang dynasty, political revolutionary heroes who maintain widespread contacts in change in Chinese history has usually occurred through the military, is another indicator that nationalism and violent means, with force also being employed to retain militarism will likely strengthen in China. The princelings power. Chinese analyst Xiao Han has called this the "axe like Xi, numbering in the hundreds, dominate the new gang" (fu tou bang) tradition, with the axe being the Standing Committee and play a key role in the government symbol of power since ancient times. But in modern and economy, in spite of their internecine power squabbles. These developments have important internal and extertimes, as Mao Zedong once famously said, "Political power nal implications. Internally, with several reformers losing grows out of the barrel of a gun." The People's Republic of China--born in blood in 1949 out to old conservatives in the power struggle for top posi--has pursued endless domestic witch-hunts and political tions, prospects for major reforms look bleak. Since the purges. Mao and Deng Xiaoping, between them, got rid of Deng era, China has dumped the Marxist half of Marxismat least five anointed successors who were discarded Leninism but retained the Leninist part. Dictatorship is one abruptly or died either mysteriously or under detention. The thing that is not open to reform. China's corrupt, factionfirst leadership transition without turmoil or bloodshed was ridden political culture and bloody history, in any event, are in 2002, when Jiang Zemin stepped down in favour of Hu conducive not to political reform but to political revolution. China's internal politics has a bearing on its external Jintao. Xi's ascension was preceded by a vicious power struggle that led to the ouster and disappearance of a rising policy. The stronger the military has become at the expense star, Bo Xilai, and the swift conviction of his wife for the of the civilian leadership (every Chinese leader since murder of a British national in what probably ranks as the Mao has been weaker than his predecessor), the more muscular Beijing's approach has been mother of all orchestrated trials. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com towards its neighbours. Stepped-up Power in China may not flow from internal repression and aggressive the barrel of a gun to the extent it did external moves to change the territorial under Mao--who was responsible for status quo in China's favour are two the death of countless millions--yet it is sides of the same coin. significant that Xi has risen to the top For India, the timing of the power with close military ties and support. In transition in China could not be more fact, what sets Xi apart from China's ominous--the Communist Party's 18th other civilian leaders is his strong National Congress and the unveiling of relationship with the military, which the new leadership line-up coincided regards him as its own man. Xi, as he with the 50th anniversary of China's rose through the Communist Party military invasion of India. Lest it spotranks, built close links with the military lights China's role as the aggressor as a reservist, assuming leadership of a when it still harps on historical provincial garrison and serving as a grievances vis-à-vis others, Beijing senior aide to the defence minister. His has maintained a studied silence on wife, Peng Liyuan, is also tied to the The real winner from the the October 20-December 1, 1962, war. military, having served as a civilian member of the army's musicale troupe. appointment of the conserva- India and other neighbours would be wise to brace up to face a less restrained The real winner from the appointtive-dominated Politburo China championing ever-expanding ment of the conservative-dominated Standing Committee is the "core interests." Politburo Standing Committee is the military, whose rising clout in military, whose rising clout in policy policy has already created an has already created an increasingly Brahma Chellaney is a increasingly assertive China. assertive China. The party, having geostrategist and author

A

14

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

