THE BIG STORY

PONTYCHADHA
Kulwant Singh Chadha was diagnosed with Alzheimer's. Hardeep aka Satnam, the youngest of his three sons, became restive. His elder brothers Ponty and Raju (Rajinder) had always been a team. When Ponty organised Raju's daughter's wedding in Istanbul this November, just before Diwali, Hardeep was conspicuous by his absence. "Constantly badgered by Hardeep, one-and-a-half-years ago Kulwant took his sons to the Rakabganj Gurdwara in Delhi and forced them to agree on an equal three-way split of the business after his demise," says a friend who was advising Hardeep on business matters. "Though Ponty agreed in deference to his dying father's wish, he wasn't happy," he adds. Ponty, after all, was the one who had expanded his father's business of two liquor vends in Moradabad to a mega corporation. "He made it the hard way," says a Punjab Congress MP, a close friend of the Chadha family for over two decades. Ponty's first venture, he says, was bridge and road construction projects on the Uttar Pradesh-Bihar border in 1992. "Few people wanted to go to an area swarming with local gangs and beset by kidnappings," the MP adds. Equally feared and admired by his rivals, there was no way Ponty was going to allow anyone to grab what he had so painstakingly built. Even if it was his own brother. Things became downright ugly in the joint family home--another 27-acre farmhouse complex in Chhattarpur--shortly after Kulwant died in 2011. Ponty and Hardeep began vilifying each other in front of mutual friends. "Just a few months ago, I heard the younger brother complaining. He said Ponty had thrashed his children for playing in the house," says a Punjab politician who knew both the brothers. The warring siblings were days away from taking their fight to the courts when elders intervened. Harvinder and Paramjit Sarna, better known for their long-held dominance of the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee, were called in to arbitrate. They are related to the brothers. While Hardeep is Harvinder Sarna's son-in-law, Ponty's daughter is married to Paramjit Sarna's nephew in Dubai. Says a lawyer who sat in on the mediation that began in early November, "A settlement was finally reached on Thursday (November 15) under which Ponty agreed to pay Hardeep a mutually agreed sum (versions vary from Rs 400 to Rs 1,200 crore)." By the next day, however, evidently instigated by cronies who said that he had bartered away his rights for "peanuts", Hardeep backtracked. He wanted more. An enraged Ponty decided that he would not let his brother have anything. He decided to occupy the two farmhouses (one in Bijwasan and the other, Number 42, Central Drive) that he had agreed to give Hardeep. Ponty's Wave Inc empire straddles six states:

THE INCREDIBLE RISE AND THE SUDDEN DEATH OF PONTY CHADHA

BLOOD & BILLIONS
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora and Asit Jolly

F

ifteen months before liquor baron Gurdeep Singh `Ponty' Chadha, 59, was killed in a bloody exchange of fire with younger brother Hardeep, he had a premonition. It was perhaps triggered by an astrologer in Delhi, who warned Ponty in August 2011 that there was a `kaala saaya' (dark shadow) on his horoscope. He was told to give up his liquor business. Liquor catapulted him from being a streetside snack seller in Moradabad to a powerful business tycoon who controlled 80 per cent of the liquor business in Uttar Pradesh. It also became the cause of his sudden death, and that of Hardeep, at Number 42, Central Drive in Chhattarpur, Delhi, around noon on November 17. Their mother Prakash Kaur and some family elders were planning to sit together the same day to resolve the brothers' dispute over dividing the estimated Rs 20,000-crore business empire straddling sugar mills to distilleries, public transportation to real estate. Number 42, the three-acre farmhouse in Chhattarpur that seemed to be at the centre of it all, was only the final trigger. Fissures first erupted two years ago when patriarch

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

PONTY CHADHA

40

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

THE BIG STORY
INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIVES/ANIL SHARMA

PONTYCHADHA
the price he would buy from manufacturers. He is said to have come close to then Congress chief minister Amarinder Singh through a legislator with large-scale agrarian interests in western Uttar Pradesh and a senior IAS officer with connections in Uttarakhand. Ponty's liquor monopoly in Punjab was built by muscle power and a `friendly' administration. This was a far cry from those early days when the tycoon had to fend for himself. But even then he hated losing. A friend recalls that Ponty was fond of flying kites as a child and hated it when some other enthusiast would bring his kite down. So he wound a thin metallic wire around the thread so that his kite, which used to be bigger than normal kites, could not be cut off. His kite got entangled in a live electric wire once and Ponty lost most of his left forearm and two fingers of the other hand from a high voltage shock. But he never let his handicap come in the way. He manouevred his first vehicle, a Luna moped, through Moradabad's narrow lanes with ease. The man liked to create myths around his accident. Though he mostly went with the kite story, one slightly inebriated version he would often relate was about a ferocious sword fight outside his father's liquor shop. He would effortlessly raise a heavy crystal tumbler to salute friends who happened to be around in time for an evening scotch. His friends say Ponty went through years of dedicated physiotherapy until his missing forearm and fingers stopped being a disability. "He could hold a pen and sign his name if he had to and the drink in the evening was never a problem. But is it not ironic that a man who was never able to hold a gun in his life went down in a gunfight?" says a former Congress MP who remained a close friend. His handicap made him more determined to succeed. The driveway of his 27-acre farmhouse at 21, Central Drive in Chhattarpur boasted of an array of expensive vehicles including Bentleys, Ferraris and Mercedes. "He had a passion for cars. It was almost as if he wanted to wipe out the Luna days from his memory," says the friend. "A soft-

REALTY CHECK
Ponty Chadha's Wave Inc is a big conglomerate with interests in entertainment, real estate, sugar manufacturing and liquor manufacturing and retailing COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE WAVE INFRATECH  Centrestage Mall, Noida 350,000 sq ft  Wave Mall, Kaushambi 97,000 sq ft  Wave Mall, Lucknow 314,000 sq ft  Wave Mall, Ludhiana 470,000 sq ft  Wave Mall, Moradabad 150,000 sq ft  Wave 1st Silver Tower, Noida (under construction) 2,25,000 sq ft  Wave City Centre, Noida (under construction) 152 acres  Wave One, Noida (under construction)  Wave 11, Noida (under construction) RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE  Plumeria Garden Estates, Greater Noida 29 acres  Wave Greens, Moradabad (under construction) 52 acres  Wave Estate, Mohali (under construction) 300 acres  Wave Lakewoods, Hyderabad (under construction) 1,800 acres  Wave City, Ghaziabad (under construction) 4,500 acres LIQUOR DISTRIBUTION Since 2009, under Mayawati's regime, Ponty Chadha had virtual monopoly over 12 lakh liquor vends in Uttar Pradesh. The Mayawati government's policy comes up for time-bound renewal in 2013. Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav could now change the system and give licences to multiple people instead. ENTERTAINMENT Cinemas WAVE CINEMAS--28 screens in seven locations across Delhi, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh. Film Distribution GINNI ARTS--Distributors of major Hindi films in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh; hits include Gadar-Ek Prem Katha, No Entry, Ready, Murder 2 and Kahaani. MANUFACTURING Soft Drinks  Two Coca-Cola bottling plants, Punjab

(LEFT) PONTY WITH RAM GOPALYADAV; WITH SUKHBIR BADAL (LEFT) AND OM PRAKASH CHAUTALA, AT HIS DAUGHTER'S WEDDING

"More than clout, he Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, sought respectability. Punjab, Uttarakhand, Ponty always felt that Himachal Pradesh and despite having immense Chhattisgarh. However, wealth and contacts in it was the tag of liquor the right places, he was baron that the portly, still not given the respect soft-spoken Ponty was he deserved," says a desperately trying to friend. Ponty's refrain shake off even as he was that there are other went on an expansion liquor barons who have spree, branching out HARDEEP SINGH CHADHA spent millions on their into real estate, malls, high-flying but failed cinema halls, film production and distribution, soft drink bot- businesses but still got away with a bettling, paper manufacturing, sugar, ter image than his. Despite his Armani distilleries, hydel power and education. suits, Italian shoes and diamond-studRaju had been handling the liquor busi- ded Rolex watches, Ponty always felt ness, as well as a few independent con- that he had failed to shake off the unretracts. Ponty's next aim was to make it fined image of an outsider who began big in food processing. Known to be life on the mean streets of Moradabad. His father Kulwant, a refugee from close to former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Mayawati, Ponty was well on Rawalpindi, had started off with a his way towards building bridges with bhang and ganja vend shop at Gurhatti the Samajwadi Party in Uttar Pradesh. Chowraha, Moradabad, in the early He had managed to get an invite for the 1950s. He expanded to a wine shop at swearing-in ceremony of Chief Minister Amroha Gate by the end of the decade. Akhilesh Yadav in Lucknow on March It is outside this shop that Ponty, a 15. An associate recalls how a perse- school dropout, started his first `indeverant Ponty spent eight days at the Taj pendent' business venture. It comHotel in Lucknow, waiting for a per- prised a rickety wooden table, a sonal meeting with Yadav, which finally kerosene pressure stove and a large materialised after an influential busi- oil-filled wok to dish out Punjabi-style fish to tipplers. Of Kulwant's three sons, nessman intervened.

it was Ponty who showed acumen in business and an interest in expanding it. Kulwant noticed Ponty's networking skills with the local police and municipal authorities and encouraged him to meet senior bureaucrats, policemen and politicians. In 1972, Ponty started his first solo venture, the Apollo Hotel, which was actually a restaurant at Imperial Tiraha in Moradabad. By early 2000, he had not only managed to expand his father's liquor retail business outside Moradabad but also got his first foothold in Punjab. In 2001, a section of the Shiromani Akali Dal supported by Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal's son-in-law and the then state excise and taxation minister Adesh Pratap Kairon actively patronised Ponty in an attempt to shatter the then all-powerful Garcha Group's monopoly in Ludhiana. This was to undercut the influence of their patron, Badal's son Sukhbir, who Kairon did not get along with. This first foray was however not successful, and Ponty withdrew only to make a reappearance in 2003 when he succeeded in gaining control of Punjab's lucrative liquor trade. His critics said that the auctions were manipulated to favour Ponty. He got a majority of the liquor vends and then began dictating terms including

DISPUTED OWNERSHIP
Ponty's brother Hardeep laid claim to some companies after their father's death. Officially, they remain part of Wave Inc:
 

Chadha Papers Limited, Uttarakhand Chadha Sugars & Industries Ltd, Punjab  A.B. Grain Spirits Pvt Ltd, Haryana  A. B. Breweries Pvt Ltd,Punjab  A. B. Distillers & Bottlers Pvt Ltd, Haryana  A. B. Sugars & Industries Ltd, Punjab  A. B. Transport Corporation, Delhi  Indraprastha Integrated Development Land Futuristic Pvt Ltd, Noida

(LEFT) WAVE MULTIPLEX IN LUCKNOW; PONTY'S HOUSE IN MORADABAD

MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

RAJWANT RAWAT/www.indiatodayimages.com

42

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

THE BIG STORY
HT

PONTYCHADHA
In the last few years of his life, Ponty had become more religious. He always carried a copy of Sukhmani Sahib--an extract from the Guru Granth Sahib meant to bring happiness and well-being--in his pocket, and read from it whenever he had the time. Police found the book in the dashboard of the Land Cruiser in which Ponty had driven with his one-time bodyguard-friend and Uttarakhand Minority Commission Chairman Sukhdev Singh Namdhari to the disputed Chhattarpur farmhouse on November 17. Lately, Ponty had taken to funding repair and reconstruction of some gurdwaras in the Capital. This increased his influence with the Delhi Sikh

PONTY'S HOME WAS A MUST-STOP FOR POLITICIANS AND BUREAUCRATS. TO CLOSE FRIENDS HE SERVED THE FINEST SINGLE MALTS, FOR MORE FORMAL ACQUAINTANCES IT WAS THE FINEST TEAS.
Gurdwara Management Committee. Days before he died, he had agreed to fund restoration of some gurdwaras in Pakistan as well. "He had to approach the Ministry of External Affairs to complete the formalities. He was reluctant since he believed his image may pose a problem," says a close associate. It is ironic that a man, who lived by his own rules and did not hesitate in breaking a few, suffered from self-doubt at the thought of benevolence. Outside the main entrance of the now desolate Chadha farmhouse in Chhattarpur, where two widows share their common grief, is a life-size statue of Hanuman wielding his mace. Ponty had it installed because he was told it would protect him from harm. In the end, nothing could save him from the enemy within. with Piyush Babele

spoken man who was never impolite but knew exactly how to tick off someone who was becoming a pest," is how a regular visitor to the sprawling Chadha homestead describes Ponty. He compared the lobby of his farmhouse to that of a seven-star hotel. "It is probably even more luxurious. Have you ever seen onyx floors spread across thousands of square feet?" All of Ponty's friends--politicians, bureaucrats and businessmen--universally acknowledge his uncommon generosity. His home was a must-stop

(TOP) PONTY (RIGHT) WITH HIS FATHER KULWANT; RELATIVES RECEIVE PONTY'S BODYAFTER THE POST-MORTEM AT AIIMS, DELHI

for many politicians and bureaucrats visiting Delhi from Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and Uttar Pradesh. Ponty did not deal in imported liquor but offered a range of finest single malt whiskeys and wines to his guests. To the more formal acquaintances, it was a choice of finest teas from Ceylon to Darjeeling and Huntley & Palmers biscuits.

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

