SPECIAL REPORT

BALTHACKERAY

DEATH
The struggle for Thackeray's mantle deepens as the drift between Uddhav and Raj widens further
By Kiran Tare and Rahul Jayaram
THOUSANDS TURN OUT TO JOIN THE FUNERAL PROCESSION OF BALTHACKERAY ON NOVEMBER 18

LIFE AFTER
n November 17, minutes after Shiv Sena supremo Bal Thackeray died at 3.33 p.m. after a cardiac arrest at his home Matoshree, his nephew Raj received an unusual message from Thackeray's close aide Ravi Dodha. Thackeray's son Uddhav had decided that no one apart from family would be allowed into Thackeray's room on the second floor. Dodha conveyed the message to Raj. Thackeray's nephew requested visitors not to come up to pay their last respects to the departed leader. The family was planning a grand funeral procession the next day, he told them. Raj left Matoshree around 7.30 p.m. and returned in an hour to find a small crowd of Thackeray's neighbours gathered there. He was livid. He was told to do one thing and the exact opposite happened. Was someone playing games? Raj shouted at senior Shiv Sena leader Diwakar Raote "Mala khote ka padta?" (Are you trying to prove me a liar?") But the facts were something else. Thackeray's neighbours had gathered at Matoshree seeking permission to enter his room. Uddhav did not stop visitors from coming to Matoshree but did not allow them to go to Thackeray's room. Unaware of what Uddhav told the neighbours, Raj screamed at Shiv Sena leaders. It is a classic case of miscommunication. Misinterpretation and mistrust are keeping the Thackeray cousins apart. Shiv

O

Photographs by MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

SPECIAL REPORT
Sena supporters and the Raj-led Maharashtra Navnirman Sena's (MNS) rank and file want to see them working together after seven years. But the air is rife with cheap talk and rumourmongering. The cracks between the cousins are being kept wide open. When Thackeray was laid to rest on November 18, Raj was not a pallbearer. There is speculation that Raj was asked to walk in the funeral procession and not board the truck which carried Thackeray's body and had Uddhav on it. Raj felt humiliated and left the funeral procession midway. He appeared at Shivaji Park minutes before the truck reached the temporary crematorium. "I had a headache," Raj told his aides. However, an officer from the Mumbai Police's crime branch clears the air. He says the police had advised Raj, who broke away from the Shiv Sena in 2005, not to participate in the funeral procession. His presence on the truck could have agitated three million Shiv Sena sympathisers who had thronged for a final glimpse of their departed leader.

BALTHACKERAY
RAJ AND UDDHAV AT BAL THACKERAY'S FUNERAL IN MUMBAI

T

hackeray's death has raised the frequently asked question once more: Will Uddhav, 52, and Raj, 44, join hands? Shiv Sena sympathisers and MNS members say they must join for a greater cause: To dethrone the Congress-NCP alliance that is in power. But the cousins are in no hurry. Raj visited Matoshree every single day during Thackeray's last days. However, he barely interacted with Uddhav and his family. He would either sit beside the ailing Thackeray or in his Mercedes Class E parked behind the Thackerays' home. His close aides say Uddhav's family didn't treat Raj well. Supporters say he was not even offered tea when he visited Matoshree. An Uddhav aide vehemently refutes the charge of ill-treatment. "Uddhav held Raj's hand and took him near Balasaheb's pyre before he lit it. If Uddhav had any negative sentiment in his heart he would have kept Raj away from the final rites," he says. MNS MLA Nitin Sardesai, who is close to Raj, says he has no idea what transpired between the cousins. "I accompanied Raj

Uddhavmaybrand himself as Thackeray's true inheritor,but Raj,with his grasp over marketing techniques,has better image-building skills.
to Matoshree for four days. But whenever they (Uddhav and Raj) sat beside Balasaheb, I was not present," he says. Lower-rung Shiv Sena workers are not ready to accept Raj. They believe he overlooked Thackeray's emotional plea before the 2009 Assembly elections. "My doors are always open. The decision is with Raj," Thackeray had said. "Even if we come to power after reconciliation, Saheb (Thackeray) will not be there to cherish the victory. Raj could not make him happy when he was alive. We'll never accept him," says Jitendra Janavale, a Shiv Sena deputy zonal chief from Andheri, Mumbai. He scoffs at Raj being described as Thackeray's replica: "Saheb (Thackeray) was the real Sholay (the 1975 Bollywood blockbuster). He (Raj) is Ramgadh Ke Sholay (a 1991 spoof on the original)." An MNS leader from Andheri says there are practical difficulties in joining hands with Shiv Sena. "Both the parties have their own organisational set-up. A merger will lead to nothing but anarchy," he says. Shiv Sena has around one million members in Maharashtra while MNS has 300,000 members. Sardesai rules out a rapprochement. "There is no indication (from Raj). Only Raj and Uddhav can take a final call," he says. Sardesai is talking simple arithmetic: MNS is growing. The party won 13 seats in the 2009 Assembly elections, and its nine candidates secured more than one lakh votes in the 2009 Lok Sabha polls, though none of them won. MNS has a significant presence in the municipal corporations of Mumbai and Pune. It is in power in Nashik. "We are in no hurry," says Sardesai. Shiv Sena's most senior leader Manohar Joshi is also sceptical. "In politics, even staunch rivals come together. But I can say that Uddhav and Raj will not come together in the near future," he says. Political compulsions are one thing, family issues another. "Their (Raj's and Uddhav's) wives will never allow them

to come together," says a friend of the Thackerays. A source says that Uddhav's ambitious wife Rashmi and Raj's politically aloof but dominating wife Sharmila would like their husbands to carve out their own paths. Uddhav's supporters recall an incident at Raj's house where Sharmila snapped at her husband for visiting Matoshree so frequently. Clearly, there are no signs of the feud receding. A source close to Uddhav says there's a hidden hand behind the animus. "Somebody has conspired to maintain the division forever," he says darkly. An hour before he died, Thackeray wanted to see Uddhav's younger son Tejas, 18. When Tejas went inside his room Thackeray held his hand and patted him. Thackeray was unable to speak, but was he trying to send a message? On October 18, 2010, Uddhav launched his elder son Aditya, 23, as the chief of Shiv Sena's youth wing Yuva Sena at a rally in Shivaji Park. At the rally Thackeray took pride in announcing, "Tejas resembles me." He did not hesitate in declaring that the aggressive Tejas, a first-year science student, would be his real heir. "Like me, he is fond of fish and dogs. He is aggressive and likes tod-phod (smashing up

things)," Thackeray had said. With Thackeray's death, Uddhav's leadership is on test. A political rival of Uddhav believes Sena workers over 45 will watch the future developments quietly and then decide whether to jump ship or stay put. Those under 25 have already chosen their leader: The charismatic Raj, not the sober Uddhav. He may have been aggressive, but Thackeray always tried to meet Sena workers' demands. "With his defensive leadership and introvert nature, Uddhav is a huge contrast," says former journalist Hemant Desai. Though the Sena is trying to pit Aditya against Raj to gain young voters, the strategy might backfire. "There is a possibility that Aditya will become the Rahul Gandhi of the Shiv Sena if he cannot win an election, a liability rather than an asset," says a senior Sena leader. Jitendra Janavale dismisses speculation that post-Thackeray, Sena will recede under Uddhav's leadership. "From now Uddhavji is our Balasaheb," he says. Uddhav can indeed brand himself as Thackeray's true inheritor, but Raj, with his grasp over marketing techniques and contacts in the media, has better image-building skills. "The party's fortune depends on how Uddhavji takes care of the workers," says Manohar Joshi. There is no doubt that the Sena will miss Thackeray's realpolitik. He had excellent rapport with politicians such as Sharad Pawar, L.K. Advani and Pranab Mukherjee. When Pawar's daughter Supriya Sule contested the 2006 Rajya Sabha elections, the Sena did not field a candidate against her. When Mukherjee was named as the Congress nominee for President, Shiv Sena, despite being an NDA constituent, supported him. Uddhav does not have such cross-party camaraderie. Worse, he is not on the best of terms with Nitin Gadkari, president of the Sena's most trusted ally since 1986, BJP. Gadkari's rapport with Raj is far better, with the MNS chief endorsing his BJP counterpart's credentials to become Maharashtra chief minister in an interview before the 2009 Assembly elections. Senior BJP leader Gopinath Munde is in fact keen on having Raj on board. The

JAILED FOR FACEBOOK POST

SHAHEEN DHADA (LEFT) AND RINU SHRINIVASAN

n November 18, Shaheen Dhada, 21, posted on her Facebook page: "Respect is earned, not given and definitely not forced. Today Mumbai shuts down due to fear and not respect. People like Thackeray are born and die daily and one should not observe a bandh." Her friend Rinu Shrinivasan `liked' the post. Both are students from Palghar, around 125 km from Mumbai. Hours later, Shiv Sena workers vandalised a hospital run by Dhada's uncle. Police arrested Dhada and Shrinivasan for hurting religious sentiments. Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan later ordered an inquiry into the police action. Dhada apologised for hurting the sentiments of the people. A day later, the police arrested 10 Shiv Sena workers on November 20. But who will pay for the trauma faced by the students?

O

party announced in October that it will face the 2014 Assembly elections under Munde's leadership. The Sena is slipping. It won only 45 seats out of 288 in 2009. Except Mumbai and Thane, it is not in power in any other big municipal corporation. In the elections to local governing bodies held in February this year, Shiv Sena stood third behind NCP and Congress. Munde will not hesitate to sideline the Shiv Sena and ally with MNS if he thinks the latter is a better bet. Half an hour before Thackeray passed away, the otherwise calm and verdant area of Bandra's Kalanagar, where Matoshree is situated, erupted with the cawing of crows and chirping of sparrows. What were they prophesying? Was it Thackeray's death or the Shiv Sena's troubles?
For more, log on to: www.indiatoday.in/sainik www.indiatoday.in/kiran-bst

32

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

