NA TION
EXCLUSIVE

BIHAR

Nitish Slips on Liquor Scam
By Amitabh Srivastava

Audit reveals that the price of country liquor was raised arbitrarily, ignoring lower bids by suppliers
Lords Distillery and Narang Distillery, for `inadequacies' in their bids--for not furnishing the solvency certificate from the Registrar of Companies in the case of Lords and non-submission of Income Tax Department receipts with tax returns in the case of Narang. Bidders with similar and other shortcomings were however allowed. The auditor has held then excise minister Jamshed Ashraf of the Janata Dal (United) responsible for nixing the Lords and Narang bids. Narang Distillery had quoted the lowest price of Rs 1.33 per 200 ml of rectified spirit. Country liquor is essen-

confidential audit report by the Principal Accountant General (PAG), Bihar, has found that the state excise department arbitrarily raised the price of country liquor to benefit some suppliers to the tune of Rs 181.15 crore. The report, likely to be tabled before the state legislature next year, says that in 2009 excise department bureaucrats on a whim raised the price above that quoted by the successful lowest bidder and awarded more than two-thirds of the total supply quantity to the tenth lowest bidder. While finalising tenders for 20092012, the price was raised "on presumptuous and imaginary grounds, provided by a coterie of suppliers, to provide undue benefit to the bidders", the report says. The decision-makers in the department rejected the lowest tender on "specious grounds", besides extending "undue favour to (a) few suppliers", according to the report. Though the audit report, currently in the final phase of preparation, is as good as final, PAG Rajiv Bhushan Sinha has been transferred out of the state before its submission in the legislature. In February 2009, when the department invited tenders for supply of country liquor for three years, it received 15 bids. It eliminated two serious bidders,

A

PEOPLE OUTSIDE A COUNTRY LIQUOR SHOP IN PATNA
KRISHNA MURARI KISHAN

COURSE CORRECTION
The suppliers'rate for country liquor this year is lower than three years ago


In 2009, the excise department fixed Rs 2.80 per 200 ml as the suppliers'rate.  The latest competitive bidding for country liquor supply (for the period from December 2012 to March 2014) held in November saw the lowest bidder quoting a price of Rs 2.14 per 200 ml of country liquor. It means that the suppliers'rate of country liquor in 2012 is lower than the one fixed three years ago.  The excise department this time held no negotiations and fixed the price quoted by the lowest bidder as the rate for suppliers.

tially made of rectified spirit, a raw material from molasses, a byproduct of sugarcane. Rectified spirit is diluted with water in a fixed proportion to produce country liquor. The department formed an internal screening committee of officers, which determined the price of rectified spirit at Rs 1.54 per 200 ml and then fixed the suppliers' rate of country liquor at Rs 2.80 per 200 ml sachet. According to Narang Distillery's rejected bid, the suppliers' rate per 200 ml would have been Rs 2.36. The committee determined it at Rs 2.80. The decision-makers also ignored the suppliers' rate of Rs 2.43 per 200 ml quoted by Umeri Distillery, which emerged as the lowest bidder following the rejection of Narang Distillery's bid. The suppliers' rate is the rate at which successful bidders supply country liquor. Various duties such as VAT, excise duty, licence fee and margin money of the State Beverage Corpo-

AMIR SUBHANI,
Then secretary, excise Now principal secretary, home

N.VIJAY LAKSHMI,
Then excise commissioner Now agriculture secretary

JAMSHED ASHRAF
Then excise minister Now a Congress politician

ration Ltd are added to that to fix the maximum retail price. The screening committee, which took all the decisions while finalising supply orders, functioned under direct supervisory control of the then secretary, excise, Amir Subhani, a 1987batch IAS officer. The then excise commissioner N. Vijay Lakshmi (1995batch IAS) and joint commissioner excise (now retired) Ram Lakhan Sahni were members of the committee. Subhani is now principal secretary,

home, and Vijay Lakshmi is the state's agriculture secretary. Umeri Distillery, the lowest eligible bidder, had quoted its supply rate of Rs 2.43 per 200 ml for only three districts--Nalanda, Nawada and Darbhanga. However, the screening committee made a mockery of the process when it allowed supply at a higher rate (Rs 2.80 per 200 ml) even in those three districts. That resulted in an undue benefit of Rs 25.52 crore to suppliers and wholesalers in these three

districts alone. "This was unprecedented; and even the most favourable auditor could not have condoned it," said a source in the PAG office. Umeri Distillery was asked to supply country liquor in just Kaimur district. While it was allowed only 8.9 per cent of the total supply order, the committee allotted Saraya Industries, tenth lowest on the list of 13 successful bidders, 67.2 per cent supply of the total tendered quantity. The auditor noted there was nothing in the record to explain the basis of allotment. The excise department has scripted a spectacular success story since the NDA government led by Nitish Kumar took over in November 2005. It has earned Rs 2,045.31 crore as excise revenue in 2011-12 against a target of Rs 1,900 crore, a 361 per cent rise in collection from Rs 566 crore in 2004-05. The audit findings, however, suggest that the department could do with some serious introspection. 

38

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

