SP ORT

CRICKET
GEETY IMAGES

TURBANATOR IN ATAILSPIN
A
fter his blink-and-you-miss comeback during the T20 World Cup in Sri Lanka in SeptemberOctober, Team India's most experienced spinner has been reduced to an occasional experiment. Off-spinner Harbhajan Singh, 32, a veteran with 406 Test wickets in his kitty, is no longer captain M.S. Dhoni's first choice after the success of spin duo Pragyan Ojha and R. Ashwin. The 26-year-olds, who have been together since junior grade cricket and differ only when it comes to their favourite football team--Ojha is a Barcelona fan, Ashwin a Manchester United loyalist--have a phenomenal 86 wickets in six matches, a statistic unmatched by any Indian spin pair. The `Turbanator', India's third highest Test wicket-taker after Anil Kumble and Kapil Dev, retains his place in the squad only as a third spin option. He is part of the set-up only because leg-spinners Amit Mishra, Piyush Chawla and Rahul Sharma have been weak at staking their claim. Even after Harbhajan breaks into the playing XI, it's unlikely Dhoni will give him too many chances. Given the pressure to perform, former India off-spinner

Off-spinner Harbhajan Singh has been relegated to third place in Team India's list of spin options

HARBHAJAN SINGH

Erapalli Prasanna believes Harbhajan is better off focusing on the positives. "He has to try and remember what has given him so many wickets. At this point, he's the third spinner and what role he gets to play in the series will be interesting. He's got 400 wickets behind him yet we don't know when he will get into the 100-match bracket," says Prasanna. Harbhajan had played 98 Tests before the England series. During the first Test at Ahmedabad, Harbhajan made for a compelling sight, wearing a fashionable yellow bib and holding a matching drinks holder at the sidelines as Ojha and Ashwin split 13 wickets between them. Each time they jumped with joy after scalp-

EACH TIME OJHA OR ASHWIN JUMPED WITH JOY AFTER SCALPING AN ENGLISH WICKET, HARBHAJAN'S STOIC FACE WOULD FLASH ON TV SCREENS.

ing an English wicket, Harbhajan's stoic face would instantly flash on television screens. Harbhajan's request to play the second round of Ranji Trophy for some match practice instead of attending Team India's preparatory camp was shot down by BCCI as a matter of principle; he was held back as a substitute even when opener Murali Vijay and paceman Ashok Dinda were released by the Indian team management for the third set of Ranji matches. Former India left-arm spinner Maninder Singh says Harbhajan has to be patient: "There is only one piece of advice I would give Harbhajan and it is what (legendary spinner) Bishan Singh Bedi gave us--keep bowling." Over the recent months, Harbhajan has played English county cricket for Essex, bowled at the Champions League in South Africa for Mumbai Indians and revisited the Indian domestic scene for Punjab with average success. Ironically, standing on the brink of a career milestone, it's not just his own performance that will ensure Harbhajan's success. It depends on others failing. by G.S. Vivek

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

