The Big Story INDIAARTFAIR

COLOURS OF MONEY
Large crowds, eye-catching installations, big name artists made the art fair a stunning success
By Georgina Maddox

2

1.A polyester, resin and fibreglass sculpture by Ravinder Reddy; 2. Small Things, a silicone, human hair and resin sculpture by Sam Jinks; 3. Butterfly Psalm Prints, silkscreen prints with glaze by Damien Hirst; 4. Entangled Head, bronze cast and Belfast granite sculpture by Angus Taylor; 5. Trojan Horse, a mixed media sculpture by Willie Bester; 6. Neha Kirpal, founderdirector of India Art Fair; 7. Colony Collapse Disorder, a metal anklets, fabric and steel installation by Vibha Galhotra

5

4

BARGAIN BAZAAR
"Art Fairs have become the newest venues to reach out to a global audience, which flocks to these super art marts for a week of all-day shopping and all-night partying," says Abhay Maskara who wears many hats as a gallery owner, collector and now a recently published author. Some galleries such as Delhi-based Religare and Exhibit 320, Mumbai-based Gallery Beyond and Abu Dhabi's Salwa Zeidan Gallery had priced their work between Rs 1 lakh and 50 lakh and saw a better turnover. The closing Sunday witnessed a few distress sales with discounts in the range of 20-30 per cent thrown in on higher priced art, strictly "off the record".

A

1

new location, the NSCI Exhibition Grounds in Delhi's Okhla area; the unconventional use of 12,000 sq metres of tents to house art; and the openly commercial avatar of the fourth edition of India Art Fair could have spelt doom for its organiser, 31-yearold Neha Kirpal. However, judging by the crowds that queued up every day from January 26 to 29 (a rough estimate puts the total at 1 lakh visitors), Kirpal has much to be happy about. This year saw 98 exhibitors from 20 countries presenting 1,000 modern and contemporary artists from across the globe. Earlier in the year, Kirpal split a 49 per cent share of the India Art Fair between two co-founders of Art Hong Kong, Sandy Angus and Will Ramsay, becoming a part of the largest network of art fairs in the world. With 80 per cent of the galleries reporting sales or interest in their work and a fairground studded with international curators, gallerists and dealers, this was the defining event of the 2012 art calendar. Art costing between Rs 50,000 and Rs 50 lakh saw brisk sales. The butterfly prints and golden skull editions by Damien Hirst priced between Rs 1 lakh and 30 lakh found many takers, though the Green Black by Anish Kapoor, priced at a whopping Rs 4.6 crore, did not sell. As Maithili Parekh of Sotheby's said: "Buyers have become more discerning and frenzy has given way to thoughtful collecting."

3

6

WEIRD AND WHACKY ANYTHING FOR ART
"It was a risk moving location but it also means that the crowds you get are those you want--people with a genuine interest in art," says James Lavender, whose Hauser and Wirth booth was the first one saw on entering the fair. Showcasing India's star art couple, Subodh Gupta and Bharti Kher, alongside Paul McCarthy and Martian Creed, Lavender reported "reasonable" sales with both Kher's and Gupta's work selling at close to Rs 1 crore each. While some flew in for the fair, others came by train. And some, like octogenarian Progressive artist S.H. Raza and art historian Geeta Kapur, made it to the fair in wheelchairs and on crutches-- anything for art. Maskara's booth had some of the most irreverent art on display--from Shine Shivan's deer faeces sculpture to T. Venkarana's auto-erotic women pleasuring themselves. Both artists were in demand at the fair and their work was priced between Rs 1 lakh and 10 lakh. Siddharth Kararwal's Maharaja Gaikwad wrapped in bandages on a horse got many eyeballs and Yoko Ono's Wish Tree had people putting up messages like "I do not want the Lokpal Bill to be passed because I want to do well". The fair had its share of oddballs. Australian artist Peter Burke had quite a few heads turning when he walked up to them and threw open his coat, lined with a collection of matchbox-sized art he called his mobile gallery.
Photographs: VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

7

FEBRUARY 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

The Big Story INDIAARTFAIR
ent over a mirror above which are strung pomegranates, Amina Ahmad, 50, regards her reflection. She then invites other viewers to see themselves in a pond dappled with red globules. It speaks of the transience of identity and the persistence of beauty, an installation she created at the art residency of the Engendered Art Space, a 2,000 sq ft gallery at Shahpur Jat in Delhi. Ahmad was born in Africa and is a Kutchi-Turk Indian who grew up in England and lived in Iran and the US. These multiple strains of culture have affected her life and art. There are many artists like her who showed their work at the India Art Fair and in the collateral shows that kicked off in Delhi this January. "The diaspora is more relevant in today's transnational scenario because it touches more lives as there

B

AMINA BEGUM AHMAD, 50
A Kutchi-Turk Indian born in Africa, she grew up in UK, lived in Iran and US. Was awarded Barakat prize by the Prince of Wales Institute of Architecture .

AHMAD WITH HER WORK FOR THE CAN YOU SEE ME? EXHIBITION

``

The Babu, the Nayika and the Cat, sculptures by Tapas Sarkar

NO LONGER FOREIGN
Laura Williams of gallery Art18/21 is now a three-time India Art Fair veteran and has seen the event grow from strength to strength, "I don't think the international galleries are here to flirt with the Indian art market, but to build strong ties. Given that scenario, I do wish the paper work around transporting art across borders would lighten up," says the gallery owner whose artists Alec Cummings and Isabel Rock have made India their second home. Galleries from Europe accounted for 26 per cent of the attendance, 14 per cent were from North and South America, Middle East, Africa and Australia and 57 per cent from Asia, including India.

Her work is not only beautiful, but calming and uplifting because it is the result of her own spiritual contemplation. Her work embodies a Sufi state of mind: connection to all and what may be in between.

SHARMISTHA RAY, 33
Born in Kolkata, became a British citizen, grew up in Kuwait, moved to the US. Has a master's from Pratt Institute after winning the Joan Mitchell scholarship.

``

I am impressed with her use of Western art historical references and how she has brought in her own experiences to create a distinctly South Asian color palette.

Leeza Ahmady, director,Asia Contemporary Art Week, New York

''

Tony Korner, Publisher of Artforum International magazine

''

RAY PAINTS THE EROTIC IMPULSE AT ENGENDERED SPACE
Photographs: CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

GLOBAL ART COMES HOME
Diaspora artists find India a better showcase for their work but are unanimous that global exposure has left them richer in terms of experience
is a larger group of people struggling with issues of borders, securities and migration," says Myna Mukherjee, 37, who lived in New York for 19 years, where she was director of Engendered for six years. She has recently moved back to Delhi, and launched Engendered Space, one of the first multidisciplinary alternative art spaces in Delhi. In another part of Delhi, artist L.N. Tallur says he has "deliberately" shared his time between India and South Korea for the past eight years. The Mysore-born Tallur, 40, was a strong contender for this year's Rs 10 lakh Skoda Art Prize. However, much to everyone's surprise, it was multimedia artist Navin Thomas who won the prize, announced on January 28. Tallur has even dedicated an artwork to his transnational identity. "I did a work called Souvenir Maker: Designed in America, Conceptualised in India, Made in China, Sponsored by Korea, Yes we are conditioned to think under flags. It was a barbed wire machine metamorphosed into a souvenir-making machine," says Tallur, whose work is often ironical and satirical. His price ranges from Rs 4 lakh to Rs 5.15 lakh. Spending "Indian summers in Korea and Korean winters in India", Tallur just showed his work at the Bhau Daji Lad Museum in Mumbai. He also has work on display at a group exhibition at Art Alive Gallery in Gurgaon. For Bangalore-born K.K. Raghava, 31, who dropped out of school in 1996 to become a full-time cartoonist and then a painter, the first brush with diaspora came when he fell in love with a girl based in the US. Instead of going to art school he stud-

K.K. RAGHAVA, 31
Born in Bangalore, he travelled across US, UK and Europe. His work was auctioned by Queens Museum and Christie's. Winner of grant from America India Foundation.

MARKET MANTRA
There were a few grunts of disapproval when emerging collector Parmesh Shahani commented on the surfeit of `commercial' work at the fair. Given that six of the large galleries-- Vadehra, Espace, Nature Morte, Sakshi and Arushi from India and 1x1 from Dubai--had the hugely popular Ravindra Reddy's work on display, one can see where his grouse is coming from. Besides Reddy, saleable work by M.F. Husain, S.H. Raza, Anjolie Ela Menon and Laxma Goud were on display. with Olina Banerji

``

Poised to be one of the most successful crossover artists from India in the US, his genius lies in his simplicity and openness to take from and give back to the environment around him.

RAGHAVA WITH A CANVAS TITLED FREEDOM

Myna Mukherjee, director, Engendered Space

''

ied with billboard painters and started an atelier to keep the dying art alive. "I wanted to make enough money to be with my girlfriend, who is now my wife, so we rented a van and toured all over the world selling my art work," recalls Raghava, who showed a 6x4 ft mixed media canvas at the Art Musings booth at the India Art Fair that made a statement about the end of the Nehruvian dream and the birth of globalised India. His work is priced between Rs 25 lakh and an astronomical Rs 1.25 crore. For Karachi born Simeen Farhat it will be 20 years since she moved to the US and while she believes that "India currently has a strong presence, economically and culturally on the global art scene, the incidence of diaspora in the US was much stronger earlier than it is now". Farhat's work comprises Urdu text used in a symbolic-

58

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

FEBRUARY 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

SIMEEN FARHAT, 43
Born in Karachi, grew up in the US. Master's from Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, and recipient of Clay Fellowship Residency, US.

TALLUR WITH HIS WORK BULIMIA

``

Widely collected from Paris to Istanbul,Abu Dhabi to Texas, Simeen Farhat is one of the most popular emergent names in the East and the West. Her work, though incredibly aesthetic, is also immediately political.

Myna Mukherjee, director, Engendered Space

''

FARHAT WITH HER SCULPTURE TITLED MASNAVI

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

sculptural manner. While the calligraphic forms are based on the revolutionary poetry of Rumi, Saadi, Khayyam, Ghalib and Faiz, they are not to be read literally. Instead they create a visual energy. "The root for using text comes from the story of the Tower of Babel and also from the fact that language initially was derived from gestures and objects," says the 43-year-old, who studied fine artists at Texas Christian University and Arizona State University. Farhat is showing her work at the exhibition Can You See Me?, a parallel art event during the India Art Fair hosted by Engendered Space. She has been jetting around the globe showing her work at Xerxes Art, London; The Slick Art Fair in Paris; La Fontaine Centre of Contemporary Art, Bahrain; and at Abu Dhabi. She has been doing brisk sales because her work is priced affordably between Rs 3 lakh and Rs 15 lakh. "In the last five years I've been establishing connections outside the US, with trips to Pakistan, Europe, and the Middle East. Moving to the US definitely helped me see things with multiple perspectives; both as an insider and outsider," says Farhat, who is planning a big solo in India. For Ahmad, showing in India seemed the most logical step given

the global climate pervading the Indian art scene. "I feel very connected to where I was born, my heritage, where I lived and where I am now. The need to have a sense of belonging is always there and the pain of witnessing and being a part of marginalised communities does not escape me," says Ahmad who studied at the Royal College of Art. Earlier this year Ahmad had a solo at the Seven Arts Gallery in Delhi that marked her entry on the Indian art scene. She also showed her work at the Seven Arts booth at the art fair titled Oh Subtle Earth. Ahmad's work is priced between Rs 1.25 lakh and Rs 8.93 lakh. Enjoying the playful and experimental atmosphere of being around other diaspora artists, Sharmistha Ray painted a canvas live on a rooftop at Shahpur Jat on January 24. Having flown in from Mumbai after her successful exhibition at Galerie Mirchandani+Steinruecke, Ray, 33, created The Erotic Impulse, a 6x8 diptych that was layered with salmon pink, pale green, vibrant reds and hot yellows. Colours that reflect her musings on gender-sexuality in the surroundings of green foliage and pink prayer flags. Ray quit her job as sales director at Hauser and Wirth Gallery, New York, in 2011 and turned to painting large format abstracts on canvas.

L.N.TALLUR, 40
Born in Mysore, grew up in Gujarat, Maharashtra, lives in Korea. Studied at Leeds Metropolitan University, UK, got Commonwealth Scholarship in 2001.

``

Tallur has mobilised his itinerant life and multiple academic experiences to develop a practice that calls into question all manner of notions of belonging. He capitalises on strangeness.
Chaitanya Sambrani, ANU School of Art,The Australian National University, Canberra

''

Before that she was a British citizen in the Middle East. The Joan Mitchell Scholarship let her study at Pratt Institute in New York, after which she worked with Bodhi Art Gallery as managing director. "I was tired of being marginalised in the US where I had to underline my political response in my work. I want to work without that baggage. That's why I came back to India and was immediately absorbed into the mainstream," says Ray who has been here for six years. She prices her work between Rs 40,000 and Rs 12 lakh. "I don't want the metaphors of migration to be literal. I want to tie in the issues of displacement, migration and the turmoil that can occur from it in a more poetic and metaphorical way. And I want to do that as a globalised Indian," Ray signs off. 

60

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

