So ciety NETWORKING

BLOG TO EARN BIG
Virtual pastimes become real world businesses as online ideas click and bloggers turn entrepreneurs
By Aditi Pai

MUMBAI

WINE AND FOOD
, and Aneesh Bhasin, 26, Shiladitya Mukhopadhyay, 28 Bhasin, a lifestyle photographer, started blogging on wines after developing an interest during his international tours. He met automation expert Mukhopadhyay on Twitter.The partners are soon launching a mobile phone app on wine.

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

followers 3,800 ON TWITTER
MUKHOPADHYAY (LEFT) AND BHASIN

hen Sahil Jatana, 29, first tweeted about his homebrewed coffee in 2009, little did he expect to convert his love for java into a business. Three years later, the former digital media professional is a full-time coffee coach who conducts workshops to train people to tell their Americano apart from an Affogato. "I was always passionate about coffee but didn't have the funds to set up a cafe. But the response I got to my tweets made me consider it a serious career option," says Jatana. Spurred by his online success with 3,500 followers, this CoffeeNazi, as he calls himself on Twitter, did a weeklong course at the Coffee Board of India in Bangalore and invited Twitter regulars to taste different brews at his Mumbai home. He is now set to open an online store selling everything from coffee beans to brewing machines. Like Jatana, several young bloggers are cashing in on their cyber celebrity status. For some the blog is a conscious decision to test waters, for others it happened by chance. Writer-artist Preeti Shenoy, 40, wrote her maiden blog in 2006 to "overcome grief" after her father's death. She continued writing about her "reflections on life" and gradually became a regular columnist in newspapers before bagging a book contract for 34 Bubblegums and Candies in 2008. Her second book, Life Is What You Make It, released in 2011 and she is already working on the third, a novel called Tea for Two and a Piece of Cake.

W

Similarly, Rushina Munshaw Ghildiyal, 35, was a "bored homemaker" when she took to blogging eight years ago. Her comments on food and a post on lesser-known recipes from the hill state of Uttarakhand saw her turn into a food columnist for magazines. Within the next few years, her online followers multiplied. She became a food consultant to Mumbai restaurants and retail stores such as Nature's Basket. Ghildiyal has clinched deals to author two cookbooks. "I am known because of my blog. The Internet is an excellent tool to reach to the consumer directly and get immediate feedback," says the mother of two. For most young entrepreneurs, blogosphere is the new boardroom. When an idea clicks or gets a large number of followers, it becomes a potential career or business option, especially if a blogger consistently sticks to a single topic. "People start identifying you with that product or service and once you establish yourself as someone with authority on the topic, people lap up your opinion," says Aneesh Bhasin, 26, a lifestyle photographer and wine bloggerturned-entrepreneur. He took to wines three years ago during his international trips and started blogging. With his followers' list swelling to 3,800 on Twitter, the Mumbai resident joined hands with automation expert Shiladitya Mukhopadhyay, 28, another Twitter regular. The duo is set to launch a mobile phone application called Indian Wine List next month. "We realised there was a gap in information while people's interest in wine is growing," Bhasin says.

MUMBAI

FASHION
, and Jasleen Kaur Gupta, 28, Sonu Bohra, 25
The former journalists and shopaholics who trawl the malls and streets of Mumbai thrice a week extended their online styling tips to launch a business through which they offer social media support to various brands, play personal shoppers, style shoots for magazines and write on fashion for various websites.

followers 800 ON TWITTER
BOHRA (LEFT) AND GUPTA

BANGALORE

LIFE EXPERIENCES
Preeti Shenoy, 40
The writer-artist started blogging after her father's death in 2006 to overcome her grief.A US radio show picked up one post and Shenoy soon became popular in blogosphere.With two books already in the market, she is now penning her third one.

followers 750 ON BLOG

Jasleen Kaur Gupta, 28, a bloggerturned-stylist and co-founder of Fashion Bombay, a popular blog, says, "You reach out to a large number of people online. The biggest advantage is that it involves zero capital." With colleague Sonu Bohra, 25, the former journalist started commenting on trends, reviewing stores and offering tips in 2009. Soon requests for personal shopping and styling started pouring in and the two quit their jobs in Mumbai to take up styling as a full-time profession. "We started putting up our own pictures. People could relate to us since we are regular girls and not models," explains Gupta, who has witnessed a "100 per cent jump in her earnings" in one year. Besides being an experiment with low stakes, blogging works as a wordof-mouth publicity tool with readers' comments working as reviews. Each time a person re-tweets the message, it spreads to a larger base of readers. "It is a typical Indian trait to want to see or hear about products before trying them. That is the specific benefit we got out of social networking," says Reena Chengappa, 35, co-founder of Mysunnybalcony, a company that designs home gardens for people in Bangalore. With no kitty to start an e-commerce website, Chengappa and her three friends--Shailesh Deshpande, Athreya Chidambi and Sriram Aravamudan--started posting pictures on social media sites in early 2009. As word spread, assignments started pouring in and the four have now set up an online store for gardening implements designed by them. Even as online followers form a potential customer base, it is important to convert the success into a business with a concrete strategy. Ghildiyal cashed in

MUMBAI

FOOD
Rushina Munshaw Ghildiyal, 35
Trained in animation, she took to blogging eight years ago and chanced upon a site dedicated to pickles. It got her interested in food and she stuck to blogging about recipes, food reviews and trivia. Her online success won her two book deals. She is a food consultant to stores and restaurants, conducts food trials and is now setting up a food studio.

followers 1,700 ON TWITTER
on her fame to conduct food trails, workshops, and is now setting up an innovative food studio where people can toss up their own recipes. The Fashion Bombay girls too lapped up offers from various brands. They manage social media for them, play personal stylists and had even briefly launched their line of accessories and scarves. "A blog-dependent enterprise is as sustainable or unpredictable as any other business. But the online space has great potential with people joining in fast," says Gupta. While the web puts no bounds on content, regulars caution that overt advertising or an overdose of information can put readers off. Many refrain from direct advertising on their blogs and instead opt for "soft marketing" peppered with user-friendly information like sales alerts, trivia or recipes. A report by Nielsen and AbsolutData states that 30 million Indians are users of social networking media and the numbers are growing by leaps and bounds. It's time for many more businesses to flourish in cyberspace.
with Sowmya Aji and Mona Ramavat

70

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

FEBRUARY 20, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

71

