The Big Story DEFENCE

HOWTO STEALDEFENCE LAND IN 5 EASYSTEPS
Despite repeated encroachments on defence land, its custodians have done nothing to toughen rules or punish violators. The easy loot continues.
By Sandeep Unnithan

Responsibility for the protection of the land is diffused and the landholding opaque. Guilty officials are punished only if a hue and cry is raised in public. The CBI is now investigating three defence land scams-- Adarsh, Kandivli and at Lohegaon, Pune. In the Lohegaon land scam unearthed in 2011, three scamsters prepared fake documents claiming ownership of about 69 acres of defence land worth Rs 800 crore.

GRANT BUNGALOWS 4 TARGETOLD
Buyers propose tearing down old houses and constructing a new residential building on it
ld grant bungalows are BritishO era dwellings on prime government land. These bungalows dot most military stations and cantonments. They are now valuable for their land which is owned by the government. The modus operandi is for the builder to approach the original tenants and buy them out. The bungalows are `de-

n just three years, 1,073 acres of defence land--equal to 412 football fields--has been swallowed up through encroachments by builders and private developers. The Government admitted this blandly in the Lok Sabha in March 2011, noting that encroachments in military areas have increased from 3,510.16 acres to 4,583.588 acres. The Directorate General of Defence Estates (DGDE) reported these encroachments on the 66,000 acres of land it held directly. DGDE is the department in the Ministry of Defence which is responsible for audit, accounting and financial management, Over 17 lakh acres of defence land worth Rs 20 lakh crore is vulnerable to encroachment. Of this, nearly 11,000 acres have been stolen, and no one cares. Records for land worth thousands of crores of rupees are maintained in tattered paper registers instead of secure electronic databases. The land is not demarcated. Worse, a corrupt nexus of army brass, defence estates officials and builders continue to bite large chunks out of this land bank. The DGDE has 1,251 officials to administer defence land, but no one has been held accountable for failing to protect it. The defence ministry is yet to table its proposed Defence Land Management Bill in Parliament. If there was a scamster's manual for

I

looting defence land, it would read something like this:

1

IDENTIFYPLIABLE DEFENCE AND ARMYOFFICIALS
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Nexus between the officials has been found in most land scams that have been unearthed
n January 31, the raided the Pune home of former army O vice chief Lt-General (Retd) Nobel
CBI

FORMER VICE CHIEF LT GEN (RETD) THAMBURAJ, THE MOST SENIOR ARMY OFFICER TO FACE A GRAFT CHARGE

ADARSH BUILDING HOUSING SOCIETY; (BELOW) PUNE'S RESIDENCY CLUB, A FORMER OLD GRANT BUNGALOW

Thamburaj for his alleged involvement in a land scam. An army press release said that Lt-General Thamburaj had arrived at an outof-court settlement with a builder that resulted in the government losing 0.96 acres of prime defence land worth Rs 45 crore in the Pune cantonment area. In most military land scams unearthed over the past few years, defence estates officials have been found to be hand-in-glove with army officials and private developers. The reasons are not far to see. The DGDE is represented by defence estates officers in military stations. These officials are custodians of defence land. The army uses the land. A General Officer Commanding of a military area heads the local administration in all of the 62 cantonment boards across the country. The board issues sanctions for construction of buildings within the cantonment area.

NOTIN MILITARYRECORDS 2 TARGETLAND
Land sharks take advantage of loopholes in land documentation
oughly 25 per cent of all defence land has not been `mutated' or not R transferred to the land records of the defence estates department. Bureaucratic lethargy is to blame for this. When the land-holding is ambiguous, it becomes ripe for exploitation by land sharks. In the Adarsh scam for instance, the housing society that was formed by retired military officials and defence estates officials homed in on a football fieldsized plot of prime land in Colaba, South Mumbai. The land was held by the army but owned by the state government. No records were available. The combination of defence estates and armed forces officials moved in to build a commercial residential tower.

ENCROACH DEFENCE LAND 3 SURREPTITIOUSLY
Builders encircle defence land after buying private plots around it
nused defence land is sometimes not even fenced. At times, corrupt U land sharks are known to buy private land around vacant defence land and then gradually encircle it. This happened in the case of the Srinagar air force land scam uncovered in 2009. Nearly 200 acres of prime defence land worth over Rs 1,500 crore was quietly sold over the years. The defence estates officials issued no-objection certificates to show that the land never belonged to the defence ministry despite having bought it in 1966. Camping grounds, another colonial relic located on the outskirts of military areas, are also considered fair game. The DGDE is meant to conduct land audits to assess the state of its land bank. The last major audit was carried out in

2000. Each year the department presents shrinking estimates of its landholding. The encroachments are termed `a complex socio-economic problem'. Surveys of disputed land holdings, ordered to buy time, are carried out with the state government and can take over five years.

hired'--the process by which the government stops collecting lease. The builder then approaches the cantonment board with a proposal for demolishing the `dilapidated' building and constructing a new residential building on it. An audit done by the Comptroller and Auditor General in

26

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

FEBRUARY 20, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

27

SAVE ADARSH MINISTERS PLAN
Congress wants to absolve former Maharashtra chief ministers Shinde and Deshmukh of guilt
January 2011 by Prithviraj Chavan. On January 30, the state government urged Justice Patil to submit the commission's interim report. The confidential letter, a copy of which is with INDIA TODAY, was written by K.P. Bakshi, principal secretary of the General Administration Department (GAD). It mentions the likelihood of the Adarsh inquiry being raised in the March 15 Budget session of the state legislature. The GAD, headed by Prithviraj Chavan, has asked the commission to submit its interim report on the first two issues of the inquiry--who owns the land of Adarsh Society and whether the society was meant only for Kargil war veterans. A clean chit for Shinde and Deshmukh is likely because they cannot be held SHINDE DESHMUKH guilty on these two issues. The state government's letter, however, does not mention the third issue of inquiry: whether rules were bent to allow construction. State government officials say they are baffled by the commission's lethargy. The commission was to have submitted its report in three months. It has, however, got three extensions. On January 6 this year, the commission Deshmukh figure in the CBI's got a further five-month extension. chargesheet filed in July 2011. The CBI "It cost Rs 74 crore to build the has named Deshmukh's successor, Adarsh Housing Society but we have Ashok Chavan. He was forced to step already spent Rs 4 crore on the down in 2010 when it was found his relcommission, including lawyers' fees atives got three flats in the building and administrative expenses," an meant for war veterans. official from the GAD said. Having sacrificed Ashok Chavan, Shiv Sena leader in the Assembly, the Congress wants Deshmukh and Subhash Desai, alleges that the Shinde to be cleared of these charges government is trying to wind up the soon. Congress insiders say the party commission by seeking an interim wants to field Shinde, 70, as a candireport."There are several instances of date for the vice-president elections in commissions being wound up after July. Deshmukh, 63, is a possible canditheir interim report. I do not see any date to replace present chief minister reason other than giving a clean Prithviraj Chavan, who has not ruled chit to the Congress leaders behind out a shift to Delhi."I am a committed the move. Why can't the government worker of the Congress. I will work whewait till the commission's tenure rever the party asks me to go," he says. comes to an end in May? The A commission of inquiry headed by Opposition will not accept the interim former Judge J.A. Patil was set up in report," he said. by Kiran Tare he Maharashtra government is working on a plan to give a clean chit to Union ministers Sushilkumar Shinde and Vilasrao Deshmukh in the Adarsh scam. Shinde, the Union power minister, was Maharashtra chief minister between 2003 and 2004. Deshmukh, the science and technology minister, was chief minister between 2004 and 2008. This was the period in which the Adarsh Society got all its permissions and clearances that bypassed Coastal Regulatory Zone norms. The developers submitted a plan for a seven-storey building in 2001. It grew into a 31-storey building when it was completed in 2009. Neither Shinde nor

T

2011 mentions 16 such bungalows in military areas of Lucknow, Almora, Kanpur, Ranikhet and Bareilly as being illegally sold for Rs 150 crore. Several other such cases are under the scanner of audit authorities. In the Meerut cantonment, schools, colleges and residential properties have been built on old grant bungalows. A CAG report of 2010 mentions how the Residency Club was built on an old grant bungalow in the Pune cantonment.

THE TITLE OF 5 CHALLENGE DEFENCE LAND IN COURT
Court proceedings can drag on for decades because of weak legal defence
mong the weakest links in the A is its inability to protect encroached defence land in court. There
DGDE

are an estimated 13,000 pending cases relating to defence land in various courts. The way these cases are handled causes concern. The Government does not file its replies in time and court proceedings drag on for decades. A report prepared by the Controller General of Defence Accounts (CGDA) suggests that the defence estates department get a separate legal department to fight their cases. This suggestion has gone unheeded. "Defence estates officials pose as victims of the situation. It suits corrupt officials to have a weak legal defence put up by the Government so that they lose in court," says a defence ministry official. CGDA officials say land worth "thousands of crores" is locked in legal disputes all over the country. A case in point is a six-acre plot of defence land in Secunderabad on which the defence accounts department built houses. A private firm won a favourable verdict from the high court in 2002. The case continues in the Supreme Court after the defence ministry appealed against this verdict. The options for the ministry are grim in this case. They have to either demolish all the buildings, hand the land back to the private society or cough up an estimated Rs 100 crore, the market value of the land. I

NEW

