Na tion AVIATION

AIR INDIA'S REALTYCHEQUE
With losses totalling over Rs 20,000 crore,the national carrier could sell or rent out its properties for a much-needed cash boost
By Shantanu Guha Ray

CASH INJECTION
What Air India may get from its real estate assets

Rs 1,000 cr
from sale of Nariman Point building or Rs 100 cr from renting the 15 floors of the 22-storey building lying unused.

Rs 320 cr from
sale of flats in plush localities of Mumbai, Kolkata and Bangalore.

ash-strapped Air India can raise about Rs 3,500 crore, close to the Rs 4,500 crore it needs as working capital for a year, if it sells its properties across India. The national carrier, which is currently saddled with accumulated losses of Rs 20,320 crore, has properties in Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai. In Mumbai, the airline owns the iconic 22-floor Air India building in downtown Nariman Point, six flats in the city's plush Peddar Road locality and a residential colony in Kalina near the Santa Cruz airport. It also has residential colonies in Delhi and Chennai. These colonies are a luxurious boon for employees in an airline which can't pay salaries on time. The airline also has flats in posh neighbourhoods in Kolkata, Bhubaneswar, Hyderabad and Bangalore where its top executives stay. A proposal to sell the properties was considered in 2011, but deferred because of serious differences within the top management. Those opposed to the sale argued against relocation of the staff residing in the properties and also said the cash garnered would not be enough to resolve the financial woes of the national carrier. But now,

C

Rs 1,200 cr
from sale of residential colonies in Delhi and Chennai.

Rs 1,000 cr
from sale of the residential colony near Mumbai's Santa Cruz airport.
(CLOCKWISE FROM LEFT) THE ICONIC AIR INDIA BUILDING IN MUMBAI; FORMER CIVILAVIATION MINISTER PRAFUL PATEL; HIS SUCCESSOR AJIT SINGH
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Civil Aviation Secretary Nasim Zaidi says the proposal to sell properties is among the many the ministry is contemplating on. He, however, refuses to elaborate on his statement. If the unused portions of the Mumbai Air India building are leased, Air India could earn nearly Rs 100 crore per year (after taxes and expenses). An outright sale of the building will fetch the airline Rs 1,000 crore, claim realty

"During Praful Patel's tenure as the civil aviation minister, a proposal for sale was mooted but nothing happened."
JITENDRA BHARGAVA, Former Air India executive director

experts. The Peddar Road flats could be sold for approximately Rs 20 crore each and earn Rs 120 crore for the company. An additional Rs 1,200 crore could come from sale of its other residential colonies in Chennai and Delhi. Another Rs 200 crore could be raised from sale of flats in other cities. "The Government will have to decide whether it wants to sell or lease the Air India building (to others) and other properties," Sunil Jha of National Real Estate Development Council told INDIA TODAY. Currently, the airline is paying Rs 2.64 crore per year from its own coffers for the upkeep of the centrally air-conditioned structure that has a whopping 220,000 sq ft space. "During Praful Patel's tenure as the civil aviation minister, a proposal for sale was

mooted but nothing happened. No one took a call on renting out the building's unused space," said former Air India executive director Jitendra Bhargava. The building's security was beefed up post the 1993 serial bomb blasts. In 1995-1996, the airline's management wanted to generate additional revenue and increased the rentals. Many companies left instantly, some had to be persuaded and others left after protracted legal battles. The last tenant left two years ago. Air India uses less than seven floors in the building that has only a single tenant, an IT consultancy firm. Fifteen floors are lying unused as Air India has not taken a call on renting them out. "Companies across India are making use of their surplus or non-per-

forming assets. Some are sold, some put on rent for sustainable income, fund expansion and to reduce liabilities. Air India needs to take a call soon," said Arvind Nandan of Cushman & Wakefield, a global realty company. "If they sell the properties, the airline could wipe out a large chunk of its loans and the interest it has to pay on the amount. Or, it could use the cash to offer VRS to its staffers and reduce the staff strength to almost half from the current 29,000," said Bhargava. Air India, which needs a cash injection of Rs 10 crore a day, slipped into crisis mode after a consortium of 12 banks refused to loan Rs 10,000 crore in January, even after being told to do so by the Group of Ministers (GoM). The banks said they were worried that their loan could turn into a nonperforming asset since for the last four years, little effort was made to revive Air India and the cash-strapped airline was being run by bureaucrats of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The lenders, including SBI Caps, claimed that they already had an exposure of over Rs 27,000 crore to Air India in both working capital loans and short-term loans and another Rs 42,000 crore exposure towards aircraft purchases. Any further loan was not possible for the airline, they argued. They were supported by Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh who said the Government cannot keep pumping money into Air India and that the airline must become competitive. The Government is still trying hard to bail it out of its current mess. On February 8, a Group of Ministers (GoM) cleared a Rs 21,000 crore package for the cash-strapped airlines. The package, once cleared by the Cabinet, will help Air India restructure its Rs 23,000 crore liability on account of inducting 80 new aircrafts into its fleet. The GoM's decision will be a big relief for Air India, which is facing the prospect of defaulting on its Rs 44,000 crore loan repayment to several banks. Once the Cabinet clears the proposal, Air India can look forward to an immediate infusion of Rs 5,550 crore. That would help the beleaguered airline to clear some of its dues. I

44

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

NEW

NEW

