Mail

Who Should Be Next PM?
FEBRUARY 6, 2012

Narendra Modi relegates Rahul Gandhi to second spot in PM barometer. UPA slips on corruption and economic mismanagement. NDA and `others' gain at its expense.

SHIKHA RAI,

Numbers' Game
Corruption being the major factor of disenchantment with the Congress, the Congress spokespersons' denigrating of Anna has by and large annoyed the people ("Who Should Be the Next PM", February 6). The BJP seems the least corrupt party, but infighting and egoistic machinations within the party may not let it win the race. The election scenario may aptly be described as the witches' dance around the political cauldron.
J. N. BHARTIYA, Hyderabad

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Public Service
As of now, Mumbai has more overcrowding and homelessness than any other city in the country ("Chavan Turns Messiah of Poor", February 6). Also, the living conditions in the slums are distressing, to say the least. What Prithviraj Chavan has planned will bring much needed relief. True, the middle class will suffer, but ultimately, he has to provide the funds from somewhere. The stance taken by the BJP in attacking Chavan is not justified.
ANKIT SINGH, Pune

The article elaborates expected vote ratio of arch political rivals. It would be meaningless to anticipate anything for the time being. One aspect of the situation is undisputed and clear--for prime minister-

Chavan has been the cleanest chief minister yet, and he should be allowed to function properly. The action being taken by the Chief Minister is a much needed one. The article highlights the government's lack of interest towards the urban middle class.
NISHA SAWANT, Mumbai

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

06

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

``

``

If performance remains the criteria for choosing our country's Prime Minister, then Narendra Modi should definitely be given the top job.
Bangalore

ship in the next Lok Sabha elections, in all probability, is going to be among hopefuls within the BJP.
RAMESH SINHA, Gurgaon

There is little doubt that if BJP promotes Narendra Modi as a contender for the top post at the Centre, then going by his track record of development achieved in Gujarat, he will be the first choice of the masses to run the affairs of the country in the next parliamentary elections. The Congress has nosedived due to its lacklustre approach to ending corruption, inflation and the economic downturn. The loss of the Congress is the gain of the rest.
V.K.TANGRI, Dehradun

Literary Shame
A large number of writers and poets who had been beguiled by media hype

Mail
into attaching importance to this corporate-funded extravaganza were left frustrated ("Shame and Disenchantment in Jaipur", February 6). There is no denying that the spirit of the festival was ruined by the organisers' obsession for media miles. The whole thing was reduced to a debate on freedom of expression vs `censorship'.
J.S. ACHARYA, Hyderabad

35
fanatics) to take the law into their own hands and forced Rushdie to stay away from the festival. It was the duty of the Government to ensure Rushdie's safety. Instead, they gave in to the demand of some fanatics just to secure Muslim votes in the upcoming elections.
MAHESH KUMAR, Patna

play between Congress and Government factions, others as a response to "new political exigencies" in the latter half of Manmohan Singh's term.
K.S. JAYATHEERTHA, Chennai

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
M A R C H 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Chaining The Young
In the tea gardens of Assam, children put in a day's work for 17 paise; in the back lanes of Lucknow, children over the age of eight help their mothers embroider the famous chikan patterns for 50 paise a day; and in the recesses of Old Delhi, countless little hands cut and paste a hundred paper bags for less than a rupee a day.These are only three faces of child labour in the country.And there is no dearth of examples.Whether it is the young shoeshine boy on a street corner or an army of shivering waiters washing dishes in a local dhaba, these are the faceless children of the country, whose past is as oblivious as their future. Occasionally, a small news story in the papers about a young beggar arrested for some petty crime might catch the eye; occasionally social workers might congregate at a seminar and in loud voices discuss the "children of the shadows" . But the problem is rarely considered in all its dimensions.There are 10.7 million child labourers in the country according to the 1971 Census.A seminar by the National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development held in New Delhi two years ago put the figure at 12 million.
by Sunil Sethi

Second Innings
Suresh Kalmadi indeed epitomises the rot and the degeneration of India's polity and the politician as is perceived today by the common man ("Back in the Games Arena", February 6). Here is a discredited politician who had spent most of the year behind bars but now on bail and wasting no time in trying to get back into thick of action, showing apparently no remorse or regret despite being neck-deep in the CWG corruption scandal.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

Crisis Next Door
The game theory of destabilisation is being played out by Pakistan-backed Islamists on both borders ("Dhaka Conspiracy", February 6). A change of guard in Dhaka would have suited their agenda perfectly. Mercifully, the plot has failed. But it has thickened nonetheless.
J. AKSHOBHYA, Mysore

Just because Salman Rushdie bagged the Booker Prize does not bestow greatness upon him. His book has antagonised Muslims all across the world. The organisers should have thought twice before inviting him. Probably he was invited with the polls in mind. Any writer is great only when his writings are non-controversial. Surely, the sales of all his books, including the controversial The Satanic Verses, will soar, thanks to the Jaipur episode. Sometimes even the enemy's action brings fortune, which has been proved in Rushdie's case.
V.S. GANESHAN, Bangalore

The article draws much attention of readers due to its comprehensive report on the coup threat in Bangladesh. India's timely warning defused a potential crisis in the neighbouring country.
VIJAY MALIK, Hyderabad

Media Outreach
A fair amount of speculation--idle and intelligent-- still attends Pachauri's appointment, essentially because there is no explanation from the Government on what motivated the abrupt change of personnel ("Press PMO for Revolving Door", February 6). Some see the change as a consequence of power-

It is really unfortunate that celebrated author Salman Rushdie could not attend the literature festival. But what is frightening is that the Central and state governments allowed some people (read religious

The craving and lust for power beckons-- notwithstanding the obvious toll that a series of ailments like diabetes, hypertension, cardiac problem, dementia and depression have taken. No sooner is Suresh Kalmadi out of jail than he is back in business--the Indian Olympic Association and the Pune municipal elections are already on his agenda. At least he reportedly doubts whether it is actually a slur or a compliment when his supporters now shout slogans in his favour.
VIBHA DAYAL, New Delhi

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

THE FACELESS CHILDREN--DO THEY FALL BETWEEN LEGISLATION?

08

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

