Nation TAMILNADU

BANDITQUEEN GETS ANGRY
Veerappan's widow files lawsuit against film based on her husband's life

M

uthulakshmi Veerappan, 39, wife of slain sandalwood smuggler Muniswamy Veerappan, was reading a local newspaper when she came across a rather curious article. The story was accompanied by a picture of a man who was a spitting image of her late husband. "Next to this man was the picture of an actress holding a gun. I realised that was supposed to be me," she says. The article was based on a forthcoming film--Vana Yuddham in Tamil and Attahasa in Kannada-- based on her husband's life. The film, directed by A.M.R. Ramesh, is still on the floors and is scheduled for release this year. Muthulakshmi is furious. "How can they make a film about my life
H K RAJASHEKHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

without getting their facts right?" she asks. She has vowed to take the filmmaker to court and get the film banned. She has filed a case in the Madras High Court. Her case comes up for hearing on February 24. Ramesh, on the other hand, has said that he will follow the court's orders. While Ramesh says he has met her twice, she clarifies that the meetings were brief and she didn't give him the nod to go ahead with the film. "I met Ramesh at an event. I posed for a picture with him and we spoke for a bit," she says. They met again in 2007. "He came to my house and told me he was making a movie about my husband. He asked for my story but said he wouldn't pay for it, not

that I even asked him for money. He added that I could play myself in the movie and he would pay me Rs 50,000, but that was it," she says. The film's impending release has Muthulakshmi worried as there is just one case pending against her now. The incident concerns the July 2000 kidnapping of Kannada actor Rajkumar. The episode has been depicted in the movie. "The film's release at this time is bound to make me look guilty," she says. Muthulakshmi believes Veerappan was killed in a fake encounter in 2004. "He talked about surrendering some months before he was gunned down. He sent a tape to Tamil Nadu Chief Minister J. Jayalalithaa. But I

MUTHULAKSHMI WITH VEERAPPAN'S PORTRAIT

THE FILM'S RELEASE HAS MUTHULAKSHMI WORRIED AS SHE FEELS IT WILL MANIPULATE FACTS AND MAKE HER LOOK GUILTY.
think it was too late, they just wanted to eliminate him," she says. Muthulakshmi married Veerappan in 1989 when she was just 16. After her husband's death, she wanted to re-invent herself. She got into politics and contested the 2006 Assembly polls as an independent from Pennagaram constituency, but lost. She was arrested in 2008 on charges of murder, providing support to carry out bomb blasts and attacking a police station. "I was arrested for my husband's crimes," says a defiant Muthulakshmi. She was acquitted in April 2011. Muthulakshmi wants her life back. But it might be too late. The trailers of the film are already out.
by Lakshmi Kumaraswami

