INTERVIEW

SUNNY LEONE

Cover Story PORNOGRAPHY

THE DARK SIDE OF

"Indians love adult entertainment"
After her high-profile stint on Bigg Boss 5, Canadian-Indian porn star Sunny Leone, 30, co-hosted the US porn industry's biggest night, the AVN Awards show in Las Vegas on January 21. In an interview with NISHAT BARI, the former Penthouse Pet of the Year said she couldn't wait to return to India and work on Jism 2. Excerpts from the interview: Q. What was your perception of India, its culture and its attitude towards adult entertainment before you came here? A. I believe Indians love adult material but it was and is a big secret. I feel me being on TV has empowered a lot of people to be open about their own sexuality. Q. As a businesswoman in the adult entertainment industry, what potential do you see in the Indian market? A. I don't think India is ready for adult material to be available legally. The potential is obviously huge but changing a country's point of view is very hard. Q. What are you looking forward to in your role in Jism 2? A. I am looking forward to doing something that I have never done before: act in a mainstream movie, and doing it in another language. It's very important to me to prove to the whole world, myself and Bollywood that I am a serious actor. Q. Talking about porn publicly is still considered taboo in India. Your presence in Bigg Boss 5 and Jism 2 has, in a way, helped discussions come out in the open. A. You should have the freedom to talk about what you want as long as you're not hurting someone. There's nothing wrong with the word `sex' unless you make it wrong. Q. What was the response you got from the Indian audience? A. People on the streets recognised me, parents asked if their 16-year-old daughters could take pictures with me, a whole table of 20 at a restaurant got up to take photos with me; it was absolutely amazing. I am so thankful to the fans and people for giving me a life in the Indian entertainment industry.

PORN
Easy access to pornography on the Internet hits society, threatening to swamp conventional notions of morality, raise tensions in bedrooms and lure children into a world they do not understand
By Damayanti Datta

SUNNY
n February 7, three Karnataka ministers were captured on television poring over a phone screen, watching a woman in a petticoat gyrating wildly. They lost their jobs for watching pornography in the sacred precincts of the Legislative Assembly. The incident is a highprofile sample of a definitive reality: porn is pervasive through the Internet across India, easily and freely available, not just to leery politicians but to children and adults in millions of ordinary homes. It is a sign of the times that the most famous international porn star has Indian roots and was on Indian television. Sunny Leone, 30, appeared on the reality show Big Boss 5 and has now launched a clothes-on Bollywood career. Her fake breasts, that won the 2010 FAME Award for Favourite Breasts in Los Angeles, have brought her the honour of being named among the 50 Most Desirable Women by the nation's biggest daily this month. The organised $12 billion (Rs 60,000 crore) American adult entertainment industry, to which Leone belongs, has bred explicit images beyond the limits of imagination. And they are free. Fuelled by the Internet and facilitated by high-speed data service, pornography, born in dozens of studio lofts around the world, has entered teenagers' mobile phones with the force and sweep of a dangerous flood. It threatens to swamp conventional notions of morality, raise tensions in bedrooms, lure children into a world

O

SUNNY LEONE

Cover Story PORNOGRAPHY
they do not understand, and initiate a culture that threatens the mores of family life as we know it. The writing is on the wall. Google Trends show the search volume index for the word `porn' has doubled in India between 2010 and 2012. With instant Net connectivity and flexible payment options, online porn is increasingly affordable, accessible and acceptable. Seven Indian cities are among the top 10 in the world on porn search, reports Google Trends, 2011. One out of five mobile users in India wants adult content on his 3G-enabled phone, according to an 2011 IMRB survey. Over 47 per cent students discuss porn every day, says a public school survey by Max Hospital in Delhi. Porn tops the list of cyber crimes in India, according to the National Crime Records Bureau. Rape, penetration, oral, anal, lesbian, gay or group porn are yesterday's news. There is now a hectic crossover of porn subcultures on the World Wide Web. Consider MILF (or Mothers I Like to F***) porn. "Check out the most notorious hot, mature moms going crazy and getting f****d by young studs," invites one of the 40,600,000 MILF websites. "A hot and sexy bride is getting raped brutally," says a `ravished bride' porn site. There is `pregnant porn' ("Are you ready to see these moms-to-be in action?"). There is `incest porn' that welcomes you to sites with "xxx videos full of mother and son, dad and daughter". Child porn blends with `teen porn', promising "fascinating porn actions starring our young models". New jargon and innovative formats, borrowed from foreign cultures, are trendy on the web. For the uninitiated,

24
OUT OF TOP 500 INDIAN WEBSITES ARE RELATED TO PORN.

50%
Net users access the web via smartphones, the future of anytimeanywhere porn.

BANDEEP SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

chikan ("to grope" in Japanese) porn is all about public molestation in trains. `Bukkake' parties involve repeated ejaculation on a woman by several men. Shemale and futanari porn mean "live action" with transsexuals. Anime and manga refer to Japanese formats of sexually-explicit comics and animation. A new focus is the service sector, with "shy massage girls" seducing clients, doctors and "hot babes in nurse uniforms" getting wild. In `corporate porn' "busty secretaries" go down on their knees to pleasure their boss. Sunny Leone (or Karen Malhotra) takes credit for the `pornification' of India. "My presence on Bigg Boss has empowered a lot of people to be open about their sexuality," she tells INDIA TODAY. One of the richest adult actresses in the industry, with her SunLust Pictures in Los Angeles reporting a top line of over $1 million (Rs 5 crore), she is now getting ready to debut in filmmaker Mahesh Bhatt's Jism 2, playing a professional body double. The mostsearched Google celebrity--powered by India, Bangladesh and Pakistan-- she has 1,47,326 Twitter followers. Leone's success indicates the greater acceptability of porn in daily life. Internet is the new tool, exploding every embarrassing sexual adventure of public personalities (see box) and making every lurid detail an item of private consumption. Coming after the midwife Bhanwri Devi's sex CDs with Rajasthan politician Mahipal Maderna in November 2011, public reaction to the Karnataka fiasco has ranged from indignation to amusement, but not shock: if political parties engaged in a morality-in-politics war, social activist

Anna Hazare demanded the ministers be sent to jail and media professional Pritish Nandy summed up Bollywood's reaction by calling them the "3 idiots". "A porn star doesn't automatically mean prostitute," says Leone, now seeking respectability. She talks about her parents' initial shock turning into respect, how they taught her to be a "good person", years of hard work, restrained personal life, professionalism and lack of regrets. Like the girlnext-door, she tweets how she is learning Hindi, cooking sabzi and massaging hair oil. Her endeavour will not be too difficult. Young adults, who grew up with cable TV, DVD players and the Internet, have been exposed to much more adult material than their parents. As filmmaker Pooja Bhatt points out, "Young people don't respond negatively to Sunny because they have already logged on to her website." She is not wrong. Even school students discuss porn. Dr Samir Parikh, chief psychiatrist, Max Healthcare, calls it "risky indulgences". In a survey on 1,000 children from top public schools in Delhi in 2010, he found 47 per cent boys and 29 per cent girls visiting porn sites and talking about it in school. "I understand sexual inquisitiveness and peer pressure around sexuality, but pornography on the Internet is fake, unreal, often violent and downright perverted," he says. "Moreover, a new technology in young hands could lead to irresponsible behaviour and ruin their lives." He obviously has in mind the stream of MMS scandals that have hit campuses across the country since 2004, when two Class XI students of a school in Delhi created a sensation. In

PORN GOES VIRAL
Indian aunties are objects of lust in the comic world of porn SAVITA BHABHI
India's first online porn star was so delightfully curvy and deliciously wanton that it didn't matter that she was a cartoon figure. The neglected housewife seduced men across classes and ages--from teenaged boys in the neighbourhood to salesmen, from doctors to her brother-in-law while her workaholic husband was away. Till the Government decided to play Net nanny and in June 2009, barred access to the nymphomaniac's adventures .

VELAMMA
The `innocent but sexy South Indian aunty' is Savita Bhabhi's impossibly voluptuous south Indian counterpart. While Bhabhi seduces, Velamma's website invites visitors to read about her "sexy yet innocent and loving experiences" that begin with trysts with her young son's friend.

PORN CLIPS THATSHOOK THE NATION
PORNGATE
Even as the three Karnataka ministers resigned on February 8 after being caught watching porn, everyone wanted to know what they were watching: real-life gangrape or model Poonam Pandey's video Bathroom Secrets? "Tripleex-ministers?"Amul butter billboards said tongue-in-cheek.

From ministers watching porn in the Assembly to a swami seeking moksha, Indians are addicted to dirty downloads
MENAGE A TROIS
He got into a romp with three women at the Raj Bhavan. N.D. Tiwari, 86, resigned in 2009 as Andhra Pradesh governor after being captured on video. Not before the Internet feasted on the uploads.

NIGHT NURSE
Politics, sex, lies, ambition, blackmail, murder, arrest. Bhanwri Devi's tragic case shook the nation. But it will be remembered more for the leaked videos of intimate moments between the midwife and Rajasthan minister Mahipal Maderna. It still tops YouTube's most-watched list.

SWAMI SALVATION
Swami Nithyananda sought moksha through sexual union. But one such precious moment with southern actress Ranjitha in March 2010 proved too costly. After initial claims of being "neither a man nor a woman" , the swami admitted to erectile dysfunction. Never mind moksha moments with over 15 women.

GO COMMANDO
Model Yana Gupta appeared at a children's charity event dressed in a little black dress and no panties. Not a fashion faux pas."I just forgot," she laughed it off. Her hot new `trend' was emulated by several starlets in the last one year. Every time it happened, cyberspace went into a frenzy.

SAVITA BHABHI

22

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

NEW

NEW

Cover Story PORNOGRAPHY
INTERVIEW PRIYA ANJALI RAI

"Ihave many fans in India"
Adopted as an infant from India by an American couple, Priya Anjali Rai, 34, chose to keep part of her Indian name for her work in the porn industry. Rai believes her Indian looks differentiate her from the rest of the porn pack. In an interview with INDIRA KANNAN, she said it is tough for ethnic dark-skinned women to get on the A-list of adult entertainers. Q. When did you get into the adult entertainment industry and what kind of work do you do? A. I got into the industry about five years ago. I was a dancer for about four years, and I got into porn when I was 29. I've done all kinds of work--porn movies, centre-folds, music videos and I'm also doing a couple of mainstream projects. I'm doing a European gourmet cook show too. Q. Is there any niche segment you cater to? A. My niche is I do a lot of older stuff. Also, I'm different and it can be an advantage. The porn industry has thousands of blonde women so it's just nice to be a darker-skinned woman. But the disadvantage is that it's kind of hard for an ethnic dark-skinned woman to get on the A-list. Q. Is that the reason why there are few Indian women in the US adult industry? A. It could be, but I think it also has a lot to do with how traditionally Indian women are brought up. Obviously I was raised Americanised, so I don't understand the strictness I guess. Q. What, to you, is your biggest market? A. My biggest fan base comes from Germany, the UK, Canada, and of course, India. But I don't know how it works, how much of it is banned or whatever. But I do have a lot of fans there. In terms of money, the biggest market is always America. But my fan base is largely European, Caucasian.

RED LIGHT,BLUE FILMS

In Mumbai's largest red light area, watching a hardcore porn film costs only Rs 20

1.5 mn
WOMEN A MONTH VISIT FANFICTION.NET, AN EROTIC SITE WITH STORIES ON ROMANCE.

47%
boys and 29% girls of 1,000 students from top public schools in Delhi admitted to surfing porn sites.

n Lane Number 11 of Kamathipura, Mumbai's largest red light area, Super Video Parlour offers watching porn films at the lowest rate in the city, Rs 20. "Kaunsa ticket chahiye, 10 wala ya 20 wala? (Which ticket you want, Rs 10 or Rs 20?)," asks the receptionist at the parlour. There are three halls inside. In the biggest one, there is a screening of a Tamil movie dubbed in Hindi. The ticket costs Rs 10. There is another hall, separated by a wooden partition. There, one can watch soft porn Indian films such as Nakharewali Bibi and Kamra No 16. The ticket costs Rs 10. These films are actually a collection of a few porn clips. No story, no dialogues. Inside the parlour is another hall where one can watch foreign-made hardcore porn films with titles such as Secretary No 1 or Rising Mercury. Here, the ticket costs Rs 20. There is a small toilet, too, attached to the inner hall. Each hall is equipped with a 51-inch Samsung television, CD players, wooden benches, table fans and an exhaust fan. It has a seating capacity of 50.At any given time, one can find at least 150 people in the video parlour.

I

MOSTVIEWED CELEBRITYPORN CLIPS IN INDIA
India likes sex, especially uncensored movie sex
PAOLI DAM (2011)
The Bengali actress became an overnight Internet sensation after her nude lovemaking scenes from Bengali film Chatrak (Mushrooms) found their way online. It showed actor Anubrata Basu performing oral sex on her.

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

BHINDI BAAZAAR INC (2011)
Model-actress Vedita Pratap Singh and Prashant Narayan's unedited lovemaking scenes from Bhindi Baazaar Inc were leaked online before the film's release.

POSTERS OUTSIDE A VIDEO PARLOUR IN KAMATHIPURA

There is a wooden rack full of CDs. Most of the viewers are under 30, migrant labourers.They do not complain about the stench in the hall or the smoke-filled air.There are no cheers and no whistles.The only sound in the room is of deep breathing."We purchase the CDs wholesale from the dealers. Each CD costs us Rs 20 and we earn at least Rs 1,000 in a day," says Rajesh, one of the parlour's owners.There are at least five

such video parlours in Kamathipura. Pimps walk around offering "services" of their clients. On Sukhalaji Road, within 100 metres of the police station, one can easily get a CD of a porn film that costs between Rs 60 and Rs 100. A cinema hall in the area, Alexandra, popular for C grade films, has shut down because of its losses. Another cinema hall, Shalimar, has taken its place.
by Kiran Tare

BLOOD MONEY (2012)
Kunal Khemu on VJ-actress Mia Uyeda turned the heat for the Vishal Mahadkar movie but the lovemaking scenes were viewed online before the film's release.

many of these cases, either one partner was not aware of being filmed or did not anticipate the videos would get circulated--as in May 2011 when JNU student Janardan Kumar, 22, made a video of the girl he was intimate with and used it to blackmail her after being rejected. Campus porn is a thriving subterranean culture. Try talking to students in various campuses of Delhi: "Have you ever heard of MMS videos of students being circulated on the campus?" Diksha Singh, 20: "Every couple of months there is a fresh case. It's so common, I don't even blink." Raghav Verma, 19: "All the time. It's shocking to see a classmate's intimate details on video camera." Mehak Suri, 18: "My ex-boyfriend tried that with me, and when it didn't work he sent me threatening emails and messages."

Amaira Kapoor, 20: "You will be surprised to know how many cases go unreported and unaccounted for." Sakshi Wakhlu, 21: "A year ago, one girl got high, went with a group of boys and had sex with them. The men came back and talked." The arrival of smartphones is changing the country's porn landscape further. India has the lowest penetration of smartphones, 10 per cent, among the youth globally. But with email, social networking, chatting, messaging and gaming, it is a device every youth craves for. And now there are even porn applications. Imagine a `pocket' girlfriend or boyfriend, who can strip, talk dirty, make sexual noises. "These are some of the `apps' that can be downloaded on smartphones," says Pranesh Prakash, programme manager with Bangalore-based think-tank

Centre for Internet and Society. "App download data shows the popularity of sex-themed apps on smartphones, apart from the adults-only stores," he says. Age restrictions for applications? Mostly a pop-up asking if one is over 17. With over 50 per cent of all Internet users in the country accessing the web via mobile phones already, as estimated by TRAI, smartphones are the future of anytime-anywhere porn. The threshold of what can be called `pornography' is shifting. Mainstream and hardcore entertainment are coming closer. The Dirty Picture, biopic of south siren Silk Smitha, raked in Rs 50 crore in its very first week in December 2011, with its noisy orgasms, titillating cleavage and fiery dialogues. It's also hard to draw the line between porn and art in raunchy item numbers, from Sheila ki Jawani to Munni Badnam Hui.

POONAM PANDEY (2011)
She never got her wish of posing nude for the Indian cricket team but kept herself busy making videos bathing in a two-piece, stripping for a magazine shoot and posting semi-nude pictures on her website.

ASHMIT PATELRIYA SEN (2005)
Video clips of the couple's intimate moments started doing the rounds right before their film Silsiilay hit screens. Both denied it was them but it got them more exposure than all their movies put together.

24

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

FEBRUARY 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

25

NEW

NEW

Cover Story

PORNOGRAPHY
BANDEEP SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

"What heroines do in films today is what vamps did yesterday," says filmmaker Mahesh Bhatt. Some item numbers are more obscene than nudity, he feels. "People tell me, how can someone who made Saaransh, Arth and Zakhm, make films like Jism and Murder?" he adds. "I say, get off the high horse." Kolkata certainly is getting off the high horse. A city with the least taste for pornography, going by INDIA TODAY Sex Surveys, is also one of the top seekers of porn online, reports Google Trends. Leone's CDs are bestsellers here. Teenage boys creep up and ask, "Sunny Leone ka CD chahiye?" (Want Sunny Leone's CDs?), at Chandni Chowk market in central Kolkata, the city's piracy hub. Step inside the dingy alleys between shops selling electronic goods, and piles of pirated blue film come out of hiding--Rs 120 for just a CD and Rs 250 for one with Leone on the cover. Ask too many questions and they show you the door. The police are their friends, although motorcycles stand ready for sudden crackdowns. "Sunny's CD is selling like hot cakes, 200 a day," says one. Leone is not pleased. "If you are stealing my movies in Kolkata, that is flipping horrible," she has tweeted. But who cares? A 33-year-old customer puts away her CD in his plastic bag with quiet satisfaction. "I will have to watch when the wife is not looking," he grins. If a married man watches porn, is it considered cheating?? My husband secretly watches porn. Why are men like this? He knows I hate porn. My husband watches porn alone. He refuses to watch it with me.

80%
of Sunny Leone's web traffic comes from India.

5 THINGS MEN LIKE TO WATCH 5 THINGS WOMEN LIKE TO WATCH
Group sex Amateur porn Breasts, hips and feet, other men's penises Granny porn Shemales and Japanese anime Gay men in bed Adult fan fiction Celebrity porn Vampire porn Submission porn, where women are treated like slaves

$12 bn
WAS THE ESTIMATED SIZE OF THE US PORN INDUSTRY IN 2008.

Source: A Billion Wicked Thoughts: What the World's Largest Experiment Reveals about Human Desire by Ogi Ogas and Sai Gaddam, 2011

44%
of 2,661 men said in a survey that they watch porn alone.
My husband watches porn very often. Should I be worried? I feel insulted whenever my boyfriend watches porn. There are 2,690,000 such postings on Google, from wives and girlfriends globally, on a range of sites on the web--health, marriage, empowerment, agony. Watching porn alone is a rising trend among men, thanks to the Internet. Check out INDIA TODAY Sex Surveys: in 2009, with video as the most popular porn format, just 10 per cent men out of 2,661 watched porn alone. This year, with smarter access and gadgets, it zoomed to 44 per cent. "It is usually a sign of cybersex addiction," says Dr Vijay Nagaswami, Chennaibased expert on sexual psychotherapy. "Compulsive pornwatchers often become dysfunctional. They stay up late for online porn to get active on instant messengers, webcams, demand more private time, neglect family, work and normal sexual activity." Even five years back, it was difficult to get locals to dub foreign porn films in Gujarati. But now, mobile shop owners in Ahmedabad do brisk business in porn, supplying primarily to youngsters. They download content on hard discs and then transfer those to the memory cards of eager youngsters-- Rs 100 to Rs 200 for a 30-minute film. "It's good business. Sometimes I get more than six customers, all boys," says Rajesh Patel, a porn-provider. It's good business in Chennai, too. In a small shop opposite the high court in Burma Bazaar, the hub of pirated movies in Chennai, Ramu is doing his puja. He throws flowers at the gods, and looks at his customer. "English, Tamil also." His voice goes an octave lower, "Triple." Who cares for storylines? Many of these films are shot in the city or taken off the Net. Ramu sells

at least 100 discs a day, mostly to distributors. The CDs are mostly of Indian couples having sex, sometimes verging on rape. "This business can't be hit by recession," Ramu says. "People will always buy porn." The buzz is, although the Karnataka ministers claimed they were watching clips of a real-life gang-rape at a rave party, they were either watching Indonesian hardcore `abik' porn or model Poonam Pandey's YouTube video, Bathroom Secrets. But what do most Indians watch? Google Trends indicates that the average Indian pornwatcher opts for more tame keywords, `sex' and `how to kiss', the most. New research by computational neuroscientists Ogi Ogas and Sai Gaddam from Boston University, US, on a billion porn and erotic web searches across the world, shows that the five most popular porn sites for men are webcam or video sites featuring anonymous graphic sex, with a monthly traffic of 7-16 million visitors. For women, the most popular is the "erotic" site fanfiction.net, which gets over 1.5 million visitors a month and has more than two million stories,

50 per cent being "romance". How big is pornography in India? Of the 500 top Indian websites this month ranked by the leading global web information company Alexa, at least 24 are porn sites. Nearly a dozen porn sites are more popular than some leading news sites and that of the Bombay Stock Exchange. Leone, one of the top five global porn stars, says 80 per cent of her web traffic and 60 per cent of her "high six figures" revenue come from India. The content, she says, is "everything and above". "I can sell anything you want as long as you have a credit card." The only other major-league porn actor of Indian origin in the US, Priya Anjali Rai, also says she has a lot of fans in India, but not many paying customers. Adopted from New Delhi by American parents and brought up in Arizona, Rai keeps her Indian name for her work: "That's what makes me different from everybody else." Both Leone and Rai insist they only do "vanilla" porn, "boy-girl stuff". The US, specifically the Los Angeles area, has the biggest porn industry in the world, followed by London and Budapest, esti-

WORLD'S

BIGGEST

ADULT STARS
Sunny Leone aside, here are four women and a leading man in a female-dominated industry
26

Asa Akira 26
This Japanese-American is a newcomer to the top league. In 2012, she won seven AVN Awards, the `Oscars of porn' , awarded to honour exceptional performance in American adult movies.

Jessica Drake 37
A Caucasian American blonde, Drake is contracted to Wicked Pictures, a top porn studio. She is a multiple winner and former co-host of the AVN Awards.

Jesse Jane 31
The Caucasian American blonde is contracted to a leading porn studio, Digital Playground. In 2011, she was named by CNBC as one of the Top 12 "Dirty Dozen" porn stars for having starred in two of the biggest porn hits of all time, Pirates and Pirates II.

Bree Olson 25
A multiple AVN Award winner, the Caucasian American blonde was one of actor Charlie Sheen's girlfriends living in his mansion when he had a meltdown leading to his departure from the hit TV show Two and a Half Men.

Manuel Ferrara 36
The French porn actor and adult film director is a multiple winner of AVN's Male Performer of the Year Award. In 2012, he became the first actor to win AVN's Male Performer of the Year four times.

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

NEW

NEW

Cover Story PORNOGRAPHY
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

HOWTO CONTROL

OFFICE
POLICE THE NET

PORN
Firewall. Wiretapping. Five ways to stop vulgar viewing in office.
Internet surveillance. A network analyser is set up like spyware to capture all information from website visits, emails to downloads.
SOLUTION Snort is an intrusion detection system that can be downloaded free. Another product is SurfControl, for which you have to pay.

mated between $4 billion (Rs 20,000 crore) and $15 billion (Rs 75,000 crore) annually. Top porn stars easily earn a quarter of a million dollars annually. Those who think production and distribution of pornography in India are not allowed, think again. "A lot of amateur videos are being produced," says Namita Malhotra, author of Porn: Law, Video and Technology. "They have been there for long. But now from print they have gone digital. Amateur videos are a new phenomenon," says a lawyer associated with Alternative

Has the battle against porn been lost? Anti-porn feminists in the US have admitted defeat. India is not quite there. Despite the hyper-sexualised climate, ministers do get thrown out over porn. To cyber law expert and senior associate of SNG & Partners Rahul Sud, India is on the right track. "Personal consumption of porn has never been an offence," he points out. "Child pornography, publishing and transmitting are." Press Council of India Chairperson Justice Markandey Katju has rolled out the red carpet for

FIVE MOSTVIEWED GLOBALPORN GENRES
SUPERHERO PARODIES
Spider-Man XXX: A Porn Parody and Batman XXX: A Porn Parody are some of the most watched.

CELEBRITY SEX TAPES
Kim Kardashian's Superstar is one of many. Paris Hilton's homemade sex video
KIM KARDASHIAN

with ex-boyfriend Rick Salomon shot in 2003 is still popular.

GONZO PORN
Actors film scenes themselves, such as in Dangerous Curves.

DESKTOP SURVEILLANCE
Physical monitoring of a computer and every action taken by its user through softwares.
SOLUTION Buy softwares from McAfee, Symantec and Trend Micro

FEATURE FILMS
Portrait of a Call Girl, starring Jessie Andrews and Fabian Alomar, is a big hit.

VANILLA PORN
Films with well-endowed female and male actors such as Pirates II: Stagnetti's Revenge are always hot.

EYES AND EARS
All computers are connected to the system administrator's computer, giving him remote access to an employee's computer.
SOLUTION The remote desktop access is a de facto in all new operating systems. No additional software needs to be installed.

BLOCK A SITE
Set up a firewall to filter traffic. Since all connections are logged, it's possible to say who was surfing which site.
SOLUTION Iptables is a popular freeware firewall on Linux. Paid products from Checkpoint, Microsoft, Juniper and Fortinet are also available.

SNIFF IT OUT
Wiretap a network to see what is going on. The main purpose is to solve problems, say, why the network is slow.
SOLUTION Snort can be used here too. Paid products from Checkpoint, Juniper and Cisco are also available.
by Arvind Munshi

Law Forum in Bangalore. "It's unorganised," says a Bangalore-based photographer involved with the porn industry. There are a few big houses who run multi-crore businesses. The small players use small video cameras so that they can be seen on mobile phones. "Ever since the MMS scandal, we make false scandal videos, called kaand," the photographer says. "It's normal sex. Not like those foreign videos where they use horses and 10 men at the same time." Do they go online? Sometimes they are sold, but always with the permission of the model, "No force," he insists. "The money is good, so that we don't tell anyone." His best moment? When a model askedhim to shoot her in different ways, to try to create a scandal and get noticed.

Leone, but not before comparing her to history's "fallen women", Amrapali or Mary Magdalene. Does Leone care? She is busy stretching, bending and sweating. Not in a girl-boy-girl orgy online but on a Bikram Yoga mat in Hollywood. "OMG, I'm so tired," she tweets. She has the same vital statistics as Marilyn Monroe, 36-24-34, and she is determined to look her best for those semi-nude scenes in Jism 2. "We Indians are proud of you!," tweets one of her admirers. "Thank you," she tweets back. She has every reason to be grateful.
with Indira Kannan, Nishat Bari, Kiran Tare, Gunjeet Sra, Shravya Jain, Avantika Sharma, Lakshmi Kumaraswami, Uday Mahurkar and Tithi Sarkar

NEW

