The World MALDIVES
By Gaurav C. Sawant in Male

usted president Mohamed Nasheed, 44, was talking to his core group of advisers at his ancestral home `Keenerege' in Male when the news of Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's letter of support to new President Waheed Hassan Manik, 59, came in. A shocked Nasheed, or Anni as he is known to friends, could not speak for several minutes. Those in the room say there were tears in his eyes. "He felt he had been let down by a friend,'' said Ameen Faisal, Nasheed's close friend and the country's national security adviser before the alleged coup. Nasheed had stepped out of his home on February 8 to address his Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) workers when the `notorious' Star Force crackdown began. The former president took refuge in a hardware store but they were found and taken into custody. Nasheed, who was the first democratically elected president of Maldives, says he was ousted in a military-backed coup and that Waheed, the vice-president, was involved. Faisal, who was high commissioner to India-designate till the alleged coup on February 7, says India has made a strategic blunder in the Indian Ocean Region. "I was the defence minister of Maldives. I know how both China and Pakistan are desperately trying to make inroads here. We are India's natural allies. Yet instead of supporting the first democratically elected president, India put its weight behind forces that want to make Maldives the Pakistan of the Indian Ocean,'' Faisal insists. Nasheed, too, expressed his disappointment with India's response. "India's stand is misguided and illinformed. I hope they will consider a course correction,'' he told INDIA TODAY. Nasheed feels New Delhi is taking him for granted and India may lose its influence to China, Faisal added. China is desperately pushing its economic diplomacy. "The Maldivian National Defence Force was keen to renew its defence agreement with Beijing. Twice they came to me when I was president. I refused,'' Nasheed said.

O

HOWINDIALOSTMALDIVES

The Maldives `coup'provides fertile ground for Pakistan-backed radicals to consolidate. For India, this is clear and present danger.
cannot be reinstated and doesn't want that either. "My interest is in free and fair early elections," he adds. India's response this time has been very different from 1988, when within 12 hours of president M.A. Gayoom asking for help, then prime minister Rajiv Gandhi ordered the Special Forces to liberate Maldives from Sri Lankan terrorists. On November 3, 1988, 80-odd Lankan terrorists had reached Male in several speedboats and taken over the TV station, telephone offices and even the president's house. Gayoom escaped the attack and sent an SOS to India desperately seeking military assistance. Indian para-commandos landed at Hulule airport in Male, killed 18 terrorists and liberated the island, restoring the president. In 2012, India did not intervene militarily because it was an internal political affair and there was no official request from the president. Former foreign secretary Kanwal Sibal feels India did its best given the difficult circumstances. "India cannot be seen as partial to any one side. Given his mercurial style of functioning, Nasheed did alienate the judiciary and a section of the society. It is for them to sort it out internally. India's interests lie in ensuring the region does not become a playground for international rivalries. The second major task is to ensure Islamic fundamentalists do not establish a base in the islands and threaten peninsular India. By engaging both sides, India has ensured that its interests are not compromised,'' he said. But with battle lines drawn between ousted president Nasheed's party and the present `Coalition of December 23', many feel it is an opportunity missed and paradise lost for India. The coalition, an informal arrangement of eight political parties and several NGOs, had urged Waheed to assume control of the executive. The challenge for South Block is to regain the lost paradise. 

AP

AP

If the Chinese threat is more military in nature, the threat from Pakistanbacked fundamentalists is no less sinister. The rapid inroads Wahhabi Islam is making in Maldives, the growth of terror modules and the threat to India has the strategic community worried. Funded by Saudi Arabia, Pakistan is increasingly offering more scholarships to youth in Maldives to study Islam in madrasas in Pakistan. India has reason to be worried. Intelligence officials say after the Sultan Park bombing of 2007 in Male,

OUSTED PRESIDENT NASHEED SAYS INDIA'S STAND IS MISGUIDED AND ILL-INFORMED AND HOPES A COURSE CORRECTION IS ON ITS WAY.

there was a crackdown on fundamentalists in Maldives. Several fled to Pakistan. Ali Jaleel, a Maldivian national, had participated in the May 27, 2009, suicide attack on the ISI office in Lahore. He was linked to the al Qaeda and video CDs asking "Maldivian brothers" to join the jihad were recovered from Maldives. "Pakistan has launched a sustained campaign to indoctrinate Maldivians. The spread of radicalism in Maldivian society has increased. India needs to have a more hands-on approach," says Ajit Doval, former director, Intelligence Bureau. However, Waheed sought to dispel apprehensions and assured that Indian strategic and commercial interests in Maldives will be well protected under the new regime. Speaking to INDIA TODAY in Male, he spoke of his close association with India, hummed a few lines of his favourite Jagjit Singh song Tum itna jo muskura rahe ho, and

insisted a visit to India will be first on his itinerary as soon as the current political turmoil is settled. "India has no reason to worry. There is no threat of radicals taking over. These are false stories being spread about Islamic fundamentalists taking over since Nasheed has been ousted. We are a 100 per cent Sunni Muslim country and there are both liberals and radicals in our country, just like anywhere else in the world,'' he said. India has massive commercial interests in Maldives. The GMR Group is engaged in the expansion and operation of Ibrahim Nasir International airport and has committed $500 million (Rs 2,500 crore) in the project. Within the new dispensation, there have been talks of reviewing the contract. Waheed told journalists he would not look at the GMR contract from a political perspective and would not harm its commercial interests but would look to address

(LEFT) WAHEED, THE NEW MALDIVES PRESIDENT; HIS PREDECESSOR, NASHEED

issues raised by the public. The Dhivehi Qaumee Party (DQP) has opposed the deal for GMR Group to operate the airport for 25 years, alleging Nasheed's party had vested interests. Mohamed Jameel of the DQP is the country's new home minister. India's Special Envoy to Maldives, Secretary (West) Madhusudan Ganapathy, told journalists in Male, "We are engaging all sides and are trying to ensure stability returns.'' Nasheed's party, the MDP, says India's commercial investment rose dramatically from $60 million (Rs 300 crore) before 2008 to almost $900 million (Rs 4,500 crore) in 2011. "Only a liberal democratic government can protect Indian strategic and commercial interests. It is time for India to reorient itself to ground realities,'' the ousted president insists. He knows he

58

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

FEBRUARY 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

