BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

FORWARD MARCH!
t noon on March 6, or perhaps an hour earlier, a great duopoly, which now runs Congress and Government, will impasse will begin in Parliament. This is not an as- become a triumvirate. But two is about as many simultatrologer's prediction. The source is rather less celes- neous prime ministers as Delhi can sustain; three is a tial, the Election Commission. Since counting is now quick, crowd. Someone will have to move. Who wins Lucknow becomes, in that sense, less imporwe shall know the results of the UP Assembly polls by noon, tant than the permutations and combinations that open and the stars of Delhi will begin their whirligig. If, as its foes so anxiously desire, Congress does poorly up in Delhi. The challenge to UPA's majority in Parliament after such massive investment of political and financial will not come from BJP. Congress does not treat the BJP capital, its ability to govern will be impaired beyond im- as worthy opposition, but rather as a saffron dinosaur mediate repair. If, conversely, Congress succeeds, it will set which should have become extinct but still manages a fresh agenda without worrying about consequences. Its to trundle around, making a nuisance of itself on the lifted spirits will give Congress the energy and confidence margins. The principal Congress worry is allies who octo break with disruptive allies and risk a general election cupy the space that Congress needs to achieve single-party which it can fight on terms different from the corrosive majority status in the Lok Sabha. Under a very thin themes of corruption and administrative impotence that and transparent surface, Congress is in a constant strughave turned UPA 2 into such a limp also-ran. gle to defeat its friends. Mamata Banerjee knows that. In democratic politics the definition of success is a Sharad Pawar knows that. Mulayam Singh Yadav will find out, if he doesn't know that already. variable, not a constant. The Budget on March 16 will be evidence of the new The Congress is not seeking a victory for the party in Uttar Pradesh. That is impossible. What it wants is a vic- mood. A triumphant Congress could include measures tory for Rahul Gandhi, which is possible. You can't change which invite the wrath of allies, like FDI in retail, or permisthe goalposts for the first, but you can for the second. sion to sell Indian airline shares to foreign investors. A conSuccess can be recalibrated as a comparative fact. It will fident Congress would dare Mamata Banerjee to break the be measured, therefore, not against the 90-plus Assembly UPA alliance. A subdued Congress, on the other hand, will segments which Congress won in the 2009 Parliament shuffle along, anxious to maintain the status quo, and it polls, but against the 22 seats it got in 2007. The drums are would be Mamata Banerjee who would raise the ante with scheduled to roll for Rahul Gandhi if he delivers around 70 a barrage of public statements, and join the Opposition on seats; anything more, and the escalation select issues, threatening the GovernSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com of applause will rise in geometrical proment's majority in any sudden vote. gression. This has been his campaign, There would also be trouble over the even to the extent of caging his effective sisCongress nominee for President, whoter Priyanka Gandhi to just the family ever he or she might be. The Government constituencies of Rae Bareli and might not fall, unless it mismanaged the Amethi. Mrs Sonia Gandhi has made presidential election so badly that it lost. high-profile but limited interventions. But it would reel from round to round Prime Minister Manmohan Singh will like a battered boxer hoping for a quick make his first election speech only after end. Such a scenario would leave one unhalf of UP has voted. intended beneficiary: Dr Manmohan UP is designed to give Rahul Singh. His stature would assure at least Gandhi's family inheritance electoral short-term safety for the Government. credibility, enabling him to take over A veteran diplomat described the party and Government whenever he If Rahul Gandhi cannot find oil-and-nuclear confrontation between wants. The trigger could be this sum- his way into Dr Singh's chair, Iran, Israel and the US as a game of mer's presidential elections, when Dr the duopoly which now runs "choker", a mix of chess and poker. Manmohan Singh could top off his exThe gamble in UP is less subtle: traordinary career in politics with a bid Congress and Government flush, in which whoever has the better will become a triumvirate. three-card combination wins, and for Rashtrapati Bhavan. In any case, the decision will lie with Rahul Gandhi, But two is about as many every bluff is called because all cards not circumstance; and he will choose will be opened. There is a reason simultaneous prime the moment after March 6. We know he why the only certainty is uncertainty. ministers as Delhi can is here to stay, but cannot be sure in Players do not hold the cards. Voters do. sustain; three is a crowd. which capacity. If Rahul Gandhi cannot And they will let Big Brother know find his way into Dr Singh's chair, the Someone will have to move. by noon on 6 March. 

A

FEBRUARY 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

