Mail

The Secret Life of Indian Cricket
FEBRUARY 13, 2012

A distant captain, a team riven by dissension, lack of hard work, selectors who play God, and a sports culture stoked by fabulous riches have undermined India's national game.

Keeping non-performing players in the team is like consuming products beyond their `expiry date' and, therefore, is injurious to the health of Indian cricket.
S A N J I V G U P TA ,
Australia

Captain Clueless
Must Mahendra Singh Dhoni's captaincy credentials be questioned by one and sundry only now that India has consistently been on the losing side? His captaincy, from the very outset, had abjectly lacked aggression and this has been his major undoing ("The Secret Life of Indian Cricket", February 13). As such, under his captaincy, India often struggled to win matches which ought to have been comfortably won and lost quite a few which could probably have been won. Invariably, he failed to deliver the knockout punch that allowed the opposition to claw back into the game. This is not to say that Dhoni is a bad captain, but he needs to be far more aggressive and seen interacting more

Price of Love
The killing of a 22-year-old Vokkaliga girl by her father and relatives on the pretext of her love affair with a Dalit boy is a living example of how untouchability still shamelessly prevails in rural India ("A Village Shamed & Silent", Febraury 13). It is even more appalling because the entire community witnessed in approval the `punishment' meted out to the girl who dared to love a Dalit boy.
SHARADA HEMASAGAR, Andhra Pradesh

It was very painful to read the story of Govindaraju and Suvarna. It is shameful that even the local media and elected representatives have not done enough to ensure that justice is delivered. Even though a case has been registered, the influential netas would surely ensure that the case is closed and justice denied to the victims.
ANOOP SRINIVAS BHAT, Mumbai

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

``

``

with his players on field.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

Captain Dhoni's apparent disinterest in Test cricket should pave the way for the selectors to opt for a new Test captain who is capable and has passion for the five-day format. Playing for clubs has indeed spoilt many of our cricketers who have become more avaricious for the quick buck. To protect our nation's honour in world Test cricket, we need to ban Test players from playing unnecessary club games and instead devote more time practising the longer version of the game. Players can play for clubs if they don't play for the country or after they retire. Only stringent steps like this can salvage our nation's pride in the gentleman's game.
CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore

Mail
Bad Bargain
Volumes have been written about how this deal is the biggest arms purchase of the century and how it marks a new dawn of Indo-French relationship, but nobody has questioned why there are no takers for the Rafale jets anywhere in the world ("France Jets Past Germany", February 13). All negotiations that Dassault has conducted so far with foreign governments for sale of Rafale have failed because the fighter plane has a tendency to require a lot of repairs and is thus more expensive to maintain and operate. So, is New Delhi buying a plane already rejected by others? A fleet of 126 fighter jets that India is buying for reportedly $10 billion will therefore also incur massive bills for servicing and parts.
NAVIN AGARWAL, Siliguri

35
then the Rafale will be a multi-billion dollar intermediate step rather than a giant leap to security. Defence deals are so shrouded in secrecy that understanding the logic of what was done and why is nearly impossible. That sort of transparency is the most important requirement of arms procurement--and one that this contract has only taken baby steps towards.
K.S. JAYATHEERTHA, Bangalore

Left Behind
Industry's outcry from all over the world is that it is not getting the people it wants from the B-schools to manage its affairs effectively ("Wanted a Revolution", February 13). The top institutes of the world are constantly changing their curriculum to feed the needs of business. Indian B-schools need to replace bookish and theoretical education with practical exposure to real life situations.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
MARCH 16-31, 197 7

Hello World
Less than three weeks ago Delhi and India's northern region were put on the global satellite telecommunications map when the Prime Minister, Mrs Indira Gandhi, formally inaugurated India's second satellite earth station to link Delhi directly with 35 foreign countries.While in the peaceful western UP countryside the bullock cart still lumbers on, the sophisticated satellite earth station which is located midway between Dehradun and Rishikesh has quietly brought space-age communications to this part of the country. On February 25, Doordarshan in Delhi, and French television studios in Paris, exchanged programmes through the earth station at Dehradun, and the Prime Ministers of India and France exchanged greetings through a direct telephonic link.The giant parabolic antenna of the station picked up signals from the satellite and relayed them to Delhi through a microwave link provided by five repeater stations located in Mussoorie, Roorkee, Muzaffarnagar, Meerut and the ridge in Delhi. Hidden from view, and set in the Lachiwala sal forest 23 km from Dehradun, the Rs 10 crore station has been system-engineered, fabricated, commissioned and run by Indian engineers.
by Neena Vyas

White Elephant
The Government alone is responsible for the present state of the PSUs in the country. ("Are the Crown Jewels Fake?", February 13). Autonomy of PSUs is notional. Their chiefs have to knock on the doors of the Government even for an official visit abroad. The court has declared PSUs as `State' under Article 12 of the Constitution, handicapping them in many ways. The Government can meet the situation by reducing its equity below 51 per cent, and still remain in full control. Let the Government stop treating PSUs as its colonies and allow them to operate as board-managed companies in the true sense of the term, to get the best out of the crown jewels. The Government as Brahma created PSUs and has sustained them as Vishnu. Let it not destroy them as Shiva.
LAXMI NARAIN, Hyderabad

Moon Man Gone
Madhavan Nair's plea is a fair one, not merely because it has been voiced by a person who brought glory to the nation for his much-acclaimed moon mission ("Scientists are demoralised. I am hurt", February 13). The AntrixDevas deal showcases serious procedural flaws that need to be addressed at the highest level.
MEGHANA. A, United Kingdom

The decision to select the Dassault Aviation-made Rafale fighter jet over the Eurofighter Typhoon as the aircraft that will power the Indian Air Force for the next 40 years is easily the biggest that France has won in military orders. Billed as the world's largest open-tender military aviation deal at Rs 50,000 crore, India is expected to begin taking delivery of the Dassault Rafale fighters in 2015. If China has, as it claims, a fifth generation prototype,

The Central Government's decision to ban former chairman of Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) Nair and three other space scientists is indeed a sad thing to happen to our country's space research. The incident is sure to cast a long and gloomy shadow on the morale of the scientists, involved in various projects in ISRO, this is uncalled for.
MAHESH KAPASI, Delhi

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

THE NEW SATELLITE STATION IN DEHRADUN

10

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

