Na tion RAILWAYS
KRISHNA MURARI KISHAN

HIS MASTER'S CHOICE?
Railway Minister Dinesh Trivedi may alienate Mamata and increase fares
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

n the eve of the Railway Budget, Dinesh Trivedi is a man caught in a pernicious triangle of loyalty, conscience and uncertainty. The loyalty is towards his Trinamool Congress leader Mamata Banerjee who demands that he perpetuate populism by not increasing passenger fares, and push Railways towards bankruptcy. But his conscience is troubled by the fact that Railways is staring at a loss of Rs 16,000 crore. By all indications, Trivedi is set to listen to his inner voice and announce an increase in fares--a 10 per cent hike in freight charges across the board, and a rationalisation of passenger fares, mainly by targeting AC travellers. The uncertainty lies in the possibility that political circumstances could go topsy turvy after the Uttar Pradesh polls. If the situation goes out of control suddenly, he may not even get a chance to present the budget he has worked so hard on. During one of his several meetings with railway officers across the country, Trivedi voiced his dilemma. On getting repeated feedback that a fare hike needs to be effected, he told the officers that his loyalty is to Railways and he has to fulfil his duty. "...if fares need to be hiked, I will increase them,'' he said. However, after a pause of a few seconds, the brave words were followed by a dejected "If I am allowed to present the budget". An official of the Northeast Frontier Railway zone said that in a span of 20 minutes, the minister swayed between optimism and cynicism. His intentions were clear, as also the fact that he was helpless. However, the minister denied to INDIA TODAY that he was powerless and insisted he had a free hand in preparing the budget.

O

He admitted that hiking passenger fares was an "ideological issue" but as minister, he would do what's needed. Sources close to him claim that Trivedi sees himself as a soldier doing his job and is not scared to die in the crossfire. "He traded his Bentley for the sarkari (government) ambassador. He will go back to driving it and being a businessman,'' a source said. There are several anecdotes that people close to him narrate, which
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

prime minister Rajiv Gandhi from his flying days. A certified pilot, Trivedi was by Rahul's side at his father's funeral in 1991. Whether the explanation satisfied the temperamental Mamata is not known, but Trivedi himself feels tied down. He has hinted at the constraints he is working under even at various public forums. At the India PPP Summit 2012 organised by FICCI on January 31, Trivedi emphasised on "de-politi-

Railways has been milked by many of his predecessors for political mileage, including Mamata, who used the ministry as a stepping stone to the Writers' Buildings in Kolkata. Before her, Lalu Prasad Yadav was lucky to ride a growth surge and also astute enough to leave railway administration to a dynamic bureaucrat, officer on special duty Sudhir Kumar. The last minister to hike rail fares was Nitish Kumar in 2002-03. Fares have remained untouched since then. Railways' Rs 16,000-crore loss is despite the Rs 20,000-crore budgetary support for the year 20112012 and approval for another Rs 3,000-crore loan by Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee on February 6.
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

BIHAR HAS TAKEN A GIANT LEAP UNDER NITISH

BIHAR

TRIVEDI

THE LAST MINISTER TO HIKE RAIL FARES WAS NITISH KUMAR IN 2002-03. FARES HAVE REMAINED UNTOUCHED SINCE THEN. RAILWAYS IS NOW FACED WITH A RS 16,000 CRORE LOSS.
MAMATA

Bihar hosts a global meet to finetune its strategy to meet development goals and target higher growth

ASUMMITTO CLIMB

C

reveal the control that Mamata tries to wield over him. She took him to task for meeting Congress General Secretary Rahul Gandhi at his home in January-end. At her Kolkata office on February 3, Mamata asked Trivedi for an explanation and charged that he was taking orders from the Congress. He is believed to have told her that he had gone to discuss railway projects for Uttar Pradesh, and also that he had cordial relations with the family since he knew the late

cisation'' of Railways--a prerequisite for growth. He called for a national policy on Railways, which should continue irrespective of the government or railway minister of the day. Trivedi said that the policy should set forth a revenue model with emphasis on safety and passenger amenities. He also proposed an independent body, a Rail Fare Authority, to take decisions on railway fares without being influenced by political compulsions. The implications are clear.

This is a drop in the ocean compared to the funds required to bring the Railways back on track. Trivedi has said that Railways need an infusion of Rs 14 lakh crore for capacity expansion and modernisation by 2020. By his own admission, Railways is still stuck in the "Stone Age". Trivedi says that what he has seen as minister is a matter of serious concern. "If we don't modernise Railways, then I don't think we can guarantee 100 per cent safety,'' he says. 

hief Minister Nitish Kumar has a simple response when Bihar achieves its growth target, as it has done for the 11th Plan period-- he raises the bar, and sets a higher target. Between February 17 and 20, Nitish will play host to an eminent gathering of economists, sociologists, scholars and administrators in Patna, with just one purpose--to maintain and improve the growth momentum, with fresh ideas and methodologies to improve development delivery. The conference, themed Global Summit on Changing Bihar, will be inaugurated by Nepal Prime Minister Baburam Bhattarai, and end by offering a set of proposals to the government. The event is being jointly organised by Bihar Foundation, Institute for Human Development and Asian Development Research Institute. Nitish is the patron of Bihar Foundation, while Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi is its chairman. The summit is considered a rare open initiative in times of closed-door governance. The meet is the second of its kind to be held in the state.

The first global meet was held in January 2007 when the Nitish-led NDA government had entered its 14th month of power. In the seventh year of his uninterrupted rule, Nitish has both credibility and credentials to seek outside guidance for a state that has registered a GDP growth rate of over 14 per cent thrice in the last five years. In these years, while building roads, containing crime and crushing the Opposition both in political and electoral spaces, Nitish has also been seen determinedly creating an exclusive identity for Bihar. "The meet has nothing to do with investment. It will evolve fresh thinking for development goals and explore strategies, which will have positive transformational implications for Bihar," the Chief Minister said. An exchange of views with experts will help Bihar gain the much-desired policy capital for achieving all-round growth, he added. Modi said the primary objective for hosting the meet is to generate innovative ideas and thinking among the stakeholders to accelerate development in Bihar. by Amitabh Srivastava

48

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

NEW

NEW

FEBRUARY 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

