GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

BANERJEE

DRAMA QUEEN

M

SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

amata Banerjee inspires drama. Real drama. A jatra titled Maa-Mati-Manush (MotherMotherland-People) will now be staged at the Jatra Festival starting in Kolkata in February, by, of all troupes, inmates of Alipore Central Jail. They have rehearsed for three months under the direction of Tarun Tapan Ganguly, a warder in Presidency Jail. The play was written by celebrated playwright Bhairab Ganguly and has been staged at least 600 times since 1975. It talks about the victory of peasants against feudal landlords and reflects the rise of the Left in Bengal. Banerjee, who borrowed her campaign tagline from this play, is likely to be the chief guest.

BOOTY CALL
ho knew that the man who almost brought down the Asif Ali Zardari government was a wrestling aficionado? Businessman Mansoor Ijaz gained fame for exposing former Pakistan envoy Husain Haqqani's alleged role in requesting Pentagon help to pre-empt a coup. Now, he has hit the headlines for another reason. Click on a YouTube song called Stupidisco and watch two well-oiled women, Nancy Nasty and Miss Double D, going at each other in string bikinis. It's supposed to be a wrestling match but it degenerates into one of the ladies biting another's behind. Ijaz is the commentator who is overcome at this sight and is heard saying,

POWER MEAL

W

O

MANSOOR IJAZ

"She's giving it to her good now. You've got some real tumbling going on here." Ijaz's defence: he wasn't on the set when the video

was being shot. And that he was only doing a favour to the producer, who is his wife's friend. No wonder `Memogate' is now known as `Bootygate' .
PTI

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

n January 22, Renuka Chowdhury served a lavish south Indian breakfast to chief guest Ghulam Nabi Azad at her Banjara Hills home in Hyderabad. On the menu rode her hope for a nomination to the Rajya Sabha. The party can win four of the six seats in the biennial elections to be held in March. The UPwallah Rashid Alvi is likely to be nominated for a second term and the party plans to field K. Chiranjeevi as thanksgiving for the merger of PRP with Congress. That leaves two clear options. Chowdhury is now banking on Azad's recommendation to be a nominee.
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

"Have you seen any youngster saying that I want to play Ranji Trophy? No. You would only hear them say, `Bhai kuch bhi karke IPL mein khila do'."
MANOJ PRABHAKAR, former

cricketer

CULT OF PASWAN

REWARD, CONGRESS STYLE

MOTOR SPORTS
motorcycle rickshaw. A camel. Amitabh Bachchan will stop at nothing to promote Gujarat tourism. For his third round of shooting, which began in Gujarat on January 21, Bachchan strode around the Rann of Kutch, only stopping to tweet. Gujarat Tourism Secretary Vipul Mitra is understandably excited: "Bachchan saab has ensured a terrific surge in tourist traffic to the state." We are sure Narendra Modi can't stop preening.

"Show courage to bring Lokpal. We don't know if Congress will give you another chance as Prime Minister but if you do this, the country will remember you."
ANNA HAZARE, in a letter to PM

H

aving lost much of his clout in Bihar, Lok Janshakti Party chief Ram Vilas Paswan has done the next best thing. The man formerly known as the giant killer is fielding 288 candidates in the UP Assembly poll, where his party has never won a seat. The buzz is that the Rajya Sabha MP, who lost the Lok Sabha polls in 2009 and saw all his relatives losing Assembly polls in 2010 too, has entered the UP elections to help Congress by cutting marginally into the Dalit votebank to the detriment of Mayawati. Desperate situations breed desperate measures?

CHOWDHURY

H
GOGOI

ow does Congress reward its ace performers? By taking them out of active politics. Tarun Gogoi, three-time Chief Minister of Assam, is being tipped as UPA's candidate for vice-president. If 76-year-old Gogoi does make it to Delhi, he is likely to be replaced by his ambitious number two, Himanta Biswa Sarma. The North-east is Congress's political bread basket, and this promotion for Gogoi will be registered as a thank you note.

A

Manmohan Singh

ROLLER COASTER

T HE H IGH AND T HE L OW
Imran Khan has been retweeted by Jan Lokpal for his statement: Status quo parties can't bring change because they are part of the problem, not solution. Clearly, Team Anna wants to be a factor even in Pakistan polls. Priyanka Gandhi, usually attired in smart westerns, for dressing down in cottons to meet voters in Amethi and Rae Bareli.

"Congress will use Salman Rushdie as a tasty dish to be served to Muslims. He made fun of Lord Hanuman in The Satanic Verses, but we never said it should be banned."
JOKES
O F T H E W E E K

UMA BHARATI, BJP leader

EVER SINCE A SHOE WAS THROWN AT RAHUL GANDHI AT A RALLY IN DEHRADUN, TWITTER HAS BECOME THE SOLE OF WIT.

AMITABH BACHCHAN

NORTHERN LIGHTS NEW BUDDY
How does one know J. Jayalalithaa's mind? Well, read the posters. On January 17, party founder M.G. Ramachandran's 95th birth anniversary, Amma Peravai forum and MGR Mandram Club in Salem erected vinyl posters with images of Jayalalithaa beside an old photograph of M.G. Ramachandran and Cho Ramaswamy together. Cho, 77, the editor of the Tamil political weekly Thuglak is considered closest to the Tamil Nadu chief minister, now that Sasikala has been cast out. The irony that both Jayalalithaa and he are Brahmins is totally lost on the anti-Brahmin AIADMK.

What is the point in throwing shoes at Rahul Gandhi? He needs ideas. The joke about his reaction,"Ek aur joota pheko bhaiya," Rahul likes two of everything, from two nations to two shoes. Very rude of you RahulG, not saying "Thank You" after receiving joota and asking for "more" like greedy children?!

SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

O

PASWAN

nce upon a time long long ago, or about last August, PMO was dominated by the Malayalee IAS lobby. It is the turn of UP now. Both Principal Secretary to PM Pulok Chatterjee and Cabinet Secretary Ajit Seth are from the UP cadre. They are joined now by P.K. Misra, a 1976 batch UP IAS officer who has been shifted from the relatively insignificant job of secretary, steel, to the important position of secretary, personnel. With a UP trinity now at the helm of all civil service appointments, their cadre mates are looking forward to plum jobs after years of being ignored.

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

with UDAY MAHURKAR, PRIYA SAHGAL , AMARNATH K. MENON, AMITABH SRIVASTAVA, PARTHA DASGUPTA, DHIRAJ NAYYAR

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

15

