Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE FLAWED PARADISE
Truth is a shattered image of falsehood in this first novel set in a drugged Mumbai
By Tom Alter

NARCOPOLIS
byJeet Thayil Faber Price: RS 499 Pages: 304 BETWEEN THE COVERS The novelist sees the Mumbai of films,cricket, riots and cocaine from unique angles.As the mundane and the magical blend effortlesslyin his narrative,language for him becomes a blade and a ballad.

did not want to read this book, much less review it. The title put me off--Narcopolis, too clever, too glib. Then I discover it is about the city which has been my home for almost 40 years-- Bombay/Mumbai, and I think, "Oh, no, another grim and grubby look into the sordid underbelly. And then drugs and violence and pain." I have had enough of these things, in books and films and articles and discussions, in magazines as well as newspapers. Enough, enough, enough. But something convinced me to begin reading, something, a hint, a scent--Jeet Thayil, whom I had met as a young writer many years ago, a curiosity as to how his journey has played out. But something else, a phrase in the first page of the prologue--`trawling my head for images'. That was the hint, the scent, the blue clue, the edge, the hinge, the beginning of the binge--to trawl is the perfect image for the son of a fisherman like myself, for a city on the cusp of the sea, for the hint of depth and dreariness, and the sense of seeking even more than a head could ever contain, while a head can contain anything. And my own journey began through a Bombay I had smelt, felt faintly, but a Bombay so close to my untouched veins, unneedled veins, that I knew I would learn and yearn and burn through Jeet's journey, through Jeet's haar, in both senses of the word: the defeat and the garland. Then Jeet finds Lee. Or Dimple does. Or Zeenat does, and I was carried away to a world where Mao and mother were laced together, and dogma and dogs were barking, and the written word was a blessing and a curse.

I

Films, cricket, riots, Novelty Cinema, Bombay Central, rains, gullies, Grant Road, Bandra, Dev Anand, Sunil Gavaskar, Worli, whores--Jeet rises to the surface of his drugged world to make sudden observations of the world outside, but from the most unique angles, and then dives, drifts, sifts to the bottom of a sea where man and woman are one, where violence and velvet are one. Death is a stranger, a mehmaan; ghosts are alive, and people dead. It's a world where truth as a shattered image of falsehood becomes clear in the mirror of cocaine. And throughout this fable, and a fable it is, Jeet masterfully walks the line and snorts it between just too much and just not enough. "Below was a thick layer of cotton wool and below that were the blue pools of her nightmares"--from the mundane to the magic. Language for Jeet, for his alter egos, his characters, is a weapon and a warrior, a blade and a ballad, a source and a scourge. He writes as if the word was, is, truly god or gods. Read the description of the poetry by Xavier, the wasted and yet vibrant poet/painter; read the thoughts of Dimple/ Zeenat, as she plunges between life and death, between memories and mother; read the deeds of Rumi, who sought only what is right to search, but sought it in ways which only he could seek; read of S.T. Pande, the fake historian/philosopher who knew that reincarnation was not a fake, but a fable in itself. Read Narcopolis. You may wish for a different title; you may wish the world it lives in never existed; and you may wish no one could ever describe that world so perfectly. But you will never wish that a writer be never granted his or her flawed paradise. His or her flawed, sad, triumphant paradise. 
SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

52

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

