the Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW). His messages spread to blogs and were even picked up by a pro-BNP newspaper, Amar Desh. The DGFI and other security agencies kept the suspected plotters under surveillance. They discovered that the likely date of the coup was January 10 or 11. One by one, the plotters were picked up and are now detained in military headquarters, Dhaka. On January 19, the army unveiled the plot. In its first ever press conference, held at the Army Officers' Club in Dhaka, ISPR spokesperson Brigadier General Muhammad Masud Razzaq
MAJOR SYED MOHAMMAD ZIAUL HAQ (BELOW), THE ALLEGED MASTERMIND OF A COUP BID AGAINST SHEIKH HASINA (LEFT)

Spe cial Report

BANGLADESH

DHAKACONSPIRACY
By Saleem Samad in Dhaka

The coup bid against Sheikh Hasina has been foiled but Islamists remain a potent threat within the army

AFP

"admitted their role in the plot". Major General Mohammad Kamruzzaman, commander of the Comilla-based 33rd Infantry Division, was removed from his command and detained in Dhaka. Another brigadier, Tariqul Alam, commander of 71st Brigade of 9th Division, and Major General Shabbir Ahmad, commander of the Rangpur-based 66 Division, are under surveillance. Eleven other officers from Dhaka and other cantonments across the country have been confined in the capital. Bangladesh Army chief General Mohammad Mainul Islam says the major general and some religious bigots had planned to indoctrinate pious officers. "They had targeted the deeply religious officers, who they felt would be amenable because they were pious, to execute their conspiracy to overthrow the democratically elected government," he says. On January 21, Hasina said, "I would like to thank the Bangladesh Army. Had they not unearthed the conspiracy in time, a great disaster could have taken place. The army saved the patriotic forces and the country as well by throttling the conspiracy to topple the democratic government." She accused arch-rival Khaleda of plotting to overthrow her government. The BNP dismissed this as well as allegations that self-exiled BNP leader Tarique Rahman, Khaleda's son, was involved in the aborted coup attempt.

n late December last year, a secret letter went from New Delhi to Dhaka. It was delivered directly to Sheikh Hasina, 65, the prime minister of Bangladesh. It warned her that Islamist radicals embedded within the Bangladesh Army were planning a coup. Hasina had reason to fear coups. On the night of August 15, 1975, her father, Bangladesh's first president Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, her mother and three brothers were massacred by officers of the Bangladesh Army. Hasina and her sister would have been dead as well, but were abroad on a tour of Europe. Along with the letter, India had worked out a contingency plan to evacuate the prime minister, her cabinet

I

and key figures of her Awami League party in the event of a coup. There was a military plan as well. Indian helicopter gunships would be launched from two airbases in West Bengal and Tripura into Dhaka to provide air cover for the operation. Landing zones and evacuation sites were identified in and around the capital for the air corridor. All through December, Bangladesh's spy agency, the Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI), which reports directly to Hasina, quietly went to work. It was headed by Major General Sheikh Mamun Khaled, whom Hasina had personally chosen. They tapped phone communications, SMSs and emails of suspects in the conspiracy. Social networking sites were

monitored. A series of arrests was made from December-end to January. Opposition leader Begum Khaleda Zia of the Bangladesh National Party (BNP), who is anti-India by conviction and hates Hasina with a rare passion, alleged at a public rally in Chittagong that army officers were becoming victims of "sudden disappearance". The army's media wing, the Inter-Services Public Relations Directorate (ISPR), warned Khaleda to refrain from making any statements. The army was worried that public discourse might soon include details of the impending coup. The coup attempt began innocuously. Posts on a Facebook group, `Soldiers Forum', instigated soldiers to work against the government. Major

Syed Mohammad Ziaul Haq, a graduate of the military academy who was training at the Military Institute of Science and Technology, Dhaka, was identified as the mastermind. He used a mobile phone with a UK number to share details of the conspiracy with 11 other army officers. On his Facebook account, he bragged that "mid-level officers of Bangladesh Army are bringing changes soon". On January 8, the banned fanatical organisation Hizb utTahrir (Party of Liberation) distributed provocative leaflets based on his post. Major Zia regularly updated his Facebook account with "information" on arrests of army officers by "anti-terrorism agents", including those of India's external intelligence agency,

AP PHOTO

BANGLADESH'S DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF FORCES INTELLIGENCE, WHICH REPORTS DIRECTLY TO HASINA, QUIETLY WENT TO WORK. A SERIES OF ARRESTS WAS MADE FROM DECEMBER-END.
took questions, didn't reveal specifics, but talked about the threat to Hasina's "pro-secular and democratically elected government". Brigadier Razzaq claimed between 14 and 16 former and active mid-level radical Muslim officers were behind the conspiracy to topple the government and install an Islamist regime. Two retired officers, Lt Col Ehsan Yousuf and Major Zakir, were arrested on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government and they The Bangladesh Army says Major Zia, the alleged coup mastermind, evaded arrest. His whereabouts are unknown. Yet, it was the resurfacing of an underground Islamist organisation that caused concern. The Bangladesh Army linked the conspirators to the Hizb ut-Tahrir. The Tahrir, an international Sunni pan-Islamist political organisation, advocates an Islamic Caliphate governed by Shariah law. Founded in 1953 in Jerusalem, it has

28

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

Spe cial Report

BANGLADESH

MORE COUPS THAN

PAKISTAN

spread to more than 40 countries, and is also active in Pakistan. The Hasina government had banned the Tahrir in October 2009. Agencies such as the Rapid Action Battalion, National Security Intelligence and Detective Branch repeatedly claimed they had succeeded in containing them. They based these claims on the detention of key figures such as Towfiq Elahi, a teacher of a prominent private university, and Dr Golam Haider Rasul, 45, who practises at Dhaka's United Hospital, besides hundreds of others. Tahrir leader Maulana Mamunur Rashid, principal of a Dhaka madrassa, remains a fugitive. Nearly 500 Tahrir members were detained mostly for organising rallies and distributing leaflets. Police officers now admit their inability to curb the well-funded organisation merely through arrests. "It's tough because families of the detained activists get money from their global network," says Lt Col Ziaul Ahsan, director of the Intelligence Wing of the elite anti-crime Rapid Action Battalion. Most of the detained militants released on bail rejoin the outfit. The outfit has resurfaced more aggressively after its ban. Besides the men in uniform, the Hizb ut-Tahrir has spread its invisible tentacles among the social elite, government professionals, academics and politicians. "They have a new approach

THE SECRET SECRETSERVICE
The Indian Army's Military Intelligence Directorate, which tipped off Sheikh Hasina, is a lean, mean machine
n the topmost floor of Sena Bhavan in Delhi are the headquarters of one of India's 21 intelligence agencies, the Indian Army's Military Intelligence Directorate (MI). The building, located behind South Block, is the closest India gets to the Pentagon. Its warren of corridors and cramped offices helps India's military spies maintain a veneer of anonymity. It was the MI that warned Sheikh Hasina about a coup brewing in the Bangladesh Army. The incident

O

brought the agency's role into focus. Set up in 1950 as a small army department primarily to investigate corruption within the force, MI has made its share of blunders. It survived the embarrassment of the 1978 Samba spy case, where it falsely implicated three Indian Army officers as being Pakistani spies. The agency gathered momentum in the 1990s especially after the Kargil conflict with Pakistan. The army chafed at the poor quality tactical intelligence provided by the

MI SLEUTHS SHOW INTERROGATION TECHNIQUES AT THE SCHOOL OF MILITARY INTELLIGENCE, PUNE

DELHI'S SUPPORT FOR HASINA IS CLEAR. UNDER HER, BANGLADESH IS NO LONGER A HAVEN FOR INDIAN MILITANTS.
to radicalism, the cuckoo's eggs in the crow's nest (trying to covertly embed themselves in society)," says Nazmul Ahsan Kalimullah, a political scientist in Dhaka University. Since their 1975 putsch that killed Mujib, the Father of the Nation, the military in Bangladesh has overthrown the civilian government four times. The army has killed two elected presidents and coerced three other presidents into

Intelligence Bureau (IB) and R&AW. It boosted MI's mandate. Today, the organisation comprises just over 700 officers, including women officers, and over 3,000 men. It is still tiny when compared to R&AW and IB, whose staff is over 25,000. MI's operating budget, too, is a tiny fraction of the well-entrenched IB and R&AW, though all three agencies have somewhat overlapping mandates visa-vis trans-border tasks. The director-general, MI, a lieutenant general-rank officer who reports directly to the army chief, is indispensable when it comes to furthering Indian Army's diplomacy and exchanging intelligence with friendly countries like Myanmar, Israel, Afghanistan and Vietnam. MI was initially tasked with generating only tactical or field intelligence in all countries bordering India. Its geographical mandate was set to 50 km from the border. These limits were quickly crossed in the mid-1990s when the organisation began playing an increasing role in countries within the subcontinent and its outer periphery. MI operatives moved into Tajikistan and later Afghanistan in support of the Ahmad Shah Massoud-led Northern Alliance that overthrew the Taliban in 2001. Besides furthering national strategic goals, MI officials say these `third country operations' allowed the agency to peep into countries of their immediate interest. MI was also active in Myanmar, which nurtured insurgent groups. In 1998, an MI operative impersonated a Khalistani terrorist and infiltrated a gun-running

Myanmarese insurgent group. He led them into a death trap in the Andaman islands. Operation Leech, as the operation was called, marked the start of the Indian Army outreach to the Myanmarese junta in the 1990s. It also aimed to offset China's expanding footprint on India's eastern border. Bangladesh is another country that has figured high on the MI scanner, particularly because of the safe sanctuaries provided to insurgent groups like the United Liberation Front of Asom (ULFA), the United National Liberation Front of Manipur (UNLF) and the Kamtapur Liberation Organisation of Assam. Within months of the Hasina government taking over in 2009, the entire leadership of the ULFA and UNLF was handed over to Indian authorities. MI's mandate also includes counterterrorism in the north and Northeast and generating pinpoint intelligence for small team operations. It is also tasked with counterintelligence in the army, which entails detecting spies in military areas. MI survived the post-Kargil loss of turf to two new intelligence agencies, the National Technical Research Organisation and the Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA). DIA took away some of its signal monitoring capabilities and foreign military attaches who used to report to MI. A measure of the turf wars between India's spy agencies is brought out by the pithy remark of an MI official: "Let us remain low profile, we don't want to tread on too many toes."
by Sandeep Unnithan

Bangladesh has seen numerous blood-soaked transfers of power

August 1975
Major Faruque Rahman and Major Rashid assassinate the first president and founder of Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman

November 1975
New government set up by Major Rahman and Major Rashid is overthrown by Brigadier Khaled Mosharraf.

November 1975
Brigadier Mosharraf is killed in a soldiers' revolt; General Ziaur Rahman takes over the reins of power.

May 1981
General Ziaur Rahman is assassinated by a group of army officers. Major-General Abul Manzoor's direct involvement is probed but not proved. Coup suppressed by army chief General H.M. Ershad.

March 1982
General H.M. Ershad takes power through a bloodless coup, rules for eight years.

January 2006
Army chief General Moeen Uddin Ahmed declares a state of emergency which lasts for two years until fresh elections are called in December 2008.

SANDEEP UNNITHAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

declaring military-backed emergency. The last coup was in January 2007 and since then, attempts have been made to keep the military in the barracks. The Supreme Court has been a key force. A landmark judgment by a full bench headed by former chief justice Mohammad Tafazzul Islam on July 28, 2010, declared three military regimes between August 15, 1975, and February 1979 as illegal. The new con-

stitution, adopted by parliament in November 2011, has restored equality of religions. But as UK-based terror analyst Chris Blackburn says, "The recent coup plot shows that extremism in South Asia has many forms. There has always been a trend within the ranks of the military to push the importance of religion in binding a country together. There are certainly officers who see themselves as guardians of both state

and religion. But I still think it is too early right now to speculate on Hizb utTahrir's role in the attempted coup. They are an extremist group." Hasina has been under threat since she swept to power in early 2009. More than 1,000 paramilitary border guards of Bangladesh Rifles, now renamed Border Guards Bangladesh, revolted against the military's hegemony over their institution. It was symptomatic of

the unrest in the armed forces. India helped even then. Sources in the prime minister's office said that as soon as the mutiny broke out, India kept its special forces 50 Parachute Independent Brigade on standby to fly into Dhaka in case of an emergency. New Delhi's support for Hasina is clear. In her third stint as prime minister, Bangladesh has ceased to become a safe haven for militant groups operating in India.

The military has moved in swiftly to initiate a court of inquiry against the rogue officers. The military brass, meanwhile, reassured the president of its secular credentials and their support. "There is no room for religious zealots in the Bangladesh Army," army chief General Islam told a seminar in Dhaka a week after the botched coup. The civilian government can only hope that it is true. 

30

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

