OSAMA'S HIDEOUT IN ABBOTTABAD BEING DEMOLISHED

Nei ghbours

PAKISTAN
AP PHOTO

REMAINS OFAHORROR
Pakistan demolishes Osama's Abbottabad hideout in a bid to exorcise his ghost

O

n the night of February 25, Pakistani authorities initiated a covert operation to demolish Osama bin Laden's erstwhile home in the garrison town of Abbottabad. Three bulldozers hired from a private construction firm clawed at the threestoreyed house which served as the hideout of the al Qaeda leader for over five years since 2006. Security personnel cordoned off the demolition site. Only local residents were allowed to enter Bilal Town, the suburb where the house is located. Officials say that they feared attacks from the Taliban and al Qaeda militants. A major portion of what was once a three-storeyed building surrounded by 10-foot high walls, has been reduced to rubble. Workers were busy loading the remains onto gigantic trawlers to eradicate any vestiges of the past. What remains is a huge gate erected in the middle of the compound, heaps of building material, blocks of concrete and steel and iron rods. The basement, too, is packed with debris. An engineer of the company, which has been asked to demolish the house, told INDIA TODAY on condition of anonymity, "High-grade

cement, iron and steel were used to construct the basement. Over 100 tonnes of steel and iron were used to build the compound." On May 2, 2011, US Special Forces gunned down bin Laden, who was living within earshot of the Pakistan Military Academy, just 2 km away. The dust, however, has not settled on the controversy. US officials still suspect Pakistani complicity in sheltering bin Laden. Washington Post recently reported that an architect hired by ISI had designed the house that was constructed in 2005. The government, army and judiciary are unanimous on one thing: The house must be demolished. Pakistani military brass regards it as a symbol of their humiliation. The US did not want the house to become an al Qaeda

A JUDICIAL COMMISSION ORDERED PAKISTAN FEDERAL INTERIOR MINISTER REHMAN MALIK TO ENSURE A SPEEDY DEMOLITION.

shrine. A judicial commission appointed by the Supreme Court to probe the covert US raid, ordered Federal Interior Minister Rehman Malik on February 23 to ensure speedy demolition."Both Prime Minister Syed Yousuf Raza Gilani and President Asif Ali Zardari have agreed on the demolition," Malik told INDIA TODAY. Since the raid on May 2, the 38,000 square feet home, worth 85 million Pakistani rupees, has been in the custody of the Abbottabad district administration. At least 27 people, including diplomats and journalists, have been arrested for trying to enter the area and taking photographs. "They should have demolished it earlier and spared us the surveillance," sighs a local resident, Obaid Shinwari, 40. The demolition has hit business prospects of local residents who were earlier earning up to 8,600 Pakistani rupees, showing `Osama tourists' around. "I was hoping the house would become a source of permanent income for me as I could brief visitors on its history," said Mohammad Kareem Khan, 51, a labourer. But it was not to be.
by Qaswar Abbas in Abbottabad

82

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

