UP FRONT

NITISH KUMAR

VICTIMISATION OFTHE POOR
here is no point repeating from where Bihar its strength and built on it. Today, nobody even rememstarted and where it has reached now. We have al- bers that Jharkhand was once a part of Bihar. The people of Bihar are to be credited for the turnready understood our weaknesses and identified our strengths. With development and justice being the around. I had reminded everyone--when our governguiding principle of governance model, Bihar has ment was formed in November 2005--that the mines marched ahead with pride and hope. But the state is and minerals might have gone to Jharkhand but we fighting against all kinds of bottlenecks. The burden of still have the rich heritage, fertile soil, work culture proof has always been on the state, and we have always and hardworking people. Our people have been our asfaced a trust deficit, making it incumbent upon us to pro- sets. Shortage of resources in Bihar is no secret. Successive governments have done nothing to provide evidences of our growth potential and sincerity. When the Planning Commission asked us to opt for mote any significant institutional or government inprojects in Public Private Partnership (PPP), we were a vestment. The introduction of freight equalisation bit sceptical to begin with. We worked upon it and now policy--brought when Bihar was an undivided state-- the results have once again vindicated our credentials. nullified whatever strength we had. Many investors, Recently, we have seen investors bidding for the who would have had invested in Bihar, moved out for PPP projects in Bihar, willing to invest with zero-viabilgreener pastures elsewhere after the Centre's lopsided ity gap funding--which is otherwise offered to ensure policy nullified our advantage. commercial viability of the economically essential When the British started to set up sugarcane-based projects--even though the Centre and government of industries, they picked Bihar and eastern UP as the preBihar were willing to give 20 per cent of it. This is a ferred destinations for sugar mills because the area had telling testament of investors' growing faith in Bihar. an abundance of sugarcane. It still has. At the time of The Government of India should now unlock its Independence, Bihar accounted for over 25 per cent of sugar production in the country. Thanks to the Centre's coffers to assist the state. There is one basic question the Centre needs to an- discriminatory policies, our contribution to national swer. When Central taxes are applied equally on all the sugar production has slumped to just about 2 per cent. Still, Bihar has progressed--and is prospering too. states, why is it that Bihar is not provided equal amount of facilities and services? Why shouldn't Bihar be given How should we measure development? Economists assess it on the scale of Gross Domestic funds? Isn't this discrimination? I SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Product. I agree with them, but my know it is for the Planning Commconcept of development means enission to take a call on the issue. suring that the growth benefits reach Over the years, Bihar has been unthe people on the last rung of the sowaveringly contented. We work with cial and economic ladder. whatever little we receive. But, doesBihar is celebrating 100 years of n't it make their claims of inclusive its formation. There was a time when governance hollow? Inclusive Bihar didn't even celebrate the foungrowth does not mean that we end dation day. We started the tradition. up creating some islands of And Bihar has multiple identities--of progress--like we have done in some caste and religion, which have not selected western and southern weakened despite our best efforts. pockets of the country--and leave We have drawn a bigger line to crethe rest of the country behind. ate the identity of Bihar so that a Inclusive growth means developBihari rises above parochial considment for everyone and everywhere. We have drawn a bigger erations. The new identity has In 2000, when Jharkhand was biline to create the strengthened in the last four years. furcated from Bihar, I remember the The Centre must have faith in entire state was surrounded by an identity of Bihar so that Bihar. A poor man is never dishonest, overwhelming sense of despair. The a Bihari rises above and we are poor people. shock of having lost everything was parochial consideraso overpowering that people in Bihar tions. The new identity then thought they could do nothing to This is an edited version of Bihar Chief has strengthened in the make up for the irreversible loss. But, Minister Nitish Kumar's speech at the gradually, Bihar started recognising last four years. Global Summit on Changing Bihar, in Patna

T

10

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

