Cover Story BOLLYWOOD HEROINES

Return
By Nishat Bari

OF THE

Sirens
Bollywood's women get better roles and bigger brands. In 2012, they will go from being beautiful Barbies to power performers.

pregnant Vidya Balan, 34, slowly walks down a bustling Park Street in Kolkata even as director Sujoy Ghosh and his camera crew struggle with milling crowds to capture the dejection of a woman in desperate search of her husband in Kahaani. The crowds wait for the shot to be taken but such is the rush to get closer to the screen Silk Smitha that Ghosh and his team have already been beaten up once. The Dirty Picture grossed Rs 114 crore worldwide in 2011 but Balan had already established herself as the hero: No One Killed Jessica with Rani Mukherjee made Rs 36 crore in January 2011. Bollywood women have not looked back since Madhur Bhandarkar's Fashion in 2008. The film saw Priyanka Chopra, 29, sleeping her way to the top in the film, Kangna Ranaut,24, dying of a drug overdose, and Mugdha Godse, 25, the cleanest living model of the group, marrying a gay

A

D KAREENAKAPOOR
KAREENA KAPOOR IN THE FORTHCOMING HEROINE

She was a quirky hairstylist from Los Angeles, Riana Braganza in Ek Main Aur Ekk Tu opposite Imran Khan, is a Pakistani agent in Agent Vinod with Saif, and teams up with Aamir Khan and Rani Mukherjee for thriller psychological Talaash. Then it's time to play superstar on the skids Mahi Gill in Madhur Bhandarkar's Heroine. USP Beautiful, professional, can act. Endorses 14 brands

Jun 1

Mar 23

Cover Story BOLLYWOOD HEROINES
D VIDYABALAN
She plays a pregnant woman in Kahaani, does an item number in Ferrari ki Sawaari, and plays a comic role in Ghanchakkar. USP Fake orgasms or earthy abuses, she's done it all. She can be fiercely maternal, sexually voracious, dutifully dowdy. Endorses Five brands

D KATRINAKAIF
She is an ISI spy in Ek Tha Tiger.Two weeks of shooting remain. She is currently in London, shooting for an epic romance with Shah Rukh Khan. Next up, action in Dhoom 3 with Aamir Khan. USP From Sheila Ki Jawani to Chikni Chameli, she is the goddess of good luck. Endorses 11 brands

D PRIYANKACHOPRA
She plays an autistic girl in Barfee and Shahid Kapoor's love interest in three different periods in Teri Meri Kahaani. Reprises her role opposite Hrithik Roshan in Krrish 3, this time as his wife. USP Can be a glam diva and desi girl. Connects with fans on Twitter. Endorses Eight brands

D

DEEPIKAPADUKONE
Romances Ranbir Kapoor in Ayan Mukherjee's Yeh Jawani Hai Dewani, is back in Ramesh Taurani's Race 2, has Tamil film Kochadaiyaan opposite Rajinikanth , and a dark love story Cocktail. USP Dances well, has a terrific body, likely to learn on the job, likeable. Endorses Eight brands

Eid
2012

Mar 9
FHM india AFP

Jul 13
YOGEN SHAH

Nov 30
FOTOCORP

man. The film was Bhandarkar's highest grosser ever, at Rs 42 crore. Kareena Kapoor, 31, knows all about numbers: Of her 10 films since 2009, four have crossed the Rs 100crore mark. At The Imperial hotel in Delhi for promotions of Ek Main Aur Ekk Tu, which went on to make Rs 58 crore, she looks dew fresh from a 20day vacation in a Swiss chalet with long-time beau Saif Ali Khan. Smartly attired in red J Brand trousers, blue Ralph Lauren jacket and black Prada boots, she sounds exhilarated after her

"first real holiday in a year-and-a-half" when all she did was drink red wine and eat fondue. She needed a break. She has three big films this year: The globetrotting Agent Vinod with Saif where she plays a Pakistani spy; Talaash, where she is a prostitute who tempts Aamir Khan, a married policeman investigating a superstar's death in Mumbai; and a star in spectacular decline in Bhandarkar's Heroine. What's more, she has a Sanjay Leela Bhansali movie lined up, with rising star Ranveer Singh. Fourteen brands to

endorse, a beautiful Bandra apartment she shares with Saif ("he has exquisite taste," she says) and just enough money to shop (her mother invests the rest), Kareena is now where she's wanted to be since her debut in Refugee in 2001. "I never had the best of an education, although I did pass Class X from Welham Girls' School with 75 per cent. I couldn't have done anything else. There was no fallback," she says. But as she points out, "I never gave up. I was always ready for war. I had faith in my talent."

Whether it's promoting brands or selling movies with glamorous item songs, which are to Bollywood what car chases are to Hollywood, women have never had it so good in male-driven Bollywood where all they did previously, says a snide director, was audition for marriage. At 40 per cent, women have a bigger share of celebrity television endorsements than their male counterparts at 38 per cent, according to TAM Media Research. If Kareena tops the wish list of filmmakers, Katrina Kaif, 27, was the darling of the endorsement world in 2011, second only to Shah Rukh Khan and ahead of M.S. Dhoni, Sachin Tendulkar and Amitabh Bachchan, according to TAM. No self-respecting movie is without an item bomb to propel it. It helps the film and the star. Not only does the star pocket a fee for the song--Deepika Padukone, 26, was paid Rs 1 crore for Dum Maaro Dum--she also earns from repeated stage performances where the fee could go up to Rs 1.5 crore. As Kareena says, "I am very clear. It's a circus. Either give me an award or give me a packet. Four years ago, I decided I wouldn't do private weddings." No apologies. No excuses. As Priyanka says, "This is the best time to be a female lead in Bollywood." She's on the phone from Hyderabad, having joined the Rs 100 crore super women's club with the success of Don 2 and Agneepath. She is "doubly happy" because it comes after disappointment-- her ambitious seven avatars in Vishal Bhardwaj's 7 Khoon Maaf failed at the box office in 2011 despite a brave performance which had her being sexually roughed up onscreen by Irrfan Khan and being subjected to Annu Kapoor's orgasm. Female courage is being rewarded. Ask Balan. She's taking quick bites of her lunch at The Trident in Mumbai in between day-long interviews for her forthcoming film, Kahaani. She's just had three hours of sleep and is wondering whether she will be on time for an award function in Goa at 8.30 p.m. later in the day. "I feel like a bird in the sky. To the rest of the world, it seems like the bird is really high but the bird knows that the sky is actually much

higher," she says. "The Dirty Picture shot through the roof to the extent that now there is a Bhojpuri film called Dirty Pichkari," she laughs. Suddenly, everyone wants a piece of her. Even mentor Vidhu Vinod Chopra. Three years were spent on developing the father-son script of Chopra's production Ferrari ki Sawaari, auditioning 5,000 children and shooting on location-- including at Lords in London--all in an effort to chase excellence. Yet it is up to

Balan's scorching lavani number, Mala jau dya na ghari, to grab eyeballs. She can't help recall the dark days after Heyy Baby (2007) and Kismat Konnection (2008), though. "I remember reading on a website that `she is so badly dressed I don't know why she would even want to step out of home'. I think that killed me." Now she doesn't read news or watch television. The breakneck promotional rounds will cease only after March 9 when

KHANS
D SHAH RUKH KHAN
He is shooting in England for a return to classic romance in 79-year-old Yash Chopra's untitled epic with Katrina Kaif and Anushka Sharma.

the

D SAIFALI KHAN
He is the Indian James Bond in Agent Vinod, a spy thriller shot across nine countries, from Latvia to Morocco. Saif's pet project is slated for release on March 23. He also has Homi Adajania's Cocktail, Race 2 and a cameo in Raj Nidimoru and Krishna DK's Go Goa Gone.

D AAMIR KHAN
Aamir and Kareena make a comeback in Talaash,Reema Kagti's thriller about the murder of a superstar.Shot almost entirely in Mumbai's red light district,he's a policeman,Rani Mukherjee his wife and Kareena a prostitute who knows more than she lets on.

D SALMAN KHAN
He's the star of Ek Tha Tiger, Yashraj Films'biggest movie in 2012. It will be ready in time for his favourite day of the year, Eid.
SAIF

22

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

AAMIR

SALMAN

SHAH RUKH
AFP

NEW

Cover story BOLLYWOOD HEROINES
Kahaani releases. Then she gets a much-needed three-month break and a long overdue family holiday before shooting begins for her first comedy, Rajkumar Gupta's quirky Ghanchakkar, with the star of the crass and underclass, Emraan Hashmi. Women are vital even to conventional Bollywood "projects" which revolve around heroes. When Padukone, walked out of Race 2, the value of the project being sold by producer Ramesh Taurani to UTV dropped from Rs 87 crore to Rs 65 crore even though it has Saif, Anil Kapoor and John Abraham on board. Taurani was understandably frantic and after a very public spat, Padukone is back, though dates are yet to be allotted. That may be tough--Padukone is juggling an almost complete love story Cocktail with Saif, where she plays Meera, her darkest and most challenging role yet. She starts shooting with former boyfriend Ranbir Kapoor in two weeks for Ayan Mukherjee's college love story Yeh Jawani Hai Dewani, and though Rana, opposite Rajinikanth, has been put on the backburner, a prequel, the period film Kochadaiyaan, will take off in the next few weeks. With the business of cinema expanding to smaller towns as well as new overseas destinations, the Rs 100crore box office mark is becoming easier to achieve. Siddharth Roy Kapur, CEO of UTV Movies, points to three key factors. One, penetration into smaller towns has helped new revenue flow into the industry and with cinema having gone digital, costs of production have been reduced. There are about 11,000 screens across India of which approximately 1,500 are multiplexes. Two, ticket prices have increased. They rose 5-7 per cent in 2011, and tickets can now cost anywhere between Rs 150-250, with big films commanding as much as Rs 350 in Mumbai and Delhi. They're expected to rise by another 20 per cent this year. Three, the nature of audiences is changing. Sunil Punjabi, CEO, Cinemax, gives the example of two centres in Mumbai, Versova and Malad, where 80 per cent of the audience that came to watch The Dirty Picture was women.
YOGEN SHAH

numbers ITEM
D CHITRANGADASINGH adds the earthy
element to the fantasy style of Joker as she dons a tiny red choli to do a raunchy number, Kaafirana.

VIDYA BALAN IN A SONG FROM FERRARI KI SAWAARI

D KARISMAKAPOOR returns with
Dangerous Ishq. Either it's her time away or working with Vikram Bhatt, but she has become bolder. She will do an item number in Prabhu Deva's Rowdy Rathore.

D VIDYABALAN does a lavani item song
in Vidhu Vinod Chopra's Ferrari ki Sawaari. Paid Rs 1.5 crore for her new film Ghanchakkar with Emraan Hashmi, she is doing Ferrari ki Sawaari free for the Parineeta and Munnabhai producer.

D KAREENAKAPOOR will do two item
numbers for Heroine, one song called Halkat Jawani. Also coming up, an item song in the yet-to-be-shot Dabangg 2.

RANBIR KAPOOR IN BARFEE

her parents or her shoot locations. Between visiting Berlin Film Festival for a screening of Don 2 to attending the Grammy music awards in Los Angeles to signing a music album with Universal Music to working on three films, Priyanka has no time to dawdle. Just like Katrina. Not only has Katrina just two weeks to go on Kabir Khan's Ek Tha Tiger with Salman, she is also in the epic romance with Salman's arch-rival Shah Rukh. Yash Chopra, 79, is directing a film seven years after Veer-Zaara, and has declared that the film is "about love and nothing else". Katrina has a third film with the secretive Yash Raj Films, Dhoom 3 with Aamir that is slated to release next year. There are other women who have infused attitude into the industry. There's the outspoken fashion icon Sonam Kapoor who had the courage to make a chick flick with sister Rhea Kapoor as producer in Aisha (2010). There's Kangna, who has taken her image as trauma queen by its spaghetti straps and done a series of mindless male-dominated comedies like Double

NEXTin line
D RANBIR KAPOOR In yet another reinvention, he plays a deaf-mute in the Chaplinesque Barfee opposite Priyanka Chopra.

D SONAKSHI SINHA She spent all of 2011
signing films which come to fruition this year: Lootera, Joker, Rowdy Rathore, Son of Sardar, and her much awaited reunion with Salman Khan in Dabangg 2.

D KALKI KOECHLIN Traversed Anurag
Kashyap's kingdom of darkness and Zoya Akhtar's sun-filled Spanish feast in 2011. She is a raging angel in Dibakar Banerjee's political thriller Shanghai and by year-end, will start work on Kannan Iyer's still-developing film Daayan.

D IMRAN KHAN Steps out of
the rom-com comfort zone with Vishal Bhardwaj's Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola, a story of a rebellious man who sets out on a journey to reunite with his wife and parents.

The women on screen are trying to be more deserving of this new audience. Kareena is hoping to forever leave behind the sweet, bubbly straitjacket of Geet from Jab We Met with the edgier Talaash and Heroine. After playing a sex kitten in The Dirty Picture, Balan has transformed herself into a harried seven months pregnant woman in search for her husband in what turns out to be very twisted story indeed. Priyanka is playing an autistic character in Anurag Basu's Barfee, where the hearing and speech challenged Ranbir is a thief, kidnapper, hustler but also a romantic. The film has hardly any dialogue, with its empty spaces filled with contemporary music playing in the background. As Basu says, "Priyanka's character sees the world so differently that to her, everyone seems to be from Mars while she is the only normal one around." Of her many peculiarities, one is demonstrated in a scene where Ranbir is getting beaten up while she sits in a corner singing a song. Priyanka has been working hard too, taking time off only to tweet about

24

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

NEW

Cover Story BOLLYWOOD HEROINES

STARLETS
D ARJUN KAPOOR This 26-year-old is
paired opposite newbie Parineeti Chopra for Yash Raj Films'romantic drama Ishaqzaade. Like cousin Sonam Kapoor, he battled weight issues and from a fat 140-kg boy, under Salman Khan's guidance, he now looks every bit the hero he wants to become.

the

She's got a great director and two very good-looking and talented young men to work with."

D TIGER SHROFF The 20-year-old hasn't
got a launch pad yet, but news is Aamir Khan will do the needful in 2013.

D VARUN DHAWAN David Dhawan's
23-year-old son will kickstart his Bollywood career with Karan Johar's forthcoming comedy film Student of the Year. Shot across Shimla, Mussoorie and Kashmir,Johar has gone all out to make sure that his first film without Shah Rukh Khan in the lead will be a smash hit. Buzz is co-producer Shah Rukh and Kajol will do a cameo in the film.

D ALIABHATT
Mahesh Bhatt and Soni Razdan's daughter Alia Bhatt, 18, a former student of Jamnabai Narsee School, Mumbai, will star opposite Varun Dhawan in Student of the Year.A proud Razdan says,"She's very lucky.

(FROM LEFT) SHROFF, KAPOOR, BHATT, DHAWAN

Dhamaal and Rascals in a bid to become more market-friendly. It's paid off. She has landed herself a role as a mutant in Rakesh Roshan's Krrish 3, but not before she tries to recapture the magic of the manic Tanu in the sequel to Tanu Weds Manu. Then there is Priyadarshan's action thriller Tezz where she is paired opposite Ajay Devgn as his wife, and Sanjay Gupta's Shootout At Wadala where she will step into a role vacated by Balan. She replaces Balan in Abhishek Choubey's sequel Dedh Ishqiya as well. None of this would be possible without the rise of the auteur. Like Dibakar Banerjee, who has just completed Shanghai, pushing his cast and crew to the limit to finish filming his political thriller in one month. He often shot till late into the night, mak-

ing his homesick team hate him at times. They were already cranky at being deprived of non-vegetarian food in small Maharashtrian villages that served only vegetarian food. The frantic pace continues even in post-production. He is still screaming at someone as he answers the phone from a Mumbai studio. "Sorry. I just came out of the final edit of Shanghai," he offers by way of an explanation. Inspired by Z, a book by Greek writer Vassilis Vassilikos, Shanghai brings together his Oye Lucky! Lucky Oye! actor Abhay Deol, Kalki Koechlin and Hashmi, whose popularity as a serial kisser created a crowd control nightmare as they shot in Baramati and Latur. He also turned the petite Kalki into an extremely passionate young girl Shalini

who assaults people when she is angry, making her whack an actor with a vessel for an entire day to get a shot that looked adequately convincing to him. "He kept saying `nahin, ye asli nahin dikh raha, ek baar fir se maaro, aur zor se maaro, real dikhna chahiye'. By the end of the day I couldn't move from having swung my arm so many times. The next day I developed a back problem," recalls Kalki, who effortlessly switched from the dark angst of Shaitan to the romantic lightness of Zindagi Milegi Na Dobara in 2011. Filmmakers are driving their heroines harder than ever before. In Barfee, shot across Darjeeling, Kolkata, Mumbai and Bengal, Basu incorporated guerrilla shooting to make the film look as real as possible. "There was this particular scene Ranbir and I shot at 6 a.m. at Howrah Bridge sabzi mandi," recalls Priyanka. "We rode across on a cycle all decked up as our characters. The reactions we saw from people were really funny." In Kahaani Balan's baby bump is prosthetic, which would put pressure on her back when she sat or got up, making the strain on her face look all the more authentic. Kabir Khan, director of Ek Tha Tiger, said Katrina worked extra hard during 100 days of shooting that took them from Dublin, Ireland, to Havana, Cuba, and Istanbul and Antalya in Turkey. She was also recognised wherever she went. Even in Havana, says Kabir Khan, where Pakistani medical students would drive for nine hours and queue up outside Katrina's hotel, the iconic Nacional, to catch a glimpse of her and Salman. Increasingly, director Rohan Sippy says, Bollywood's women have to start stepping out of their self-imposed boundaries. They have to stop deferring to male stars and listen less to their endorsement managers. When they listen to their heart, they can be more than pretty accessories and pack a punch as powerhouse performers.
with Kruttika Kallury
For exclusive interviews with Kareena Kapoor, Vidya Balan, Priyanka Chopra and Deepika Padukone: http://www.indiatoday.in/cinema2012

26

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

NEW

