Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

RAHUL,YOU BLEW IT
ahul Gandhi's campaign in Uttar Pradesh was Herculean. He was a General without R a standing army, battling only to preserve honour in certain defeat. For that, he deserves credit, whether or not Congress pips BJP in the battle for a consolation third place on March 6. The quantum of his effort was, however, let down by several flaws in the campaign. The perennial Congress predilection of not projecting a candidate for chief minister has more serious consequences in Uttar Pradesh than elsewhere. The average voter just didn't know how Rahul intended to convert his words of promise into reality. On the campaign trail, Rahul said that he was not obsessed about becoming prime minister and that his obsession was, in fact, Uttar Pradesh. If that was ever to be a credible claim, Rahul needed to clearly present himself as the chief ministerial candidate of the Congress. He did not. He had already ruled himself out of the other job from where he could have possibly helped Uttar Pradesh, Prime Minister of India. If Rahul was implying a remote control arrangement, either in Lucknow or Delhi, of the kind Sriprakash Jaiswal had in mind, it simply wouldn't sell. The Sonia GandhiManmohan Singh experiment has been a disaster. And if he's around in Uttar Pradesh only as a larger-than-life NGO, people won't vote for it. Contrary to his thinking, Rahul needed to show that he was obsessed with being in the government, whether in Lucknow or Delhi. Politics at an arms length from government just doesn't work. The Uttar Pradesh campaign, win or lose, was Rahul's chance to showcase himself as a forward-looking politician for a new, aspirational India. Instead, he fell into the tired, old mould of caste and communal politics. He played the caste card as cynically as Mulayam Singh Yadav and Mayawati might have, by introducing his father's old friend Sam Pitroda as an OBC, never mind that Pitroda has no link to Uttar Pradesh. Rahul later said that it was his intention to present Pitroda as a symbol of hope. Why then did he not tell Pitroda's story as a rags to riches one rather than a caste to riches one? Rahul's failure to rein in senior party colleagues Salman Khurshid and Beni Prasad Verma as they played the worst kind of votebank politics is an even bigger blot. Rahul need only have recalled Rajiv Gandhi's infamous Shah Bano moment in 1986, when in the process of appeasing a minority of Muslims, a young Congress prime minister only fuelled the rise of the BJP while doing little to persuade a majority of moderate Muslims to stay in the Congress fold. Reservations in government jobs are no way to end backwardness among Uttar Pradesh's Muslims. If Rahul truly believes that reservations are the answer, he is unlikely to bring broad-based development to Uttar Pradesh. If, instead, he allowed the carrot of reservations for Muslims to be used as a cynical ploy to gather votes, he is naïve. It will only polarise votes on communal lines which will help revive a moribund BJP. At some point during the campaign, Rahul lost sight of what this election was really about. Lured by the temptation of a few extra seats, he may have sold cheap the gradually fading halo of a potentially transformational leader.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

THE UTTAR PRADESH CAMPAIGN, WIN OR LOSE, WAS RAHUL GANDHI'S CHANCE TO SHOWCASE HIMSELF AS A FORWARDLOOKING POLITICIAN FOR A NEW, ASPIRATIONAL INDIA. INSTEAD, HE FELL INTO THE TIRED, OLD MOULD OF CASTE AND COMMUNAL POLITICS.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Former India football captain Sailendra Nath Manna, who led the country to the inaugural Asian Games gold medal in 1951, at his Kolkata residence due to prolonged illness. MANNA
18
INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

KILLED Sunday Times veteran war journalist Marie Colvin, in shelling of the besieged city of Homs in Syria. Colvin was instantly recognisable for the eye patch that hid a shrapnel injury--a testament to her courage, which took her behind the front lines of deadliest conflicts. QUALIFIED Indian men's hockey team, for the

London Olympics by beating France 8-1 in the final of the qualifiers in Delhi. Ace drag-flicker Sandeep Singh scored five goals in the match, taking his total to 16, the tournament's highest. RESIGNED Professor Roddam Narasimha, the first and longest-serving member of the Space Commission, saying the

punishment of top scientists of ISRO over the AntrixDevas spectrum deal had demorNARASIMHA alised the country's scientific community. The Prime Minister did not accept his resignation.

