SIMPLY DELHI

Inside

Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie Chief Executive Officer Ashish Bagga  Editorial Director M.J Akbar Assistant Editor Insiyah Vahanvaty Editorial Team Rewati Rau, Ekta Alreja, Sibi Arasu, Shilpa Mehta, Ekta Marwaha Photo Editor T Narayan Photo Department Ravi S. Sahani, Reuben Singh, Vikram Sharma, Subir Halder, Sipra Das, Rashmi Hajela (Chief Photo Researcher) Design Associates Madhu Bhaskar, Vandana Nayar, Sheeba Narain Production Surinder Hastu (Chief of Production), Harish Aggarwal, Naveen Gupta Layout Execution Ramesh Gusain, Ravishanker Singh, Rajesh Kumar Rawat  Publishing Director Malcolm D. Mistry Associate Publisher (Impact) Anil Fernandes  IMPACT TEAM Senior General Managers Sonal Pandey (West and South), Preeti Kohli (North), Sunil R. (Bangalore) Kaustav Chatterjee (East) V. Somasundaram (Chennai) Jitendra Lad (West)

RAVI S SAHANI/www.indiatodayimages.com

COVER STORY

BUZZ

WHAT'S UP

Road Tripping

s-4

In the City s-20
A check list on where to eat and what to shop for

Enjoy!

s-22

Check out the best getaway options from Delhi.

A month of food, art, music and more
Cover by ImagesBazaar

OUR PICK of the month
Digital films galore
March 9 to 15 Film buffs in town can look forward to a hailstorm of digital films this month, with the UFO 0110 International Digital Film Festival back for its fourth edition. With over 126 films from 55 countries set to be screened, festival goers are bound to be spoilt for choice. The films will be covering a wide range of genres and are an attempt to showcase the quality of the digital film across the globe today. Apart from films such as Handover (pic right) that will be screened, awards will also be presented for the best works in the feature film, short film, documentary, special effects/ animation, student film and digital art/ installation categories. At Sirifort Auditorium, August Kranti Marg, Sirifort Road; 0110idff.com

Want to tell us about an event?A new store? A restaurant?People doing interesting things?Anything newsworthy? Please email us at: simplydelhi@intoday.com

