Signature
R O U G H

KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

BHARAT'S NEW BETAJI
elhi's most powerful people are least visible, at least to the lower orders. Priyanka D Vadra Gandhi makes an appearance only at her children's PTA meetings. Rahul Gandhi goes to swish restaurants only after everyone else has left. Sonia Gandhi steps out these days only to scold Manmohan Singh or get a medical check-up. Yet the city spends much of its time obsessing about them. The Gandhis do, after all, control the party that controls the Government, even if it has stopped governing. The city is urgently in need of a new cult. Cults have a wonderful habit of breeding followers, followers tend to generate all manner of fixers, and fixers inevitably breed gossip and patronage. Since the Gandhis are inaccessible to power brokers of recent vintage, these ladies and gentlemen tend to gravitate towards outsiders who find the foxy nature of the Capital difficult to negotiate. Remember the last time it happened? Yes, it was the Marans and M. Karunanidhi's children. The tussle for the affections of the DMK chief led to the rise of a certain statuesque PR professional given to light flirtation and heavy wheeling-dealing. Since then the Capital has had to focus its considerable speculative energies on the Gandhis, from their living arrangements to their vacation spots. Thankfully, now there is a new hero. An unknown quantity who has spent much of the past 12 years of his public life mingling with the natives in his village, Saifai. It's 280 km from Delhi but a world apart in possibilities. Akhilesh Singh has spent much of his youth there, even the years at boarding in Sainik School in Dholpur, just 70 km away. The probability of Delhi's ladies who do power lunches and men who finance them making their way to its dusty streets fills my heart with much delight. So as a public service, this is a primer to distinguish the current object of their attentions from their pet magnet of the past. Forget the trips to Dubai, hoping to run into Rahul. Try dividing your time between Akhilesh's Delhi ghar and Etawah gaon. The wheels Rahul Gandhi loves superbikes, Akhilesh prefers bicycles. It's symptomatic of how they keep fit. Rahul likes the gym, Akhilesh prefers the treadmill at his own home. So please forget the six pack and try breathing fresh air. Or better still, do five rounds of the hockey stadium in Saifai. The hangout It's futile hoping to catch Rahul's eye at Aman. Try hanging out at Khan Market. You might bump into Dimple Yadav, Akhilesh's wife, buying things for the home or their three children. The buddies High-profile dynasty MPs for Rahul. Low-profile friends from the past for Akhilesh. You could try befriending them, but first you'd have to know who they are. The sport Soccer. Rahul, as we know from years of watching him in the stands with beautiful Bollywood people, follows cricket. The education Not Harvard or Cambridge, but University of Sydney; not development economics, but environmental engineering. The honorific It's not Mummy but Netaji. So forget Tughlaq Lane, kindly get in the queue outside Akhilesh's Pandara Park home. Apparently, there are no curtains. So you can look right in. 

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

FORGET THE TRIPS TO DUBAI, HOPING TO RUN INTO RAHUL. TRY DIVIDING YOUR TIME BETWEEN AKHILESH'S DELHI GHAR AND ETAWAH GAON.

S I G N P O STS
ELECTED Vladimir Putin, as Russian president for the third time, with an official tally of 63.75 per cent of the vote. Opposition groups have reported fraud of many people casting PUTIN their ballot

more than once. RAISED Railway freight rates, for several commodities from foodgrain to fertiliser and coal, by up to 20 per cent. The revision comes just a week before the Railway Budget. BANNED Exports of cotton by the Government, to in-

crease supply of the natural fibre in the domestic market. "Exports against registration certificates already issued will not be allowed either," the Directorate General of Foreign Trade said. DIED West Indies cricketer Runako Morton, in a car crash. Morton, 33, had played 15 Tests, 56 ODIS

and seven Twenty20s for his country. SUED Former IPL commissioner Lalit Modi, by New Zealand all-rounder Chris Cairns, MODI after Modi alleged that Cairns had been involved in match-fixing.

18

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

