Soc iety RESTAURANTS

Kitchen Couturiers
By Avantika Sharma and Aditi Pai

BOHEME, Delhi
Owners Sukomal Juneja, 27 and
Tushaar Vijan, 26

USP Regular performances and events
for patrons to participate in.
student at Pune's BMCC College and Shastri was a professor of entrepreneurship and finance at Symbiosis. A passion for food, particularly eggs, brought them together to start this eggspeciality restaurant in Kothrud. A former national-level tennis player, for years Deshpande's day used to start with four egg whites. "We wanted to make eggs innovative and fun. But it was a challenge since we were both new to the industry. We didn't know how to draw up an exciting menu, how to set up a kitchen or even find the proper location," says Deshpande. The restaurant now has 110 items on the menu, including 15 types of omelettes. For IIM graduates Prateek Chaturvedi, 32 and Suketu Talekar, 33, it was a night at a Singapore pub in 2004 that transformed them into entrepreneurs. Over mugs of beer, the friends, who were then working with Proctor and Gamble, conceptualised The 1st Brewhouse (Doolally on Tap!), a microbrewery styled on the lines of similar fresh beer places they frequented in Singapore. "This was unexplored territory in India and people would enjoy the experience just as we did," says Talekar, 33. A year later, they quit their well-paying jobs and returned to Pune. They leased a 5,500 sq ft space at the Corinthian Boutique Hotel and tied up with German brewmaster Oliver Schauf, 40. "We were the first to ask for a micro-brewery licence, so the existing laws had to be changed," says Talekar. Doolally, slang for "going mad", serves fresh handcrafted beer ranging from apple cider to the classic ale. Schauf introduced brews made of local produce like bajra, jaggery and berries. He has produced 28 types of beers with new varieties being added every few weeks. Serve what you eat, run your own show, be your own boss. What could be more appetising?
with Prachi Rege and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

W

33, Prateek Chaturvedi, 32, and Oliver Schauf, 40 USP Maharashtra's first microbrewery that serves fresh handcrafted beer.
(FROM LEFT) TALEKAR, CHATURVEDI AND SCHAUF

SANDY'S CHOCOLATE LABORATORY, Chennai
Owner Sandesh Reddy, 26 USP Desserts, chocolate concoctions
and generous portions of comfort food.

Known for its desserts, chocolate concoctions and generous portions of comfort food, Sandy's attracts teens, adults and children alike to its branches in RA Puram and Nungambakkam. Completely selftaught, Reddy only serves food he likes. "It's difficult to cook something you don't eat and therefore can't taste. I don't have paneer on my menu because I don't like it," he says with a grin. When recession hit the world, chef Kaviraj Thadani, 24, had just earned his hotel management degree from Les Roches International Hotel Management School in Switzerland. "It wasn't the best of times for a culinary graduate to get a job in Europe," he says. So he returned to Mumbai in November

2008 and began working at The Leela, but he wanted to start his own venture some day. Two years later, in August 2010, Cool Chef Café, a family-run business, was born at Mumbai's Worli Sea Face. The café is housed inside the Thadanis' ancestral bungalow. "The property was unoccupied for over 10 years. With its proximity to the BandraWorli sea-link, it was an ideal place to start a restaurant," he says. A member of a different league, Vinod Shastri's Yolkshire in Pune is the fruit of a dream he nurtured for 12 years. When Varad Deshpande, 21, teamed up with Shastri, 49, to open it in June 2010, they made an unlikely restaurateur duo. He was a first year Bachelor of Business Administration

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

hen Sukomal Juneja, 27, and his childhood friend, Tushaar Vijan, 26, started looking for a space to open their own restaurant in Delhi, little did they think they'd find it one floor above their favourite restaurant, Gunpowder, in Hauz Khas Village. Juneja, who has a degree in economics from Lancaster University, UK, got the idea for his restaurant while managing a guesthouse owned by his father in Manali. "There are many restaurants there where you can just relax and enjoy an amazing view. I wanted a place like that," he says. That's how Boheme found its rooftop location. Juneja and Vijan are part of India's

new restaurateurs who want to create a space where food is served in equal measure as intimacy. Since opening in November 2011, Boheme has become one of Delhi's coolest places to soak the slow life. The restaurant serves European cuisine and Juneja's personal favourite is the Gambas A La Asparagus (prawns and asparagus). But food, delicious, but a tad overpriced, is not why most people visit Boheme. It's the relaxed vibe. Unlike the busy Yeti, located a few blocks away from Boheme. Owned by Ardahun Passah and Tenzing Sonam, Yeti was born out of hunger in March 2011. Both missed food from home. "There aren't many restaurants that offer Nepali and Tibetan food in Delhi," says Passah, 24, a journalism graduate from Delhi College of Arts and Commerce. Sonam, 28, learnt the art of running a restaurant while working as a waiter in the US, a part-time job while he gained a master's degree in business. Their inspiration came from Nepal and the wooden interiors mirror those of local cafes there. The duo also sourced paintings from Nepalese artists. Has Delhi's spice-loving, Punjabi palate adapted to the relatively delicate flavours of the Himalayas? "We had reservations about whether people will like the food, but they are very adventurous when it comes to food," says Passah. The story of Sandy's Chocolate Laboratory in Chennai is similar. Owner Sandesh Reddy, 26, baked his first cake when he was in Class III and made a mess. Two decades later, the engineer's love for food had not waned, and in 2009, he opened Sandy's.

VIJAN (LEFT) AND JUNEJA

THE 1ST BREWHOUSE (DOOLALLYON TAP!), Pune
Owners Suketu Talekar,

HK RAJASHEKHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

COOLCHEFCAFÉ , Mumbai
Owner Chef Kaviraj Thadani , 24 USP Has a night club attached to
the café.

68

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

New restaurateurs have turned their passion for food into a business. Without a degree in management.

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

MARCH 19, 2012  INDIA TODAY

69

