SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

IN THE CITY
Imperial aroma
Expect to find some great delicacies from different corners of India at this fine dining restaurant. In its new avatar, Daniell's Tavern at the Imperial Hotel explores the `culinary tradition of ancient India' and has given it a modern twist. With a live kitchen and lithographs by artists Thomas and William Daniells after whom the restaurant is named, a meal at Daniell's Tavern is a trip back to the imperial era. Your journey begins with the menu--there is East India fish curry, sole fish

STUFF

Watch that
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

RESTAURANT

cooked in traditional Bengali style; Memsahib's muse, shallow fried coconut and poppy seed dumplings and Railway Chicken curry, a popular dish served in the British railway refreshment rooms. The flavours are soothing and the meal is surprisingly light on the stomach. To maintain the original flavour, all dishes have been prepared by recipes penned down by the duo. Average meal for two: Rs 4,000 plus taxes without alcohol Timing: 7 pm to 11.45 pm At: Daniell's Tavern, The Imperial Hotel Tel: 23341234
 by

Check out Esprit Timewear's newly launched Snow White Collection, a range of wristwatches for women. Price: Rs 5,995 At: Arun Watch Co, Yusuf Sarai Tel: 9311539159

RESTAURANT

Changing tastes
Azimuth Chef's Studio is the latest entrant in the city's finedining scenario. With an aim to bring in international chefs and their specialities, this one-of-akind restaurant will see a new menu every three months. At present this über chic, dimly lit restaurant is serving celebrated Australian chef Matthew Wild's French delicacies. Though the menu is limited, it still gives you enough options to choose from. We began our gastronomic journey with the Caramelized French Brie, a confit of carrot, beetroot and watercress; mildly sweet but flavourful. We then sampled the Slow Braised Lamb, cooked with carrots, olives, coriander, pine nuts and raisin; the meat so tender that it melts in the mouth, while the vegetables still remain nice and crunchy. One can find

Rewati Rau

an unusual blend of Indian influence in the food at Azimuth--not in a non-authentic meal's-gonewrong way, but some deliberate flavours and ingredients. This fusion can be seen in the cocktail list too. We tried the exotic sounding Benares, which was basically a paan flavoured drink infused with vodka! Nicely stirred and served chilled, it was a good choice for the evening. Unable to choose dessert, we ended up gorging on two! We had the chilled Buttermilk Pudding with Cape Gooseberries, which we have to admit, tasted a bit like mishti doi. But our unanimous vote goes to the Caramelized Tarte Tatin of Pineapple with Toffee ice-cream which was superb! Average meal for two: Rs 3,000 plus taxes Timing: 7.30 pm onward At: Azimuth, The Kila, Seven Style Mile, Mehrauli Tel: 9999052802
 by

Scent alert!
This summer stay fresh with Police's new perfumes Pure Man and Pure Woman. Price: Rs 1,800 onward At: Shoppers Stop, Ansal Plaza Tel: 26258866

Spotless
Try Kiehl's newly launched Dark Spot Solution. The key ingredient used is Activated C which claims to prevent the skin from drying and reduces spots instantly. Price: Rs 3,500 At: Kiehl's Since 1851, Ambience Mall, Vasant Kunj; kiehls.com

Ekta Marwaha

PHOTOGRAPHY

Solitude in nature
Check out the exhibition Postcards from the Forest, a moving meditation on love and the threat of its sudden retreat by artist and novelist Siddharth Dhanvant Shanghvi. In 2009, after the end of an important friendship, Shangvi moved from Mumbai to Matheran. From this solitary reflection emerged

nine evocative photographs accompanied with text stories. The show's second part, Toy Train, comprises visual notes addressed to the artist's friend. Speaking about Matheran, Shanghvi says, "Its singular beauty, its solitude, because everything about it, its isolation, mood of another time is antithetical to the rest of modern India." At: Seven Art Limited, M Block Market, GK II Tel: 64640884

Sweet cravings
Stop by at Red Mango, the newest frozen yogurt entrant in the city. Take your pick from Original, Cinnamon, Blueberry, Sonoma Strawberry or Ghirardelli Chocolate flavours; and add a topping of your choice. Price: According to weight At: Ambience Mall, Vasant Kunj Tel: 40870194

