Na tion RAILWAYS
AFP

IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES
Railway Minister Dinesh Trivedi presents a forward-looking budget in defiance of Mamata Banerjee's diktat and is immediately put on notice by his party chief
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

t is unprecedented in the history of independent India that a railway budget is opposed by the party presenting it, which first demands a rollback of the fare hike and then threatens to get the minister sacked. As Dinesh Trivedi stoically defended the fare hike announced in the railway budget on March 14, his livid party chief Mamata Banerjee said she would not allow it. Exposing the tenuous state of UPA, the Prime Minister told the media, "If anything like this develops, we'll consider replacing Trivedi." He said this in response to a question about whether Trivedi would be sacked. The Government was faced with the threat of Banerjee walking out with her 19 MPs. She had two demands--that Manmohan Singh agree to a rollback, and more importantly, to get Trivedi sacked whenever she asks for it. Now that she has a commitment on the removal of Trivedi, she is waiting for a word on the rollback of fare hikes from the Government. Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee, who spoke to Banerjee to placate her, has reportedly told her that the Government will consider a rollback and give the Railways an additional budgetary support of Rs 4,000 crore. The Government had already assured the Railways of Rs 24,000 crore budgetary support this year. UPA core committee including the Prime Minister, Sonia Gandhi, Ahmed Patel and Pranab Mukherjee met at 7,

I

Race Course Road late on March 14 after Banerjee's fax to Manmohan. The official stand was that it is an internal matter of Trinamool Congress (TMC). Another ally, DMK, with 18 MPs, is also holding UPA to ransom over a United Nations Human Rights Council resolution later this month. It demands a commitment to vote against Sri Lanka for its alleged war crimes at a session in Geneva. "Banerjee is extremely vindictive. She will not be satisfied merely by takYASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

ing away Railways from Trivedi. She will want his head. It is going to be goodbye for Trivedi from TMC too,'' says a close aide of Banerjee. What made it worse for the TMC chief was the buzz in Government circles that Trivedi was actually encouraged to go against his party line of no-hike-infares by the Congress. For Trivedi, it was a conscious, deliberate and well-thought-out revolt. He knew that for Banerjee, it was an issue of ideology and she would never

DINESH TRIVEDI

"I cannot let people die in accidents. I would not trust my family to travel by Indian Railways."
DINESH TRIVEDI Railway Minister

agree to a fare hike. Despite warnings by Banerjee, Trivedi went ahead with the hike, knowing very well that he may not survive the rebellion. He insisted that the hike is imperative for the health of Railways and more importantly, for the safety of passengers. "The way things are in the Railways, I cannot guarantee the safety of passengers. I cannot let people die in accidents. I would not trust my family to travel by Indian Railways,'' he said, a statement that did not go down well with Banerjee, who as railway minister before him was known to put populism before everything else. Other aspects of the budget have irked Banerjee. Trivedi did not shower a bounty of new railway projects on West Bengal. Even the ones he did were either just surveys or projects based on the PPP model, something that Banerjee fought against in Nandigram and Singur. For a coaching terminal at Dankuni, proposed by Banerjee in the last budget, Trivedi announced only a survey for the project--knowing fully well that most surveys do not get a final nod. He said his priority was completion of pending and half-finished projects which require Rs 1 lakh crore. Political observers compare Trivedi's latest moves to that of V.P. Singh as finance minister under late prime minister Rajiv Gandhi. Singh and Rajiv had differences over raids on suspected tax evaders, including the late Dhirubhai Ambani. Singh was removed by Rajiv and then as defence minister, he began to probe defence procurement deals, including the infamous Bofors deal. He was ultimately dismissed from the Cabinet, after which he quit the Congress. Questions are being raised if a similar fate awaits Trivedi, who was with the Singh-led Janata Dal till 1998, before joining Banerjee's newly floated TMC. Trivedi asserted that for him the country was the priority, and then came his family, followed by the party. With Banerjee exerting pressure, the Railways is likely to continue its journey on the gravy train. Till the finances run out or the Railways is rescued from UPA allies. Whichever happens first. I

DASSAULT'S RAFALE AIRCRAFT

DEFENCE

JETDEALHITS AIR POCKET
Defence minister orders probe into biggest ever aircraft deal after charges of irregularities
llegations of irregularities in the Indian Air Force's (IAF) deal for 126 fighter aircraft are likely to delay, not derail the $18 billion (Rs 90,000 crore) deal. Defence Minister A.K. Antony ordered a departmental probe into his ministry's January 31 decision to shortlist French firm Dassault to supply the aircraft. Antony's move came soon after doubts were raised about the evaluation process by an MP. In January, India announced that Dassault had emerged as the lowest bidder for the contract to supply 126 Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA). The Dassault Rafale multirole combat jet edged out its closest competitor, the Eurofighter Typhoon, to emerge the cheapest bidder in the world's largest open tender defence contract. On February 27, Telugu Desam Party's Rajya Sabha MP M.V. Mysura Reddy wrote to Antony alleging deviations in procedure. Officials involved in negotiations say the probe will delay the deal by only a "month or two". Ministry of Defence (MoD) expects the deal to be signed before March 31, 2013. In February, MoD-appointed Con-

A

tract Negotiations Committee (CNC), comprising the defence ministry's stakeholders, opened negotiations with Dassault. The final proposal will be put before the Cabinet Committee on Security early next year. "The formula for calculating the cheapest aircraft was re-totalled three times, by MoD and IAF," an official told INDIA TODAY. The controversy arose because MoD used `life cycle costs' to select its finalist. As per this formula, the cheapest aircraft would not be the one with the lowest upfront cost. It would be the aircraft that worked out to be the cheapest over the aircraft's 30-year life cycle. The formula took into account variables like maintenance and engine replacement. Sources say the Rafale aircraft was $5 million (Rs 250 crore) cheaper than the Typhoon. Losing finalists like the European Consortium found fault with the formula even as European diplomats made fresh proposals to lower the rates of the Typhoon. MoD, however, signalled that the door was shut as it began CNC with Dassault in February. Reddy's letter to Antony has, however, added a twist to the tale. by Sandeep Unnithan

42

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

43

FINAL

