The idea A

-. OFB
In the world, nothing else matters more than ideas. Ideas alone can change the world. Ordnance Factories is one such idea, which has marched with times in the quest for indigenous technological capability for Armaments. To make the country self-reliant in arms and ammunitions. To build our capability for a Superpower India of our dreams.

that is

t the time of independence, there were 18 Ordnance Factories with a limited capability of producing some consumables like ammunitions. Now, OFB stands with its head high with 41 units spread throughout the country. By the ability to learn from anywhere and any source, OFB has acquired a portfolio of core-competence spanning across Precision Engineering, Heavy Fabrication, Metallurgy, High-End Optical Processing, Chemical Process Optimization, High Energy Explosives, Warheads, Fuzes etc. It is a one- stop provider of most land- system solutions for Indian Army. The idea that the core competencies can be delivered to create value for customers by mixing and matching in a number of ways. The output is an impressive range. To name a few, there are Propellants, Explosives, Fuzes, Rifles, Carbines, Machine Guns, UBGL, MGL, Mortars, Anti- Aircraft Guns, Shoulder-Fired Guns, Artillery Guns, Rockets, Vehicles, Tanks, Active and Passive Night Vision devices, all types of Ammunitions, Parachutes, Combat and Protective Uniforms, Tents, High-Altitude Specialized and Winter Clothing, These Armaments deliver unfailingly every time, in every battle. The idea that India needs to make its manufacturing strong. Metal and Steel Factory happens to be the first authentic steel manufacturer even before Tata produced steel. Machine Tool Prototype Factory (MTPF) made the first foray in making machine tools in 1953 for Defence sector, OF Varangaon created history when it started its 7.62mm ammunition plant within a short span of 5 months in 1964, a marvel in Project Engineering. The idea that OFB is the most dependable partner to support the Indian Armed Forces. OFB rose to the needs of the peculiar situation that the country was witnessing during Kargil. OFB delivered in the desired numbers as demanded by Indian Army. Befitting to the contribution made by OFB, the then Chief of Army Staff Gen VP Malik stated "Indian Ordnance Factories, which could produce ammunition and some equipment for which they had the necessary technology rose to the occasion." OFB believed in the idea; Give us a piece of land in any corner of the country, we will share the new prosperity with the people of the land. OFB started its plant at Medak, a backward district in AR Project Badmal in Odisha happened to be first industry in the Bolangir district. OFB started its units at Chandrapur, Bhandara, Varangaon etc. When IIT Hyderabad was scouting for a location, OF Medak has lent its facilities and support to this nascent institution. OFB believes in the idea of diversity. See the spread of the Ordnance Factories across the country. Look at its workforce. Representation is across caste, community, religion, state, gender etc. OFB unites India through the common thread of enhancing defence preparedness of the country. OFB nurtures the idea that it brings prosperity through growth. The turnover has almost tripled since Pre-Kargil years of 98-99. More importantly, OFB has grown in stature with impressive technological capability for undertaking the latest sophisticated Land systems solutions. OFs started from gunpowder and moved to TNT, RDX and now plastic explosives; Artillery guns with one-end closed to breech-loading guns; Flintlock muskets to Percussion trigger & Small Arms with night vision devices with automatic loader; small-caliber Howitzers with line of sight fire to ultra-modern Howitzers; traditional Tanks with limited firepower to highly sophisticated Tanks with nuclear/ biological/chemical protection capable of firing missiles; from Unguided Rockets to Multi Barrel Rocket Launchers. OFB strongly stood by the idea of unseen human potential. The first structured training through an Apprentice scheme to make technical hands ready for the industry happened at MTPF in 1953. OFB has created elaborate

SHRI S. D. DIMRI, IOFS, nd Chairman, Ordnance Factory B Director general OrdnwK

training infrastructure at three levels; at 39 units for Workmen, at 8 Ordnance Factory Institutes of Learning for staff and at National Academy of Defence Production for its executives. Employees join OFB not for job, but for career. OFB believes that Technological superiority is increasingly going to be the decisive factor in future battles. All of us know that war is fought in the battle fields, but won through weapons. OFB leveraged its competence in product and process upgrades through its 12 Ordnance Development Centres. The result; OFB has successfully developed many items like 40 mm MGL for Indian Army, Trichy Assault rifle, our own version of AK-47, Multi-calibre Milap Carbine, practice versions of Anti-submarine Rocket RGB-GO (Practice), RGB-12, for Indian Navy, Air -lifting apparatus for Ml -17 helicopters Indian Air Force and Sea king of Indian Navy, Platform for AN-32 aircraft, Long barrel .32 Bore revolver. OFB believed in the idea that the self reliance means higher value of issues from OFB, more indigenous solutions & low import content. OFB started Indigenous production of T-90 tank, MBT Arjun, Armoured Ambulance, Pinaka rocket and MPVs. OFB successfully came up with many new products like Commanders' thermal Imaging Night Sight for T-72, Driver Night Sight for BMPII,Water Bowser (2 KL), Base Bleed for shell 155 mm ERFB, A-7 Ammunition for the Indian Army ; CRN-91, Chaff Launcher Kavach for Indian Navy, 100-120 Kg Aerial bomb for Indian Air force. As on date, import content for T-72 is less than 5%. Most of the ammunition items except for the smart munitions and missiles are manufactured by OFB in-house. OFB believes in the idea that internal security is equally important as that of security against external aggression. OFB has ensured higher supply of MPVs, LMGs, Mortars, Rocket Launchers, Pump Action Guns, Pistols & Revolvers for Para-Military Forces. OFB has enhanced marine security through the punch of CRN 91 Gun for Navy and Coast Guard, Further, 12.7 mm Prahari has been instrumental in providing the fire-power against pirates. OFB believes in the Idea that future is not that something will happen to us, but it can be created today. OFB is undertaking Modernisation to facilitate and ensure stringent quality & higher reliability of products, quicker response, cost effectiveness, higher productivity, improved communication, migration from dependence on human skill to machine skill, and improved safety. OFB believes that any manufacturer should be responsible for the life cycle of the items supplied by it. Maintenance of weapon platforms requires repair and overhauling over the usable life span. OFB supplies vital spares and undertakes overhauling of Tanks and BMPs. OFB believes in the idea that it is accountable for the tax payers' money for all its stakeholders. OFB is in the process of implementing e-procurementto bring transparency in its Procurement process. In the first phase, Procurement of Materials, Plant & Machineries and Civil Works above Rs 10 Lakh is being made through this platform from 1st June 2011. OFB has improved

Transparency through a new Material procurement manual, ongoing implementation of e-procurement and e-Admin for E-payment of salary/wages. OFB believes in the idea that it cannot run business by creating a large negative foot print on our mother earth. OFB has ensured that it is responsible to the environment by implementation of ISO 14001:2004 in ten factories. Balance units are on their way to get the certification. Many of the OFs are maintaining power factor close to unity, thanks to its energy conservation efforts. OFB believes in the idea that performance speaks. A rather media-shy organisation, OFB does not believe in self-propagating its bandwagon. Many of its units like OF Muradnagar& Medak, High Explosive Factory, Kirkee & National Academy of Defence Production have received Golden Peacock National Award. Recently, Grey Iron Foundry has received award for energy conservation from Ministry of Power & OF Oehu Road has received Rakhsha Mantri's Excellence Award. OFB is neither a public sector, nor is a profit making corporate. The relationship between Indian Armed Forces and OFB is not that of buyer and seller. OFB supplies on a mutually agreed price based on the cost with the disciplined benchmark of market. The production line of BMP-II and LFG was closed due to lack of orders for many years. As Indian Army ordered such equipments, OFB quickly revived the line and commenced supply of the items. OFB believes in the idea of sound corporate performance with responsibility of the model employer. Visit any factory. See the vibes of its employees, passion of the management to reach new heights, spotlessly clean shop-floor buzzing with activity, assembly of workmen doing Kaizens for making foolproof (PokaYoke) systems, latest assembly lines, huge displays of quality and performance charts reminding of the big task ahead. Visit its Townships. Wide roads, sprawling greeneries, fully-equipped hospitals, lively educational institutions, huge sports-complexes, new look quarters and markets. As OFB completes 210 momentous years, it believes in the idea of dreams. Its vision is to establish itself as one of the leading solution-providers in the field of land-systems. S D Oimri, DGOF & Chairman, Of B shared "It is indeed a matter of great satisfaction that together we have built temples c' engineering that will continue to create growing value for our shared tomorrows. Winning the trust of the customer has been our greatest achievement. Fulfilling national objective of self-reliance of land-systems has been our significant accomplishment Innovation and adopting new technology have given OFB an opportunity, to grow exponentially. We are on course to achieve new milestones year after year. Thanks to the support of our valued customers & Ministry of Defence, OFB is set to double its turn-over in 2017 from 2012. OFB has the imagination to dream and convert its vision to actions on ground. OFB is a, dream come true, for the legendary visionaries propelled by the imagination of people of India. OFB is an idea that speaks through the language of performance. OFB is an idea that would grow; triggered by our resolve and a farsight."

OFB believes in the idea that performance speaks.
A rather media-shy organisation, OFB does not believe in self-propagating its bandwagon. Many of its units like OF Muradnagar& Medak, High Explosive Factory, Kirkee, National Academy of Defence Production have received Golden Peacock National Award. Recently, Grey Iron Foundry has received award for energy conservation from Ministry of Power & OF Dehu Road has received Rakhsha Mantri's Excellence Award.

Of GLORIOUS SERVICE

