BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THREE IS A CROWD
hat is the difference between the Third Front, that pressures. But, schooled by Gandhi, he also knew that states jaded name for an amoebic coalition that is never needed their space in a federation, and gave what he conquite sure which part has fallen off and what sidered necessary without releasing Delhi's grip. His daughter, Indira Gandhi, watched the fires rise in has joined up, and a Federal Front, currently being nourished at quickening pace from embryo to entity by Tamil Nadu, Punjab and Kashmir, and wrenched the balOrissa's Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik, with silent help ance away from parity. Perhaps with good intentions, she from present and future allies? began to confuse the party with the nation, and the nation As numbers go, 3 is a bit pathetic. It neither has the with herself. When regional parties displaced Congress, she authority of 1 nor the wistful, almost romantic, regret of 2. equated state pride with secession. She accused N.T. Rama Third can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Think of your- Rao, who upturned Congress in Andhra Pradesh, of weakself as third and there is little chance of anyone else ening India. She dismissed elected non-Congress governpromoting you to anything higher, least of all a wary, ments with abandon. Some victims made her life easier by sceptical electorate. Third Fronters may be realists, but are a wretched display of irresponsibility in governance. The depressingly devoid of ambition, the one catalyst essential issue, however, was not performance but Constitutional for a quantum leap forward in public life. Their past traps principle. A rally and resolution of opposition parties in them in the present instead of preparing them for the 1983 at Srinagar marked a turning point in the debate; the future. Success demands a vision driven by horizons, and a country began to appreciate what non-Congress parties mind that can plot a careful route map to destination. Care were saying. This shift towards federalism was impeded by is compulsory, because such a journey is fraught with Mrs Gandhi's assassination in 1984, but by the 1990s the momentum had become irreversible. An ironic conseaccidents. An idea is the vehicle. The Federal Front is driven by a powerful concept that quence was that the Congress itself became a regional anchors India's Constitution. It has not been cherry-picked party. But its heart remained centripetal. It was almost inevitable that re-election in 2009 would from a foreign doctrine, or generated from a naïve computer. It has also been at the heart of an intense political de- reinvigorate the Congress' leave-India-to-us approach. Regional parties believe that Congress is not only partisan in bate for at least four decades. Federalism was a fundamental tenet of Gandhian ideo- disbursement of financial resources, but also a bully. Whether logy, as the Mahatma moulded the Congress creed from a the issue is a Lokpal or the National Counter Terrorism manifesto for revolution to a charter for evolution through Centre, states have been repeatedly forced to defend their the seminal 1930s. Congress needed to shift focus once it rights. Mamata Banerjee is a vocal part of this anger. The Federal Front may be a coalipassed the independence resolution at SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Lahore in 1930; freedom had to mean tion of small parties searching for something more than departure of the power, but power for a purpose: To govBritish. The party required a blueprint ern India as a partnership rather than for a new, free India. Our Constitution, entitlement. It is an alternative vision of adopted in 1950, is the apotheosis of India. This is not a flippant Front. ideas debated by Congress between The next General Election will 1930 and 1947. India became a federtest whether the voter has lost his ation of states, an umbrella under mistrust of small parties. Small is a whose shade the people would find a comparative term. It had one meaning post-Raj social cohesion and economic when Congress was a giant; small progress. Every spoke was equal, has become much bigger now that and the weight of governance rested both Congress and BJP are in the 100150-seat band. In 1967, the towering with the states. (politically and physically) Biju The first generation of India's leadPatnaik, a front-rank freedom fighter ers did not abandon the principle after Federal Front may be a and friend of Nehru, became a found1947, but could not be faulted for being coalition of small parties ing father of regional assertion when wary of its consequences after the acrid experience of partition. Jawa- searching for power, but power he erased Congress rule in Orissa. harlal Nehru had witnessed the horfor a purpose: To govern India Forty-five years later, his son Naveen Patnaik has seeded an idea that could rific tragedies that centrifugal forces as a partnership rather than capture Delhi. His battle will be an had visited upon the Indian people. He entitlement. It is an exhilarating episode in the advance of realised that the creation of Pakistan Indian democracy. had not exhausted the strength of such I alternative vision of India.

W

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

70

