Cover Story

ECONOMY

Growth Stalls
Government has projected growth of 6.9% for 2011-12

By Dhiraj Nayyar

8.5 7.6

8.3 7.8

7.7

6.9

6.1

Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2010-11

Q1 Q2 Q3
2011-12

All figures are in %

Inflation Persists
The rate of price rise is still uncomfortably high
9.54 9.68 9.74 9.06 9.44 9.22 9.78 10 9.87 9.46

inance Minister Pranab Mukherjee is UPA's man with the political Midas touch. He needs to lend some of that magic to lift the economy out of its morass. By the Government's own estimate, the economy is expected to grow by a mere 6.9 per cent in 2011-12, a sharp decline from 8.4 per cent in 2010-11. Inflation remains uncomfortably high at over 7 per cent. Investor sentiment has been suffocated in the last one year by policy paralysis and

F

All figures are in %

Services Lead
Manufacturing and mining pulled down overall growth in 2011-12
Agriculture, forestry , fishing Mining , quarrying Manufacturing Electricity, gas,water supply Construction Trade, hotels, transport , communication Finance, insurance, real estate, business services Community. social and personal services

2.5 -2.2 3.9 8.3 4.8 11.2 9.1 5.9
Source: CSO

All figures are in % and are advance estimates for 2011-12

TRAPPED

corruption. There is a real danger that the Indian economy may get trapped in a middling growth trajectory of 6-7 per cent, instead of raising the bar to 9-10 per cent. The stalling economy needs a kick-start immediately. Two decisions could help boost sentiment--measures to liberalise capital markets and a credible reduction in fiscal deficit. It will, however, take more than one Budget speech to push up India's growth trajectory. The last time India grew at 9 per cent in the mid-2000s, the global economy was booming. It is unlikely to witness the same for the next five years. A serious reformist effort will have to be made on the domestic front in solving fundamental bottlenecks which prevent the Indian economy from achieving its true potential. The challenges in labour-intensive industry, agriculture, power, roads, skill gaps and food subsidies will not be solved by budgetary allocations. Only radical changes in policies, rules, incentives and delivery mechanisms, a second wave of reforms after 1991, can extract these crucial sectors from the low equilibrium trap they have been stuck in for many decades. But the finance minister may himself be in a trap.The political environment is not conducive to reform. The Sonia Gandhi-led Congress party puts its weight behind populist spending schemes like the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) and Right to Food, which may or may not get votes, but certainly do nothing for the health of the ailing economy. At least one crucial ally of UPA, the Trinamool Congress, has ruled out support for any reformist measures. There is little chance that an arrogant Congress will reach out to BJP to help it pass pro-liberalisation legislation. The economy will, more likely than not, remain mired in status quo for the remaining length of the UPA Government's term. The truth of our economy is only partly measured by statistics. Here's a look at ground reality.

A single Budget cannot solve the most serious problems of the Indian economy. A sustained reform effort is necessary to lift India to 10 per cent growth path.

Feb 11 Mar 11 Apr 11 May 11 Jun 11 Jul 11 Aug 11 Sep 11 Oct 11 Nov 11 Dec 11 Jan 12 Feb 12

7.47 6.55 6.95

Cover Story

ECONOMY
date back to the 1940s and 1950s, and are carryovers from the British era. There is a fair degree of unanimity across the Indian industry on the need to change the laws, particularly those sections which prevent hire and fire. But the prospect of reform in labour laws is bleak. Yashwant Sinha was the only finance minister to talk about labour law reform in his Budget speech in 2002. He was forced to beat a hasty retreat by his own party. There are other government-induced distortions in the labour-intensive small and medium enterprise sector. There is a perverse incentive to remain small rather than scale up to medium and large. The Government offers excise tax exemption for units with an annual turnover of less than Rs 1.5 crore. If a unit goes one rupee above that, it has to pay 10 per cent tax. The policy encourages uneconomical units and prevents a level-playing field. Small businesses are also hurt by harassment from the Government. Even if there is full compliance, inspectors of pollution, electricity, labour still extract money. Says Amit Goswami, 41, proprieter of Euroforge in Jalandhar, "I have to travel in India and abroad to find buyers. Each time, I worry what will happen if a government inspector lands up at my factory." In the absence of a strong labourintensive manufacturing sector, it's no wonder that 52 per cent of India's workforce continues to languish in the agriculture sector, contributing to only 15 per cent of GDP.

Misplaced policies have made labour-intensive industry uncompetitive vis-a-vis China. In Jalandhar, a hub of small scale labour-intensive manufacturing in India's most prosperous state, Punjab, the outlook is grim. Jalandhar's manufacturers, who specialise in sports goods, industrial valves, hand tools and shoes, are mortally afraid of competition from China. The threat has eased a bit because wages are finally rising in China. But according to Mukul Varma, 30, director of Savi International, India's largest manufacturer of footballs and rugby balls, "The Chinese sell at prices at least 20-25 per cent less than ours." India's sports goods exports are worth Rs 600 crore a year, which, says Varma, is less than 1 per cent of the global market. Indian industry can be the world's best. Varma knows: His rugby balls were used at the Rugby World Cup in 2011. Anupam Khanna, 45, proprietor of Valvco International, a small scale unit manufacturing industrial valves, is critical of the UPA Government's pet NREGA which gets additional funding in the Budget every year. This, he says, has seriously impeded the availability of cheap labour. "Till three or four years ago, we had no trouble getting labour. Now, even if I offer wages well above the minimum level, I get no migrant labour from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar," says Khanna. He argues that if the Government has money to spend, it would be better advised to train workers and give them necessary skills to find factory jobs. Anuj Pasricha, 44, owner of sports goods firm Soccer International, says he is willing to offer a wage at which workers will choose him over NREGA, but he is worried about productivity. "In China, 22 workers produce 500 footballs a day. In India, it takes 100 people to produce the same number." Stringent laws are also a deterrent to hiring labour. India's labour laws
STRINGENT LABOUR LAWS FORCE INDUSTRY TO EMPLOY MACHINES INSTEAD OF WORKERS

KAUSHIK DEKA/www.indiatodayimages.com

PROBLEMS MADE IN INDIA

SEVEN YEARS AFTER IT STARTED, WORK ON THE GUWAHATI-SHILLONG HIGHWAY IS STILL ON

Traffic Jam
India lags behind China in expressways by miles.

In Slow Motion
Industry's share in GDP has gone up only marginally in the last 20 years.

9,000 km
road construction is planned for 2012-13 to make up for earlier delays.

Men at Work
Total length of roads constructed rose only 8.6% in 2011 from 2010.

24% 10%

27% 14%

``

SMART SOLUTIONS
Manufacturing

Country

Length (km)

Ensure manufacturing units get uninterrupted supply of power through the year.

Reduce interest rates which are currently a huge burden.
Reduce land cost as it raises cost of expansion plans.
Aman Rathee Director,ASK Automotive, Manesar

LOWWAYTO HIGHWAY
Turf wars, green clearances and dodgy contractors hamper India's road network. In Assam, it has taken the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) almost seven years to construct a fourlane road across a 19-km stretch of National Highway 37. The project is not

Target Achieved 1,258 km

2,500 km

India China

200 65,065

Source: PINC research

1991

2011

Share in GDP Share in employment

40%
of manufacturing output is contributed by micro, small and medium scale industries that hire almost 60 million people.

Factory Failure
Growth in industrial output has declined at an alarming pace since 2011.

complete yet. The location is not a remote area: It's an economically and strategically vital stretch between Guwahati and Sonapur which connects Dispur with five North-eastern states. The project started in September 2005 and was slated for completion by June 2009. It is expected to be complete, as on January 31, by May. The Government says environment clearances are a problem. Critics say that the delay benefits contractors at the expense of NHAI. The delay has serious economic costs for the private sector. Says Pulak Goswami, president, Assam Motor Transport Association, "The national average of road construction is 12-13 km daily. But in Assam, not

9.7 5.9 3.7 3.4 2.5
Nov'11 Sep'11 Oct'11

6.8 2.5
Dec'11 Jan'12

``
AFP PHOTO

SMART SOLUTIONS
Roads

Appreciate site conditions to ensure faster construction.

Ensure quick resolution for various projects facing difficulty in starting up.
Give longer concession period so as to accommodate a lower toll rate.
K.Venkatesh CEO of Larsen & Toubro Infrastructure Development Projects, Delhi

All figures are in %

-5

Index of Industrial Production Source: Government of India
Graphics: MADHUMANGAL SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

even 50 km is built in a year. Due to bad roads, especially at exit points of Guwahati, the life of our vehicle tyres is reduced to 15,000 km, while it should be at least 40,000 km." He adds, "The 96-km stretch from Guwahati to Shillong should not take more than four hours. It takes us 8-10 hours." Instead of focusing on building highways, the Government runs a Central Transport Subsidy Scheme in the North-east that came into effect from July 15, 1971, and which is a classic example of self-sustaining, misguided intervention that persists over a long period of time. Under the policy, the Government reimburses between 50 and 90 per cent of the costs of transporting goods across the Northeast. Between July 15, 1971 and December 31, 2010, the Government spent Rs 2,810 crore on transport subsidy in the North-east. Between December 1 and December 31 in 2010, the subsidy amount was Rs 371.07 crore. According to NHAI, the average cost of building one kilometre of a fourlane highway in India is Rs 10 crore. So, the transport subsidy of just one month could have been used to build 37 km of a four-lane highway. NHAI's woes are not confined to Assam. The 135-km-long Eastern Peripheral Expressway around the national capital, Delhi, has not taken off

20

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

NEW

``

Jun'11

Aug'11

Jul'11

``

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

21

Cover Story

ECONOMY
GAGAN JAIN

almost six years after it was commissioned in 2006. The project, which would decongest the Capital of vehicles simply using the city to transit, has been caught in a war between the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Roads, Transport and Highways. Planning Commission insists that the toll charges on the road can be oneand-a-half times the "normal" rate because it is a bypass. The roads ministry insists that it is a regular highway so no extra toll can be charged. The project languishes in the ongoing debate. The fate of highways in Assam and Delhi sum up UPA's pathetic record in building national highways. In a report released in the first week of March 2012, Investment Bank Pioneer Investcorp (PINC) said that NHAI would miss two critical targets--for award of road construction and completion of road construction for the financial year 2011-12. NHAI had wanted to award contracts for 7,300 km of national highways in this financial PINC year. According to the report, it had only made awards for 4,285 km until the end of December 2011. The rate of progress on completion is worse. Of the 2,500 km to be completed between April 2011 and March 2012, only 1,258 km had been constructed until the end of December 2011. The Government has failed to appoint a full-time chairman for NHAI since the last chairman left office in the latter half of 2010. Coupled with a tussle between two key government bodies and serious problems with environmental clearances, the roads sector is caught in a vicious cycle of mediocrity.

A DESERTED POWER PROJECT SITE IN ALLAHABAD IS SYMPTOMATIC OF DELAYS

Short Circuit
Per capita electricity consumption in various countries in 2008.

Canada USA Japan Germany Korea South Africa Brazil China India*

17,053 13,647 8,072 7,148 8,853 *2009-10 data, 4,770 Numbers are in 2,232 kilowatt hour 2,471 Source: Ministry 779 of Power

Painted in Black
Coal India's production target falls short of requirements for 2017.

615 million tonnes
Projection

842 million tonnes
Requirement

POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Subsidised consumers, bankrupt electricity boards, little investor interest in power. Uttar Pradesh, India's largest state with 200 million people, has a serious power crisis. In the eastern part of the state, consumers receive only five to seven hours of electricity per day. The people

of Bundelkhand get an average supply of 12 hours a day. Western Uttar Pradesh is considered blessed to have 14 hours of power supply a day. This power situation is extracting a serious economic cost. Anand Kumar Dixit, 55, a sugarcane farmer of Sarenamall-Chapra in Kushinagar district of eastern Uttar Pradesh, says that production could increase by 100 per cent if he was assured 15 hours of power supply every day. "We have learnt to live without electricity and depend on diesel generators for irrigation and other agricultural purposes. But the price of diesel has increased from Rs 29 to Rs 43 per litre in the last few years, forcing us to minimise the use of even generators. The power crisis is hitting the services sector," he says. Mayank Khare, an officer in the Life Insurance Corporation of India and a resident of Banda town in Bundelkhand, says that work efficiency goes down dramatically during the summer. "I fail to understand how the electricity department plans power supply distri-

bution. They shut down the electricity supply between 12 noon and 5 p.m., when most of the work is done in offices. This brings down business by at least 25 per cent," he says. Uttar Pradesh's crisis may be more acute than in other states, but chronic shortages of power are common across India. For the country as a whole, the deficit between supply and demand at its peak in the summer months is 10 per cent. Worse, 30 per cent of total power generated is lost in transmission and distribution, mostly on account of theft. That exacerbates the deficit between demand and supply. The Government has done little to bridge the power generation deficit in the last two decades. According to Planning Commission estimates, the Government achieved only 50 per cent of its power generation targets over three Five Year Plans between 1992 and 2007. The target for the 12th Five Year Plan (2007-12) has already been cut by 20 per cent. The Government is likely to fall short of meeting even that

22

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

NEW

Satvik Varma

UPA LACKS GUMPTION FOR TOUGH BUDGET
A weak Government is unlikely to bite the reforms bullet
hostile political environment, a he Budget session of Parliatough Budget means political risk ment commenced with the that a weak Government with an Prime Minister appealing to eye on the next parliamentary elecall political parties to work totions is unlikely to take. In fact, gether and cooperate in meeting confronted with the threat of surthe challenges facing the nation. vival, it is doubtful that the Any other time, his statesmanship Government will introduce any would have earned him laurels, economic policy measures that but post the recent electoral debamay lead to a face-off. Hence, cle, it is the appeal of a weak regardless of the benefits associGovernment walking the coalition ated with permitting foreign direct tightrope trying to pacify its belinvestment in multi-brand retail, ligerent allies and conscious that or increasing foreign investment the Opposition will do whatever caps in certain sectors or the nethey can to exploit the situation. cessity of pension reforms, it apAdd to this our fiscal deficit, pears that the Government may be inflation, stalled growth and it wary of introducing any such inimakes the job of even the most tiatives. Politics is about numbers experienced finance minister unand the Government enviable. What is unlikely to introshould be the duce policy measures Government's priorfor which it doesn't ity and what does have the sanction the future hold for or which it cannot economic reforms? pass with its current Conventional political numbers. wisdom suggests Thus, viewed from that now is the time SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com most perspectives, reto reduce expendiforms will get relegated to the ture and cut down subsidies, espebackseat. Over the next few cially on fertilisers and fuel. Tax months, Government functioning receipts also need to be increased will confirm that economic policy and given that the goods and servis closely linked to politics. The reices tax (GST) has been stalled by ality is what's good for the country the Opposition, other tax reforms isn't always good for political parlike enlarging the service tax net ties, since it doesn't translate into should be adopted. But Mamata votes. The Government knows well Banerjee, UPA's mercurial ally, has that a weak approach will expose already threatened that any init to further attacks. A tough stand crease in prices is unacceptable. and bold measures can enhance Banerjee is so livid at her party its dwindling credibility and with nominated railway minister for the Government having little to having nominally increased passenger fares--the first hike in eight lose, we would want it to take deciyears--that she has demanded that sions in the national interest. But as Winston Churchill said, "It the UPA Government drop him from would be a great reform in politics the council of Ministers. if wisdom could be made to spread No doubt, the railway budget is a precursor to what one can expect as easily and as rapidly as folly." from the finance minister and a Satvik Varma is an advocate and tough Budget is perhaps the necesfounder of Independent Law Chambers sary bitter pill. But in the existing in New Delhi

Make environmental clearances available quicker.
T.V. Sandeep Kumar Reddy Managing Director, Gayatri Projects, Hyderabad

30%
of power is lost annually in distribution across the country.

of total targets for increasing power capacity were met during 1992-2007.

reduced target. The immediate concerns for the power sector are inadequate supply of coal--a key raw material for thermal power producers who produce twothirds of the country's electricity supply--and difficulty in getting environmental clearances. If it's willing, the Government could solve those problems soon enough. However, there is a more fundamental problem in the power sector which will take much longer to solve--it is simply not profitable enough for private sector players to invest in power generation because the main buyers of electricity, state electricity boards, are bankrupt. The cumulative losses of the state electricity boards in 2011 were Rs 70,000 crore. The 13th Finance Commission expects them to rise to Rs 1 lakh crore by 2014. Ninety-five per cent of the boards are owned by the Government. They have little incentive to curb the transmission and distribution losses because they know the Government will foot the bill. But the reality is also that Indian consumers, on average, pay much less

00 84

INDIA TODAY N AUGUST OCTOBER 22, 13, 2011 2008

NEW

``

T

``

SMART SOLUTIONS
Power

Build cost-effective linkages to coal pits for optimal use of domestic supply.

Bail out bankrupt state electricity boards.

50.5%

Cover Story

ECONOMY
AP

Numbers' Shame
Naukri.com survey shows that a majority of recruiters witness a talent crunch while hiring.

for a unit of electricity than countries which are richer, both in terms of income and resources. In India, the average tariff charged is eight US cents per unit compared to 12-15 cents in China, Canada, South Africa and the US and 19-20 cents in much of Europe and the developing world. If India is to meet its power targets, the Government needs to ask consumers to pay more, to privatise electricity boards to reduce losses and then to incentivise private players to invest in power generation. On current evidence, it will take populist governments a very long time to break out of the trap.

Sector IT sector ITES sector

Unhappy Recruiters

Construction sector Banking and finance Telecom sector

66% 62% 61% 56% 57%

training has meant massive shortages in skilled labour to work in factories. The Government needs to invest in vocational training if India is to avoid being a labour surplus country with a massive talent shortage problem.

MARKET BOTTLENECKS
Holes in the supply chain harm farmers, lead to food inflation. In Jalgaon, Maharashtra, banana farmers are pleased with the fertiliser subsidies provided by the Union Government. The farmers in the banana capital of the country used 6.20
AFP

6%

459
million
was the total workforce in 2004-05. Organised sector
Source: NSSO

DEGREES TO NOWHERE
Lack of quality control has led to skilled labour shortages in a labour surplus country. Mohan Kumar, 22, in Chennai checks his email repeatedly, in case he has received a message from a potential employer. Kumar graduated as an electronics and communication engineer from ES College of Engineering and Technology in Villupuram a year ago. He is one of many engineers in Tamil Nadu, who after spending four years and Rs 4 lakh on a professional degree, have no job. In February 2012, Kiran Karnik, former Nasscom chairman and member of Scientific Advisory Council to the Prime Minister, told the media that only 25 per cent of fresh engineering graduates in India are directly employable. A survey of 1,000 recruiters conducted by jobs portal Naukri.com in 2012 revealed 61 per cent of them faced a talent crunch while hiring employees. The gap between what recruiters were looking for and what candidates offered was big across all of India's booming sectors-- 66 per cent of recruiters in IT reported talent shortages, 57 per cent in telecom, 56 per cent in auto and 55 per cent in pharmaceuticals sector reported a similar skill crunch. Many youngsters who have professional degrees need retraining to be suitable for employment. That is a telling indictment of the educa-

94%
Unorganised sector

put that the farmers of Raver, Yawal, Muktai Nagar, Chopda and Jalgaon talukas produce, courtesy cheap fertiliser, needs to be transported quickly to the biggest markets in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. Farmers complain that absence of direct freight trains from their region to major markets means that their perishable produce does not reach the market on time. Says Sudhakar Patil, a banana farmer from Yawal, "Train is a cheaper mode of transport than trucks. It saves money as well as time. But unfortunately, the railway ministry does not ensure that the wagons available on time. The banana then ripens in the wagon instead of the fend market."
THE PROBLEM IS NOT PRODUCTION BUT TIMELY DELIVERYTO THE MARKETS

India produces around 7,50,000 engineers annually. Only 25% are employable.

25% 75%

Source: Nasscom MANY PEOPLE WITH ENGINEERING DEGREES HAVE TO BE TRAINED AGAIN TO LAND A JOB

Make India's failed 1,400 state employment exchanges functional.

Manish Sabharwal CEO,TeamLease, Bangalore tion, is yet to see the light of day. The many radical suggestions of the Sam Pitroda-headed National Knowledge Commission are in cold storage. There has been some limited effort from the private sector to bridge the skill gap. IT bellwether Infosys has started two programmes to re-train engineers for jobs. The first is a campus contact programme contest for students in 500

26

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

NEW

``

tion system which, barring a few elite institutions like the IITS and IIMs, fails to provide a decent education. Says Karnik, affirming the point, "Why do I (a candidate) need to go back and learn a bit of programming, mathematics and communication skills after spending so many years and money in education? I must say the education system, particularly in the last few decades, has not quite succeeded." The reform of the higher education sector was a priority for UPA 2 under the leadership of Union Human Resource Development Minister Kapil Sibal. However, three years on, the Government has failed to push new legislation through Parliament. The Foreign Universities Bill, which would help raise quality of education by attracting top universities from abroad, is languishing. The crucial National Council for Higher Education and Research Bill, which would revamp the outdated regulatory structure for higher educa-

``

SMART SOLUTIONS
Skill Gap

Reform the Apprenticeship Act of 1961 to increase the number of youths who learn as they earn.

Increase employability in college education.

engineering colleges via a portal, where they download projects and compete to solve problems set in a realistic environment, while the second is re-training of their own employees at a residential complex in Mysore. Srikantan Moorthy, 49, senior vice-president and group head, education and research of Infosys, pointed out that engineering students do understand concepts, but their ability to use them in the context of a given problem is "very limited". "The main focus of the education they receive is on examination. It tests the definition of a concept rather than solving a problem," he told INDIA TODAY. About 1.4 lakh students have participated in the campus connect programme, but Infosys can only absorb a limited number of engineers. The Government needs to re-orient the way professional courses are taught in colleges so that re-training is not required. The huge gap between the demand and supply of appropriate skills is not just at the level of professional education. The lack of emphasis on vocational

62% 52% 33% 15%

More for Less
Agriculture's share in GDP has gone down, yet it continues to be most labour intensive.

30% 60.4% of perishable
of the land area in India is under agriculture, of which 35.12% is irrigated. fruits and vegetables rot annually before reaching retail outlets.

Share in GDP Share in employment
1991 2011
Source: Government of India, World Bank

Source: Biological Sciences Journal

lakh tonne fertilisers in the last season, the highest in the state and third highest in the country after Guntur (Andhra Pradesh) and Gurdaspur (Punjab). However, what the farmers gain from fertiliser subsidies is ruined by the Indian Railways. The extra out-

Farmers elsewhere in India have similar problems. Transportation is inadequate and slow. Cold storage facilities don't exist. The Government could have made up for its own failing by allowing FDI in retail. Big retail would have the necessary incentives to invest

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

27

Arunabha Ghosh

MAKE IT PROFITABLE TO SAVE RESOURCES
Efficiency is the single most important area of reform
udget session 2012 threatens to be a stormy one for political reasons. But if there is one thing that should keep the Union Cabinet awake at night, not only for this session but for years to come, irrespective of which Government is in office, it is resource efficiency. It will be the single most important area of reform for India, if we wish to sustain high economic growth rates, increase energy access, guarantee food security, develop high technology products, generate employment, and do all this without breaking the bank and without jeopardising the sustainability of these goals. This is why resource efficiency not only matters for our finance minister, but for the ministers of petroleum and natural gas, agriculture, water resources, power, coal, chemicals and fertilisers, renewable energy, environment and forests, not to mention commerce and industry, and external affairs. Three elements of reform are top priority: First, make conservation of oil and gas more than a feelgood measure. Despite India's relatively good performance on energy efficiency, compared to other major energy consuming countries, it is vulnerable to high import dependence for oil and gas, expected to rise to 90 per cent of the demand. We are also exposed to West Asia far more than other major oil importers (63 per cent of imports, compared to, say, 46 per cent for China). If West Asia flares up, rising hydrocarbon prices will add to the $118 billion-plus (Over Rs 5,90,000 crore) import bill. Moreover, since domestic production of gas has not matched vaunted projections, the

``

SMART SOLUTIONS
Agriculture

Triple the Budget allocation for agriculture infrastructure and research and development.

THE SYSTEM LEAKS
Pumping money into subsidies without reforming distribution is a disaster. The residents of Kandakhal in Bolangir district, Orissa, are upset with the Government because of irregular supply of subsidised rice, their primary means of subsistence. Kandakhal is in the infamous Kalahandi-BorangirKoraput belt of Orissa which suffers from chronic poverty and malnutrition. The rates of poverty in the region are almost double the national average of around 35 per cent of the total population. Kandhakal's villagers are entitled to 35 kg of rice every month at Rs 2 per kg under the Government's Antyodaya Anna Yojana for families below the poverty line. They don't always get it. Says Baishnab Mahanand, a BPL cardholder, "The supply is erratic. We know that political leaders and their hench-

Rationalise and target policies and subsidies.
Ajay Vir Jakhar Chairman, Bharat Krishak Samaj, Delhi

in cold storage and faster transportation. But UPA caved in under political pressure. The average consumer pays the ultimate price. Other government policies also practice an implicit discrimination against the farming of fruits and vegetables. The Government offers a minimum support price for the procurement of wheat and rice. No such guarantees are available to fruit and vegetable farmers who are exposed to the vagaries of the market. That lopsided procurement policy encourages farmers to grow rice and wheat even in regions where growing fruits and vegetables would be more appropriate. That, in turn, reduces the supply of fruits and vegetables, leading to an upward pressure on prices. Farmers also tend to get a raw deal from policies such as the Agricultural Produce Markets Committee (APMC) Act which restricts access to mandis to a limited number of traders. The traders, who often form a cartel, then extract produce at a lower price from farmers. The only avenue for farmers to bypass local markets is to access export markets. The Government's propensity to introduce export bans the moment the prices of a commodity rise (in favour of the farmer) robs them of potential windfall gains. The policy dice is loaded against India's farmers. The Government needs to reverse its vision for agriculture if it is to become an engine of growth for the economy in the future.

Arunabha Ghosh is CEO, Council on Energy, Environment and Water

``

B

import burden will rise. What can be done? In short, make it profitable to save. Consider the following options: Reduced corporate income tax on energy conservation measures; VAT exemptions for re-using industrial waste as production inputs for energy efficient processing; accelerated depreciation benefits for capital costs incurred on energy saving equipment; incentivise purchase of smaller, more efficient motor vehicles; tax incentives for energy use reductions in commercial buildings; and income tax incentives for purchase of energy-efficient appliances. Second, develop a national water resources framework to integrate different water uses (across sectors), introduce basin-wide management, institutional reforms to increase service delivery and demand efficiency, broaden skill-base of water resource managers, and increase resources for measurement of water delivery and use. Third, adopt a strategic approach to sustainability finance. What is needed is a common platform to coordinate the actions of national and international funding channels and financial institutions, to develop a robust financial and technological market for sustainability technologies. This platform would operate at the strategic level (priority sector lending, concessional loans, long-term debt, R&D funds, payment guarantees); project level (non-recourse project finance, innovative infrastructure funds); and with ancillary support measures (information, skills development, investment incentives).

Focus on transfer of existing knowledge to the farmer.

DESPITE FOOD SUBSIDIES, RESIDENTS OF BOLANGIR, ORISSA, LANGUISH IN POVERTY

Burden of Subsidies
Ending subsidies would cut fiscal deficit.

Misplaced Priorities
Government spends more on food subsidy and employment guarantee scheme than on health and education programmes.

60,000 cr
TOTAL

Budget allocation Food subsidy

Rs/Cr

Food Fertiliser 34,000 cr Petroleum and oil PSUs

1.44
lakh crore

60,750 NREGA 40,000 Health programmes 26,750 Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 21,000
Source: Government of India

50,000 cr

NEW

STUCK IN STAGFLATION
Slowdown in investment,high fiscal deficit,project delays.Experts suggest ways to tackle them.
ASHIMA GOYAL Professor, Indira Gandhi
Institute of Development Research,Mumbai

LAVEESH BHANDARI Director, Indicus
Analytics, Delhi

RAJIV KUMAR Secretary-General,
FICCI, Delhi

SAUGATA BHATTACHARYA Chief Economist
Axis Bank, Mumbai

AJIT RANADE Chief Economist,
Aditya Birla Group, Mumbai

BIBEK DEBROY Professor,
Centre for Policy Research, Delhi

Q
G

What are the three economic challenges the Government needs to address?
Sustained and possibly burgeoning fiscal deficit in medium term. G Slowdown of employment growth. G Crowding out of domestic investors, retaining international investors.
G

Resolve issues where Centre and state jurisdictions overlap. G Restrict non-discretionary expenditure. G Reverse slowdown in public and private investment.

Black money and wealth stashed abroad. G Consistently high fiscal deficit of more than 4% of the GDP. G Lack of clarity on when goods and services tax (GST) will be implemented.
G

Cartelisation in mandis because of APMC Act. G State electricity board reforms and inefficiencies. G Lack of user charges for last mile utility services.
G

Delays in approvals and clearances that causes project setbacks. G Key hurdles for doing business: Construction permits and enforcing contracts. G Increasing role of money power in elections.
G

Reluctance of bureaucracy to take decisions. G Land acquisition problems. G Forest and environment clearance delays.
G

Q
G

What are the three solutions in terms of policy, administration and legislation?
Push through GST. Slash, or at the very least, freeze subsidies. G Privatise, not merely disinvest part of Government shareholding in public sector companies.
G G

Create mechanism for productive dialogue between Centre and states. G Legislative restraint on spending. G Remove administrative irritants that restrict private investment.

Give amnesty to those bringing back capital stashed abroad. G Privatise Air India,and break up Coal India into constituent companies. G A full compensation for any loss of revenue.
G

Enable competitive procurement for agricultural produce. G Enforce strict discipline in allocating Central resources to states.
G

G Give automatic approval for projects beyond a certain timeline. G Standardise construction plans; judicial reforms. G Bring clarity in political parties'accounts,comprehensive electoral reforms.

Set a 300-day deadline to clear forest projects. G Prime Minister's Office should lead in taking decisions. G Fast-track land acquisition Bill.
G

Forecast for 2012-13
Growth Inflation Interest rate Rupee-dollar exchange rate

8% 6% 7% 50

Growth Inflation Interest rate Rupee-dollar exchange rate

7% 7% 7.5% 47-52

Growth Inflation Interest rate Rupee-dollar exchange rate

6.5% 6% 7% 50

Growth Inflation Interest rate Rupee-dollar exchange rate

6.7% 6% 7.25% 49

Growth Inflation Interest rate Rupee-dollar exchange rate

7.5% 7% 8% 49

Growth Inflation Interest rate Rupee-dollar exchange rate

6.5% 6% 8% 50

CURRENT RATE Growth 6.9% (estimate); Inflation 8.86% (average of April 2011-Feb 2012); Interest rate 8.50%; Rupee-dollar exchange 49.17 men eat up stocks meant for us." The villagers have only limited demands. Abhi Bag, a BPL card-holder from Antarla in Bolangir's Titlagarh block says that wheat and sugar are a luxury. "All we want is our quota of Rs 2 rice. Let the Government ensure we get it." The Government spends approximately Rs 60,000 crore every year on subsidising food for the poor. The proposed Food Security Bill, which may well be the only big-ticket legislation announced in the Budget, will raise the annual food subsidy bill to Rs 90,000 crore. It will not be radically different from the existing food subsidy schemes promising 35 kg of rice and wheat at Rs 2 and Rs 3 per kg every month. The total expenditure will be more than four times what the Government spends on Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, its programme to universalise school education. Unfortunately, as the experience of Bolangir's villagers proves, much of the Government's money and grain are siphoned off by middlemen

30

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

NEW

Bill Emmott

POLITICS KILLS POLICY
India remains a much less flexible economy than China
tion rate should tell us is that India n the end, despite all the profesremains a less flexible, unlibersors' efforts to make it technical alised economy than China. Inflaand sophisticated, economics is tion is higher in India because RBI actually quite simple. It is politics is less prone, for political reasons, and human psychology that make to clamp down early on, but also implementing economic principles because the supply side of India's rather complicated. That is the economy remains rigid. In princiessential background to any conple, rising prices should stimulate sideration of India's current ecorising supply in a flexible econnomic troubles. omy, but India simply isn't. Why has India's growth slowed Why not? Because the Governdown, back to the disappointing ment has given up on liberalisaannual rate of 6-7 per cent that tion, given up on opening markets was typical of the late 1990s and and of untangling the cat's cradle turn of the century? Why is India of rules, taxes and other barriers failing to do what so many enthuthat prevent India from becoming siastic tipsters, both Indian and like the single appealing market non-Indian, said it would do, that it could and should be. namely overtake China in terms The on-off saga of large-scale of its annual rate of growth retailing is symbolic of the proband become the emerging lem, which is politiworld's hotspot? cal rather than The answer is economic. No sinencapsulated in a gle liberalisation single economic inwould be a panadicator: Rate of incea. But that one flation. Rapid price held the promise of inflation deters a triple-whammy: corporate investReducing prices; ment and weakens SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com boosting investhouseholds' ability ment in infrastructure; and speedto spend. The high interest rates ing up the process of delivering used by RBI to bring it under control raise corporate borrowing better incomes to rural India, costs too, as does the expectation which would have a beneficial of future inflation. India is never effect on demand. going to achieve double-digit anPolitics blew that one up, just as corruption and eventually the nual growth in real GDP if its inflalaw have blown up the mobile tion rate is prone to soar towards telecom licences affair. Then 15 per cent, as it did in 2009-10. comes the bizarre decision Oh, but this was forced by exfirst to ban cotton exports and ternal factors, I hear you say, it then, a few days later, to lift the was a time when other emerging ban. If you were a company, markets, China included, also had inflation worries. All true, but look whether Indian or foreign, with cash to invest, would you rush at China's inflation rate: Instead of soaring like India's, it peaked at to invest in a country with volatile just over 6 per cent and is now inflation and utterly volatile polidown below 4 per cent. India tics and policy decisions? Of thinks it is splendid that its inflacourse not. It is simple really, tion is below 8 per cent and loud even if changing that climate is voices are calling for RBI to loosen hard in the extreme. its monetary policy. Bill Emmott is an author and former What all this focus on the inflaeditor of The Economist

I

operating in a broken PDS. If the Government spends more money on subsiding food without reforming the distribution system, it is money wasted. The Government does have a ready role model to emulate. In Chhattisgarh, the government of Chief Minister Raman Singh has since November 2008 ensured that the PDS system works. The state has 1,577 procurement centres for foodgrain which are connected to each other and the department of food in Raipur via the Internet. The Government monitors the movement of grain from the procurement centres to the fair price shops. It has involved local communities in the monitoring process. So, when a truck is sent to a PDS shop, an SMS is sent to the village chief and local NGOs. In the SMS, there are details of the

``

SMART SOLUTIONS
Subsidies

Need to start with identifying the intended outcomes of different subsidies.

Strengthen the role of local governments in delivery.
Ensure greater transparency in processes and fund flows.
Yamini Aiyar Senior Research Fellow at Centre for Policy Research, Delhi

amount of grain carried in the truck. Truck drivers have to record the unloading process on their phone cameras and send it via MMS to the central server. The trucks are also equipped with GPS devices. Any deviation in their route is monitored. Pilferage has been minimised. UPA must take a leaf out of Chhattisgarh's book before it continues to waste money.
with Shravya Jain, Kaushik Deka, Piyush Srivastava, Kiran Tare, Lakshmi Kumaraswami, Sowmya Aji, Rakesh Dixit, Santosh Kumar and Rajesh Sharma

To read more about the Budget and Indian economy, go to www.indiatoday.in/economy2012

00

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 13, 2008

NEW

``

