Leisure
FA S H I O N BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

LADY SAHEB
Bite-sized actress Soha Ali Khan, 33, has joined the Saheb, Biwi Aur Gangster team in Tigmanshu Dhulia's sequel to his 2011 film. She plays Irrfan Khan's tormented wife. While two from the earlier cast of Jimmy Shergill, Randeep Hooda and Mahie Gill were maimed and shot in the first edition, all three will return in the sequel. What new twists and turns will the new saheb and biwi bring? Could brother Saif Ali Khan teach Soha a thing or two about violent brawls?

Together Again
Raima Sen, 32, director Rituparno Ghosh and Rabindranath Tagore unite again.This time, it's for a documentary on the playwright. A year ago Ghosh had directed Sen in Noukadubi, a Bengali film based on a novel by Tagore. Sen returns to the silver screen to play Kadambari Debi, wife of his elder brother Jyotirindranath, whom he was close to. She has been paired opposite Samardarshi Dutta as a young Tagore.

FOTOCORP

ART ACCLAIM
Stop motion videos are the flavour of the season. Delhi-based artist Puja Bahri, 37, used 6,000 photos to create one of her own. The video Maayaa recently won a gold medal at the eighth International Florence Biennale of Contemporary Art. "In 2010, I got bored of painting and started travelling and taking pictures. I was just experimenting with a new medium," she says. Worth it.
AP

Shooting Stars
India will be playing host to Oscar glitterati next month. Supporting actress nominee Jessica Chastain, 30, will be in India with 2010 best director winner Katheryn Bigelow to shoot her new film. Bigelow will recreate Pakistan's Abbottabad in Rajasthan for the film, which is based on the US Navy Seals who tracked and killed Osama bin Laden. First Oprah, now these two. Rajasthan is the new celebrity magnet for the world.

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND WHAT MATTERS
MUST PLAY MUST WATCH

Songs from Steve Jobs's favourite band, The Beatles, that are now available as ringtones on iTunes.
MUST STOP

Freida Pinto as Arab princess Leyla in the forthcoming Black Gold. Her costumes have raised eyebrows.
MUST IGNORE

Toast of the town Adele being cut off during her acceptance speech at the Brit Awards.


Tweeters who abandon all etiquette while addressing celebrities on the micro-blogging site.

Compiled by Nishat Bari and

80

Volume XXXVII Number 10; For the week February 28-March 5, 2012, released on Feb 27

Avantika Sharma

