So ciety TRIBALRIGHTS

THE AGENTOFCHANGE
A tribal wins freedom for his village through non-violent struggle

BHASKAR PAUL/ www.indiatodayimages.com

TOFA (RIGHT) WITH VILLAGERS IN MENDHA

bespectacled 56-year-old man in white kurta and dhoti is the centre of attention at the gram sabha of a tiny village, Mendha, in Naxalite-affected Gadchiroli district of Maharashtra. After a long struggle starting in 1987, Devaji Tofa, a Class IV dropout, has succeeded in transforming Mendha, a village of 430 Gond tribals, into a self-reliant village. His non-violent struggle has made Mendha the only village in India to get the right to maintain its 1,806 hectare forest and sell its products--mainly bamboo--for their livelihood. In April 2011, then Union minister of environment and forest Jairam Ramesh awarded community rights to Mendha to harvest bamboo under The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. He also issued the mandatory transit pass for sale of bamboo. Till then, the forest department was selling the bamboo. The villagers used to get Rs 6 for cutting it.

A

Now, every villager gets Rs 650 a day for cutting bamboo. And they don't have to pay the government anything for the produce except for value added tax on the sale of bamboo. The gram sabha, which includes one member from every household, now has the right to harvest bamboo. "In the last season, the gram sabha earned a profit of Rs 12 lakh from the business," says Kundan Dupare, 40, a lecturer of economics from Dhanora, 3 km from Mendha. The gram sabha is expecting to make a profit of Rs 60 lakh this year. It has decided to use the money for the village's development, including a state-of-the-art school. Tribals of the region have always depended on the forest for their livelihood. Their right was recognised by the state government in 1950 and a gram sabha was set up in 1960, but it had very limited powers, as the forest department continued to be in control of the harvesting and selling of forest

MENDHA HAS INSPIRED AT LEAST 400 VILLAGES IN GADCHIROLI TO GET THEIR COMMUNITY RIGHTS.
66
INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

products. Tofa and his supporters insisted on the empowerment of the gram sabha. He mobilised the villagers in 1987 for an organised resistance. The tribals launched a disobedience movement. They resisted outsiders from carrying out forest activities in the area. They also sold bamboo against the law. The movement forced the government to award their rights. Mendha has inspired at least 400 villages in Gadchiroli, where 80 per cent of the area is covered by dense forest, to get their community rights. Subodh Kulkarni, 38, an engineer from Pune, assists the villages in completing the paper work for getting forest rights. "Absence of knowledge prevents villages from getting their community rights. But since we have started making documents available, villages are coming forward," he says. Tofa has become a symbol of change. A signboard, placed near the gram sabha office in Mendha, sums up: "We have our governments in Delhi and Mumbai, but in our village, we ourselves are the government." Democracy under threat? In Mendha, it is alive and kicking. by Kiran Tare

NEW

