Na tion MAHARASHTRA

A poor showing by Congress in BMC polls has upset Chavan's bid to consolidate his hold on the state unit
By Kiran Tare

MUMBAI JOLTS CONGRESS
M
which recorded its highest ever tally with 32 seats, got its maximum councillors in the western suburbs of Mumbai, a pocket of sizeable north Indian population. SP, too, recorded its highest ever by winning nine seats. In the 2009 Assembly polls, Congress and NCP were jointly ahead in 132 wards. But they could manage only 64 in the civic polls. NCP has retained its 14 seats. The Congress-NCP alliance has suffered a setback across the state. In 2009, Congress had 473 members in 10 municipal corporations. In 2012, the number has been reduced to 262. NCP has been reduced to 266 from 396. BJP-Shiv Sena, too, have suffered a dent in their fortunes but to a lesser degree. BJP slumped to 206 from 267 and Shiv Sena came down to 227 from 373. Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) is the only gainer and has raised its
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

KERALA

NO COUNTRYFOR JEWS?
Kochi's Jews cry foul over deportation order issued to Israeli rabbi and his wife for conducting sermons

K

aharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan has blamed the Samajwadi Party (SP) for the Congress's humiliating defeat in the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) elections, results of which were out on February 17. "We lost because we did not accommodate SP in the alliance. Division in secular votes led to the defeat," he said. The transfer of Muslim votes to SP resulted in the Congress shrinking to 50 from 71 in the 227-member house despite a "historic" alliance with the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP). The results also show that north Indians, loyal Congress voters, have shifted to BJP. The Shiv Sena-BJP alliance retained its 17-year rule by winning 107 seats, seven short of a clear majority. BJP,

SHIV SENA SUPPORTERS CELEBRATE BMC RESULTS

numbers to 112 from 45. Senior Congress ministers Narayan Rane and Patangrao Kadam have raised their voice against the poll management and have trained their guns on state party unit chief Manikrao Thakre. The dissent in the party is getting louder. The loss has also upset Chavan's plans to wrest control of state Congress. "Balasaheb Thackeray will be inconsequential after February 16 and Shiv Sena will be an ineffective opposition party," he had confidently said.

The statement has backfired. The Congress high command summoned Chavan to Delhi on February 20 for a "discussion" on the poll outcome. While Shiv Sena is optimistic that the results would be repeated in the 2014 Lok Sabha and Assembly polls, Congress spokesman Anant Gadgil has a different argument. "Voters always prefer Shiv Sena-BJP in local elections but in the Lok Sabha or Assembly elections, their first choice is the Congress. We saw this pattern in 2007 and I am sure it will be repeated in 2014 too." It's still a half-full glass for the Congress. 

PADMAJA

ANDHRAPRADESH

Wrong Number
Court orders UIDAI officer's transfer for sexual misconduct
he Andhra Pradesh High Court on February 17 ordered a senior bureaucrat to be transferred from Hyderabad to Guwahati after charges of sexual harassment. Siripurapu Padmaja, 44, assistant director-general at the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) regional office in Hyderabad, has accused her senior, Deputy Director-General V.S. Bhaskar, 50, of sexual harassment. Ironically,

T

the order came on a petition by Bhaskar himself against a Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) report indicting him. In the court, UIDAI told Justices G. Raghuram and N. Ravi Shankar that findings of the complaints committee probing the charges are being complied with. The judges asked why the transfer hadn't happened. "She went to the tribunal to harass me. She appears to have a grudge

against me due to work distribution," says Bhaskar. He and Padmaja joined UIDAI in 2009 and 2010 respectively. The committee found that Bhaskar made abusive phone calls to Padmaja. Instead of taking action against him, UIDAI made Padmaja go on a six-month leave. She then approached CAT, which directed UIDAI to transfer Bhaskar within 15 days starting February 3. Bhaskar went to court against the CAT order. He says the committee was improperly constituted and its report was made without following procedures. He accused CAT of not giving him a proper hearing. CAT admitted there were errors in the constitution of the panel but said action should have been taken in the case. by Amarnath K. Menon

ochi's five centuries-old Jewish community, that forms India's oldest group of Jews, is left with no qualified rabbi who can read Hebrew, the language of Torah, the Jewish holy book. The Jewish festival, Passover, is from April 6-14, yet the community has no one to conduct the religious rituals at their famed Pardesi Jewish Synagogue in Mattanchery, the Jews' ancient residential area and now a major tourist attraction. The community's population has dwindled to less than 50 due to steady migration to Israel. To make matters worse, a rabbi and his wife, both Israeli nationals specially brought from Jerusalem in 2010 by the Kochi Jews, were asked to leave the country within two weeks on February 7 by the Ernakulam District Collector P.I. Sheikh Pareed for alleged violation of tourist visa rules. The couple, Shneor Zalman Bernstein and wife Yaffa Shendi Keing, as well as the synagogue authorities challenged the order, saying that they had valid visas to stay on in India till April 1. The Kerala High Court on February 15 stayed the implementation of deportation orders, directing the district collector to hear the Israeli couple's explanation and submit a report within a week. The couple appeared before the district collector and explained the matter, as directed by the high court. The collector submitted the report to the high court on February 21, saying that unless the Israeli couple's visas were corrected, they would not be permitted to carry out religious sermons at the synagogue. "They have tourist visas, which do not permit them to conduct missionary activities. Hence the deportation orders," said Pareed. He added, "Their inten-

tions do not appear suspect, for they seem to have sought permission to engage in synagogue services at the time they applied for their visas. But that has not been specifically endorsed in their visas, which may be due to procedural errors." The rabbi and wife have been living in Kochi since March 3, 2010. The Jewish community in Kochi is livid
M R NANDAKUMAR

(FROM LEFT) BERNSTEIN AND KEING WITH ERNAKULAM COLLECTOR SHEIKH PAREED

about the aspersions cast on the couple. "Some irresponsible newspapers have even portrayed them as terrorists who were involved in the Mumbai terror attack 2008. It is absolutely abominable. Please let us live in peace here," said Elias Babu, a member of the community.
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

50

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

51

