A PAKISTAN INTERNATIONALAIRLINES EMPLOYEE PROTESTS AT KARACHI AIRPORT

Neig hbours PAKISTAN
AP

BROKEN WINGS
n February 7, Pakistan Defence Minister Chaudhry Ahmed Mukhtar offered his resignation. The dismal performance of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), run by the defence ministry (Pakistan has no civil aviation ministry), had incurred the ire of the Upper House of Parliament. "I am ready to go as defence minister if PIA can be revived by my resignation," Mukhtar told MPs. He is quite right. The national flag carrier's problems are so deep-rooted that even his resignation will not help. PIA incurs annual operating losses of over 800 crore Pakistani rupees. It has accumulated losses of 10,000 crore Pakistani rupees. It holds the dubious record of the world's highest number of employees per aircraft: 497:1. Onefourth of its fleet of 39 aircraft has been grounded for want of spare parts. Cancellations, delays, technical faults, hefty debt burdens, political appointments, overstaffing, unprofessional management and poor service have pushed the airline to the brink. Its performance has been the antithesis of its motto: `Great people to fly with'. Water from the toilets seeped into the aisles of a recent London-

Rats on board. Toilet water in aisles. Pakistan's national carrier turns into an international embarrassment.
Islamabad flight. In July 2009, passengers of a 14-hour-long BirminghamIslamabad flight were terrorised by rats. The perilous state of Pakistan's railways has left domestic travellers with no alternative. On February 17, 2012, the captain of an overbooked Lahore-Karachi flight, PK 303, seated two passengers in the toilet. The old joke that PIA stands for `Please inform Allah' has come back to haunt them.

O

Turbulent Times
PIA is plagued by problems too

deep for quick resuscitation
 PIA incurs annual losses of over

800 crore Pakistani rupees.
 It has the world's highest

number of employees per aircraft, the ratio being 497: 1.
 One-fourth of its fleet of 39

aircraft has been grounded for want of spare parts.
 The government turned down

a 20 billion Pakistani rupees bailout package for its recovery.

Spun out of the private airline Orient Airways in 1955, the carrier performed well until the 1970s, when corruption and overstaffing began taking a toll. Despite being the country's largest operator on international and domestic routes, it has become uncompetitive. Political motives rather than policy have guided PIA's recruitments. It has hit its worst phase over the past five years, yet it hired a record 2,171 staffers from 2008-2011. "You can't expect the airline to profit with such a huge number of employees. The airline needs right-sizing. We are drafting a business plan which will soon enable PIA to regain its lost pride," Mukhtar told INDIA TODAY. The government turned down a 20 billion Pakistani rupees ($232 million) bailout package requested by the carrier on November 4, 2011, to aid in its recovery. The finance ministry said it would not continue doling out money without a clear roadmap for financial and administrative restructuring. PIA officials say they plan to buy 30 new aircraft over the next decade on five-year leases. Funding will be raised through financial markets. Airline officials say future profitability will continue to be impacted by factors such as rising fuel costs, currency exchange rate volatility, deteriorating economic conditions and security concerns. Clearly, there is nothing but turbulence ahead for the airline.
by Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad

58

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

