JAGAN MOHAN REDDY

Na tion ANDHRAPRADESH

Chargesheet against Jagan boomerangs on Congress as YSR legacy slips out of hand
By Amarnath K. Menon

CONGRESS UNDER SIEGE
he CBI's chargesheet in the disproportionate assets case against Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, 39, has silenced the ruling Congress in Andhra Pradesh. It describes Jagan's father and former chief minister Y.S.Rajasekhara Reddy as a co-conspirator to defraud the Andhra Pradesh government with the help of an official B.P. Acharya. According to the chargesheet, Acharya, the former managing director of the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation (APIIC), allegedly colluded by allotting land to two pharmaceutical companies and related entities "in a nefarious deal". Filed on March 31 in the

T

Andhra Pradesh High Court, the next hearing of the case is on April 9. With no direct evidence against Rajasekhara Reddy, the Congress is in a fix as it can neither attack Jagan's father nor speak in his defence. It is steadily losing its claim on the YSR legacy which Jagan is appropriating as his and of his YSR Congress Party (YSRCP). The Congress is also divided by internal squabbles that have reached a new high, forcing Ghulam Nabi Azad, party General Secretary in charge of Andhra Pradesh, to summon Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy and state party president Botsa Satyanarayana to Delhi and pull them up for misconduct. It has sent signals of the party losing

THE CONGRESS IS IN A CATCH-22 SITUATION AFTER CBI IMPLICATED JAGAN'S FATHER AND FORMER CHIEF MINISTER Y.S. RAJASEKHARA REDDY.
72
INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

support and creating apprehensions about desertions. While alleging that Jagan prevailed upon his father to commit an offence "to materialise the nefarious deal", the chargesheet states that Jagan made Rajasekhara Reddy commit a criminal misconduct. The CBI has charged Rajasekhara Reddy with criminal conspiracy, criminal breach of trust by a public servant, and cheating and fraudulent destruction of will, authority or public documents. Jagan has termed the chargesheet `fraudulent' and a calculated campaign to malign his father's name. He is touring the state intensively to gain as much political mileage and public sympathy as he can and portray the CBI investigation as a witch-hunt against him and his family. "I have neither gone to the state secretariat nor called up any officer there when my father was chief minister," says Jagan. He contended that "all land allot-

NEW

A PRABHAKAR RAO/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Na tion
JHARKHAND

SEATS FOR SALE
Preliminary findings confirm the Election Commission's worst fears of horse-trading in Rajya Sabha polls
harkhand has emerged as the ideal gateway to New Delhi for people who seek a berth in Rajya Sabha. Prominent businessmen Parimal Nathwani, former Reliance Group president, and Alchemist Group head Kanwar Deep Singh are two of four MPs currently representing the state in the Upper House. The trend began in 2008, when Nathwani, an independent candidate from Ahmedabad, won with the support of the ruling Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) in 2008. His influence was clear; only eight of the 17 JMM legislators voted for their official candidate, Kishore Lal. Kanwar Deep Singh, nominated by JMM, was elected in 2010. He won with 32 votes against BJP nominee Ajay Maroo's 17 votes, with two MLAs from BJP's alliance partner JD-U voting for Singh. Five RJD legislators also voted for the Chandigarh-based businessman during the last minutes of the voting. Singh has since switched sides to join Mamata Banerjee. His official profile declares him as a Trinamool Congress MP, a party that ironically has no MLAs in Jharkhand. The 2012 Rajya Sabha election might also have elected an independent candidate, Raj Kumar Agrawal, from Jharkhand, but the Election Commission countermanded the process following the seizure of
SOMNATH SEN

J

JAGAN MOHAN REDDY-OWNED SAKSHI TV'S OFFICE IN HYDERABAD

ments made by my father were for employment generation," and challenged the CBI to probe land allotments made by all chief ministers since 1995, beginning with TDP's N. Chandrababu Naidu. "When states such as Tamil Nadu and Gujarat give land to industries as part of industrial development free of cost no one questions the integrity of the chief ministers there. When my father allotted land to pharmaceutical companies at Rs 7 lakh an acre, it is being considered a crime," says Jagan. Jagan is marking time for the next round of 18 Assembly by-elections that have to be held by August end and possibly before the Presidential election in July, when the Congress is likely to get a severe beating. All except one of these seats were vacated by Congress MLAs supporting Jagan. If Jagan manages a victory in the by-elections, there are chances of Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy being nudged out of office, leading to deeper dissensions within the Congress. 

INCOME TAX OFFICIALS SEIZE RS 2.15 CRORE FROM A VEHICLE IN RANCHI

WELL-CONNECTED BUSINESSMEN USE THE JHARKHAND ROUTE TO REACH RAJYA SABHA.

Rs 2.15 crore from a vehicle linked to Agrawal. The money was recovered by Income Tax officials 150 minutes before voting was to begin for two vacancies in the Upper House. Agrawal, 49, is one of the most prominent businessmen from Jharkhand and is known for his proximity to many political leaders in the state. He has denied using cash in his quest for the seat. Nevertheless, he is the cause for the first ever cancellation of Rajya Sabha polls after votes had been cast on account of suspicions of horse-trading. While the Congress, Jharkhand Vikas Morcha and JMM had fielded their candidates, two independents, Agrawal and Kolkata-based real estate developer Pawan Kumar Dhoot, had also thrown their hats into the ring. The businessmen claim to be serving the nation. But many believe the charm of power takes them to the small state where `consciencedriven' MLAs ensure their victories.
by Amitabh Srivastava

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

73

NEW

