SIMPLY DELHI

Inside

COVER STORY

Pamper Perfect
Treat yourself at the best wellness centres in the city
ELSEWHERE

s-6

Out and About
BUZZ

s-15

Heading out? Then try these places

In the City

s-18

A check list on where to eat, play and shop
WHAT'S UP

Indulge!

s-22

A month of IPL buzz, art, dance and more

Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie Chief Executive Officer Ashish Bagga  Editorial Director M.J Akbar Assistant Editor Insiyah Vahanvaty Editorial Team Rewati Rau, Ekta Alreja, Sibi Arasu, Shilpa Mehta, Ekta Marwaha, Marcia Rodrigues Photo Editor T Narayan Photo Department Ravi S. Sahani, Reuben Singh, Vikram Sharma, Subir Halder, Sipra Das, Rashmi Hajela (Chief Photo Researcher) Design Associates Madhu Bhaskar, Vandana Nayar, Sheeba Narain Production Surinder Hastu (Chief of Production), Harish Aggarwal, Naveen Gupta Layout Execution Ramesh Gusain, Ravishanker Singh, Rajesh Kumar Rawat  Publishing Director Malcolm D. Mistry Associate Publisher (Impact) Anil Fernandes  IMPACT TEAM Senior General Managers Sonal Pandey (West and South), Preeti Kohli (North), Sunil R. (Bangalore) Kaustav Chatterjee (East) V. Somasundaram (Chennai) Jitendra Lad (West)

Cover Image by Getty Images Cover Montage by Saurabh Singh

OUR PICK of the month
Shop till you drop
Ongoing Till May 16 Following the success of its previous festivals, the DLF Emporio mall is set to host its fourth luxury Shopping Festival this month. Spread over seven weeks, the festival will celebrate seven different themes, dedicated to the annual celebration of luxury living in India. With more than 100 luxury brands to choose from, the festival will witness various brand launches and events that have been planned to turn every day into a shopper's delight. Visitors can pick up merchandise offered by international brands such as Burberry, DKNY, Versace and many others. There will also be a lucky draw for shoppers who purchase goods worth more than Rs 20,000. At Nelson Mandela Marg, Vasant Kunj Tel 46116666
Want to tell us about an event?A new store? A restaurant?People doing interesting things?Anything newsworthy? Please email us at: simplydelhi@intoday.com

