GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

MISTAKEN TOKENISM
an a mistake repeated often enough become the truth? Clearly, Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot was hoping so. Two years ago, the Gujarat government issued an advertisement in praise of its development work and mistakenly used pictures of Muslim girls using computers in Uttar Pradesh. On the 63rd foundation day of Rajasthan on March 30, the state government used the same picture in its advertisement. The ad carried Gehlot's picture on the top left, the picture of the girls and the legend: "We are proud of being Rajasthani." Gehlot's critics are using it to embarrass him and he has responded typically: With an enquiry to fix responsibility on officials involved and an order to blacklist the ad agency.

ROYAL SULK

C

G

THE AD PUBLISHED ON MARCH 30

urdaspur's Lok Sabha MP Pratap Singh Bajwa is in a major sulk. He has been blaming state Congress chief Amarinder Singh's "regal lifestyle and inaccessibility" for the party's crippling defeat in the Assembly elections. Unfortunately, he has been saying this to Congressmen who have faithfully reported it to Amarinder. His response: "Bajwa used to visit my house (before the results) almost every day to lobby for a Cabinet berth for his wife Charanjit Kaur." To which Bajwa has retorted: "Was I expected to lunch and dine with (Akali Dal Chief Minister) Parkash Singh Badal?"

SPECIAL COVER
ours before CBI filed the first 68-page chargesheet in the Jagan Mohan Reddy disproportionate assets case on March 31, one man got a security upgrade. Hyderabadbased CBI Joint Director V.V. Lakshminarayana, 47, now has two gunmen for personal protection, a bullet-proof car as well as round-the-clock surveillance of his home and office. In his two-year tenure, Lakshminarayana has investigated the high-profile Satyam scam, the Emaar Hills Township scam as well as the Sohrabuddin case.

NOT HIS FAVOURITE SON

H

P

PILLAI

olitician fathers putting pressure to get their sons ministerial berths is no news. But a father moving heaven and earth to get his son out of the ministry is quite unusual. R. Balakrishna Pillai, chairman of Kerala Congress (B), has given an ultimatum to Chief Minister Oommen Chandy and the United Democratic Front (UDF) government to remove his son K. B. Ganesh Kumar, his party's only legislator and state forests minister from the Cabinet. "He is no use for our party. He neither follows the party's diktat nor mine," says Pillai, who hit the headlines when he was prematurely released by the UDF government after being sentenced to one year's imprisonment by the Supreme Court in 2011 in a corruption case.

ONLY HONOUR
olitician Bal Thackeray will receive his first and perhaps only award on April 29 for his contribution as a cartoonist. Cartoon Watch, a Raipur-based political cartoon magazine, will confer a Lifetime Achievement Award on the Shiv Sena chief in Mumbai. Launched 16 years ago, Cartoon Watch is edited by cartoonist Trimbak Sharma. "I get ideas for cartoons but ill health does not allow me to draw one," Thackeray said recently in an interview to party mouthpiece Saamna. No. No jokes about caricatures please.

P

A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

LAKSHMINARAYANA

NEW

SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

GLASS HOUSE
HOMEWORK TIME
ho would have thought being an MLA was akin to studying in school? DMDK chief Vijayakanth, 59, has now made it mandatory for party MLAs to do homework. The DMDK lost the recent by-elections in Tamil Nadu and Vijayakanth himself got suspended from the Assembly for 10 days for alleged rude behaviour. The first assignment for the 29 DMDK MLAs? They must prepare a report on their views on the Tamil Nadu Budget and submit it to the party office before they speak about it in public. Sounds like a good idea. But is the Captain doing his own homework?
HK RAJASHEKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

MEALY MOUTH

W

M

aharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan's initiative to dine with labourers in his home district Satara on April 1 was in bad taste. Chavan's publicity department released a picture of

KAUR AT THE CBI SPECIAL COURT IN PATIALA
RAJESH SACHAR

BIBI'S DAY OUT
ormer Punjab Cabinet minister Bibi Jagir Kaur's arrival at the Kapurthala Jail following her conviction on March 30 has been a `godsend' for other inmates. The usually stern warders have suddenly become most generous about permitting inmates' meetings with relatives. Not one of them is objecting to the constant presence of Kaur's daughter and son-in-law to keep her company in prison. And the women's ward, where Kaur is expected to serve out her five-year sentence, has a brand new 32-inch LCD television and a cable connection. Kaur was convicted for abducting her older daughter Harpreet and forcing her to undergo an abortion.

F

CHAVAN WITH THE LABOURERS

VIJAYAKANTH

him eating with them. It did not tell the whole truth: that the CM was served a far better meal than his guests. While the labourers got roti and vegetables, Chavan was served yogurt, salad, two vegetables and chutney. Shiv Sena called it a farce and said he was no different from Rahul Gandhi. Chavan can't even take it as a compliment.
OF THE

he fracas over army chief General V.K. Singh's allegations that defence agents continue to thrive in South Block had an instant impact on the recently concluded Defence Expo at the Pragati Maidan in Delhi. Military brass shied away from the seventh instalment of the exhibition. Exhibitors, who had paid a fortune for stalls, were left fuming. It did not discourage businessmen such as Abhishek Verma and Chetan Seth from visiting the stalls.

NO DEFENCE

T

WEEK
Army chief General V.K. Singh calls Defence Minister A.K.Antony to tell him the country has been attacked. Antony says,"Give this to me in writing."

"We must amend the Constitution to ensure that only a Lok Sabha member should become Prime Minister."
P. A. SANGMA

Former Lok Sabha Speaker

JOKE
O F T H E W E E K

"Large-scale horse trading is going on in Jharkhand, our colleagues should not come tainted."
SITARAM YECHURY

"National parties are being rejected, see the fate in UP, Bihar and Bengal. Jammu has a political vacuum, which we are slowly trying to fill."
MEHBOOBA MUFTI
MEHBOOBA

CPI(M) leader

PDP chief

A Dalit contingent is going over to Rahul Gandhi's house for a night-spend to make him feel better about the loss in Uttar Pradesh.

with ASIT JOLLY, KIRAN TARE, ROHIT PARIHAR, M.G. RADHAKRISHNAN, LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI, SANDEEP UNNITHAN, AMARNATH K. MENON

14

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

NEW

