NET FLUX

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

twitter tales
A GEM FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

Google's Fools Day
GOOGLE MAPS

Hashtag Busted
Director Shekhar Kapur created a Twitter trend last week,with his hashtag #Adswedontbuy.Targeting products such as Coca-Cola,Fair & Lovely and Lays,he tweeted--"To stop advertising proffesionals from treating us like mindless consumers,I am starting #Adswedontbuy.Pl tweet every ad u dont believe." Apart from hoping Kapur will learn to spell,we hope his 1,70,664odd followers never discover some of the ridiculous advertisements Kapur was involved in--a Schweppes ad he directed, starring Arjun Rampal,Nicole Kidman and that little girl from Slumdog Millionaire and a `Made For Each Other'ad for Wills cigarettes,featuring Kapur himself.
KAPUR

Google played pranks on unsuspecting users this April Fools'Day by releasing new, fake applications Google Chrome Multi-Task Mode Users could increase their productivity (play `Angry Birds'and work), with two `mice'attached to their computer. Gmail Tap Fat-fingered people could send emails without typos, as technicians had cleverly replaced keypads with a morse code key. Google Fiber Bar Users could eat Google technology with fibre bars that could unbelievably send nutrients that the body required. Google 8-Bit Maps Video game addicts could take boring old maps of their street and convert them into 2D land by inserting a cartridge. Google-NASCAR Racers could compete with a machine when it was announced that Google would enter a `self-driving'race car in the US-based NASCAR (National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing).

GOOGLE FIBER BAR

app alert

Top of the Lot
web wow
This week's app round-up is for lovers, doodlers and tricksters. If you own a smartphone, these apps must feature on it: Pair App is for couples in long-distance relationships. It has a timeline with photos and videos. Paper App helps you create and share diagrams, illustrations, sketches and notes. Bee Swatter is ideal for pranksters. You swat bees till it feels like you have shattered the screen.

Sweet Nostalgia
The sexy performance of Zou Bisou Bisou by Megan Draper, a fictional character on Season 5's premiere of Mad Men, sparked a revival of the 1960s French number by Gillian Hills. Performed by actor Jessica Pare, who plays protagonist Don Draper's wife on the show, the song has flooded the Internet and our heads. It has also been parodied.

viral video net ninjas

Age No Bar

Booted Out
Getting fired is hard, especially when done for all to see. Notoriously cantankerous TV presenter Keith Olbermann was let go on March 30, barely a year after being hired by Current TV, a liberal TV channel run by politician Al Gore.The firing was made public through an open letter posted on the channel's website, where Gore and co-founder Joel Hyatt said Olbermann did not share the channel's values ("respect, openness, collegiality and loyalty to our viewers") anymore. Not one to keep quiet, Olbermann took to Twitter, stating that the claims were untrue and he would take legal action.
OLBERMANN

buzz feed

Samsung in iPad?
Gadget repair site, iFixit has reported that Apple's latest iPad 3 includes parts from Broadcom Corp,Elpida Memory Inc,Toshiba Corp and even Samsung Electronics.Surprisingly,supplying parts to the gadget king does not guarantee success--Elpida has filed for bankruptcy proceedings and Samsung is fighting Apple in patent litigation.

A video of an 86-year-old woman gymnast mastering headstands and parallel bars has gone viral. More than 1.3 million viewers are in awe of the octogenarian grandmother, who stole the show at the 2012 Cottbus Gymnastics World Cup recently held in Germany. The video shows Johanna Quaas, a lithe, whitehaired woman in an emerald green leotard, performing cartwheels and swinging through the bars with the flexibility and finesse of a 20-year-old.

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

89

