Mail

Hurricane in a Hurry
APRIL 2, 2012

The feisty Chief Minister of Bengal holds a ramshackle UPA Government to ransom at a time when the Congress is most vulnerable to aggressive allies.

P A D M I N I R A G H AV E N D R A ,

Mamata Express
We have regional leaders who are popular, but interested only in pursuing a populist agenda at the cost of immense long-term damage to the country, as being demonstrated by Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee ("Hurricane in a Hurry", April 2). It's a great tragedy that India is woefully short on statesman-politicians.
C.P. BELLIAPPA, Coorg

MODI

GOWDA

YASHWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Almost all of the alliance partners of UPA are regional parties with a deep resentment towards national parties. These parties are always wary of the latter's existence in their respective states. That is why they exercise bullying tactics to get their demands fulfilled at the cost of national interest.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

Voters First
Politicians will never learn till they are annihilated completely ("Powerless in Power", April 2). Even then they try to give all sorts of excuses. Recent by-elections have shown how bad the Congress and TDP are against TRS in Telangana and against Jagan Mohan Reddy in Andhra and Rayalaseema. If this trend continues, TRS and Jagan will sweep 2014 polls however corrupt they are.
M.M. KALE, Mumbai

Today Manmohan Singh has all the plans, but no power to implement any, and Mamata has all the power but no plan to implement. Both are enjoying the gaddi at the cost of the economy and overall development of the country.
TANMOY CHAKRABORTY, Gangtok

The by-election results are not necessarily the outcome of poor governance. BJP lost Sadananda Gowda's seat to Congress because of B.S. Yeddyurappa and the recent Porngate also played a role. As far as Gujarat goes, I do not think one seat loss to Congress will make Modi worried too much. He is still a winner for the December polls.
BAL GOVIND, www.intoday.com

Mamata Banerjee is bent upon reversing the pragmatic decisions of the coalition Government which is already facing challenges on various fronts. If mid-term polls take place as a result of the constant bickering and a break-up among the UPA partners, there is no probability of one party returning to power in the near future. The difference in opinion can be sorted out in private.

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

``

``

Mamata is perceived as the villain of almost every political play. It might well be her choice of weapons. When there is need to fence, she swings a club; when a scalpel is needed, she reaches for the sledgehammer.
Secunderabad

Mail
Pressure of any kind can prove suicidal for the Government at this stage.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

35
his 100th hundred ("The Price of Sachin's Century", April 2). He is the greatest Indian cricketer to date. However, there is a growing chorus of people suggesting that he bow out of the game now to let the younger players shine. Tendulkar has been crying hoarse about his tremendous love for the sport and that he will continue to play as long as he can. He must listen to his heart and prudence to decide on the matter on his own terms, without bothering about what thers are saying.
VIRAM SHUKLA, Ajmer

Changing World
The Conclave was great and wonderful ideas and views on diverse subjects were aired by different speakers ("Call of the Asian Century", April 2). The policy-makers and the people in related areas can benefit from the messages and progressive ones ought to be implemented by them. The 11th India Today Conclave has undoubtedly turned out to be yet another stupendously successful endeavour that offered a platform to the speakers to discuss the contemporary issue of global power shifting from the recession-hit USEU-Japan zone to Asia
NALINI VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Thiruvananthapuram

has left everyone mesmerised ("I do not abuse others, I talk to myself, I abuse myself", April 2). He is living a dream. With three centuries in four matches, he has proved that the team can rely on his Midas touch when the circumstances demand. With Rahul Dravid retiring and Sachin Tendulkar and V.V.S. Laxman in the autumn of their careers, it's up to Kohli and the young guns to shoulder greater responsibility. Going by Kohli's knock, India's cricket future is in safe hands.
K.S. PADMANABHA, Secunderabad

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
M AY 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Seasons in the Sun
In the 45-year history of India in Test cricket, there has never been a cricketer who has made a more spectacular debut and has continued to keep his place among the world's outstanding exponents of the game than Sunil Manohar Gavaskar. His book, Sunny Days, which is appearing in paperback this month, reveals the many-sided character of this fascinating cricketer. India Today: What gave you the idea of writing your autobiography? Was it because of Ajit Wadekar's book, My Cricketing Years? Gavaskar: No, there was no special reason for writing the autobiography. I had written up to the time I was selected to go with the Indian team to the West Indies in 1971. I had done this in 1974 or 1975. Last year, after returning from my second visit to the West Indies, I jotted down some of my experiences; and a friend suggested,"Why don't you sit down and complete the whole thing, and write a book?"And that is how it began. India Today: You spend most of your time playing cricket. How does it fit into your working life? Gavaskar: My employers are very helpful.They give me leave with pay everytime I have to play a first class game or go abroad on a tour.At the same time, they expect me to work from April to September when the season is not on; and I like to think that I do a little bit of my share of work.
by Saradindu Sanyal

Imran Khan has convinced Pakistani people that he possesses reason and sanity, and is committed to lifting Pakistan out of the morass created largely by Islamist fundamentalism. However, his refusal to attend the Conclave because of Rushdie proves that he has transformed into a politician who wants to grab power by pandering to sectarian sentiments.
J.S.ACHARYA, Hyderabad

Tendulkar's stupendous record is unlikely to be broken in another hundred years, mainly because no one is likely to last that long in this age of fierce competition when so many are waiting to replace the non-performers. That his last hundred came after such an agonising struggle is quite another story. Nonetheless, he will be remembered for many years. Unfortunately, this cricketing god will also be remembered for seeking concessions on custom duties and on personal taxes by projecting himself as an artist selling products on TV. That was some acting.
RAVI BEDI, Jodhpur

Turning a New Leaf
The news of encounter specialist IPS officer D.G. Vanzara ("Encounter Prisoner Turns Poet", April 2) turning into a preacher and a poet is a testimony to the fact that given a choice and opportunity, most of the inmates in jails would like to live a life devoid of sin and crime. Every sinner has a potential to become better. Our jails need to be changed into reformation houses. Punishment and jails have not been able to reduce criminal activities. It is only the remorse and pain of committing sin that can change a person into a saint. The humane side of everyone can be brought forward through love and compassion.
BISHAN SAHAI, Ahmedabad

Still Going Strong
Sachin has truly done the country proud by hitting

Midas Touch
Virat Kohli's quality batting display at the Sher-eBangla National Stadium

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

GAVASKAR

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

