KARTIKAYSAINI
I CHAIRMAN, SCOTTISH HIGH INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL

AnimPACTFeature

PERSEVERANCE
THE JOURNEY OF FIRE AND SUCCESS

~l

The journey of the life of Commander Kartikay Saini is indeed one of sustained perseverance - with fire and success. An alumni of the Sacred Heart Convent School the National Defence Academy Kartikay Saini has had an inspirational and unbelievable journey of selflessness and purpose.

H

aving served the Indian Navy for 15 years, this 45 year old Engineer and Post Graduate in Management has taken each assignment in the Navy and thereafter, by the horns, which would trigger many dynamic young minds scrambling. After completing his last assignment of the Navy as the Joint Controller of Foreign Defence Procurement, Kartikay took over as the CEO of Tobu India (of Tobu cycles fame) taking it to dizzy heights of success and expansion. Very soon he assigned himself to take over the operations of a mammoth manufacturing unit, Eurotherm HRIL, an Indo-German J.V. -a 100% EOU. Nothing was enough for this ex-commander of the Indian Navy. With a determined vision he embarked upon an International Senior Secondary School project in Gurgaon in 2004, with the Scottish High International School. The school today, boasts of being among the top 11 International schools in India, the best International School in Delhi NCR with the ranking of the No. 1 school in value for money in the country. With 2100 students, the school is unique to offer the IB, IGCSE (Cambridge) and the ICSE / ISC curriculum to students under stringent quality systems of ISO 9000, 14000 and OHSAS 18000 concurrently for last many years - perhaps the only school in India with such a set up. Kartikay Saini's dynamic nature and quest for achievement does not stop here. He is one of the Directors of Hema Engineering Industries Ltd, a 5000 million company majorly into manufacturing and OEM to leading automotive companies like Hero Moto Corp, Yamaha, TVS, Royal Enfield. Kartikay's belief in social responsibility and compassion is highlighted in his entrepreneurship profile by his immense passion and work towards children with special needs and intellectual disabilities. He is the Head of R & D of Autism Research Centre (Ruptech Educational India) recognized by the Govt. of India, where he is heading a team of researchers and analysts including Doctors and Special Educators to research and challenge the cause of the widely spreading Autism disorder in India. In addition, this man has made a place in the

hearts of thousands of children with intellectual disabilities, through Special Olympics where he is on the committee of Special Olympics Bharat (Delhi) and a trustee of Special Olympics Bharat (India). An avid speaker, Kartikay has ensured communicating and channelising of his vision and ideas to varied audiences in India and abroad through workshops, lectures and presentations. He has been regularly invited by renowned organizations like the International Baccalaureate Organization (Geneva), ISTE (Philadelphia), Cambridge Assessment, IAEA (Manila), World Education Summits, MDI etc. to speak, train and inspire leaders of varied fields.

Kartikay with the of Pacific Indira Gandhi of 2010, Ed

that his

come by his bestowed 2011, Asia 2004, Best Citizen

satisfaction of success, he has

Gandhi Excellence Award, Award and ISFI for his

to the

'

Kartikay Saini still feels his journey has just set sail. The miles are yet to come. He plays passionate golf and believes that golf is synonymous with life where perfection is the matter of relativity...

--"

