Na tion CPI(M)
C SHANKAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

SEARCHES FOR 21st CENTURYDOGMA
CPI(M) says no to Third Front, vows course correction

PRAKASH KARAT (SECOND FROM RIGHT) AT THE CPI(M) PARTY CONGRESS

in the wake of electoral reverses in Bengal and Kerala
he air hung heavy with a sense of introspection and admission of some of its own mistakes as CPI(M) leaders brainstormed at the 20th party congress at Kozhikode which started on April 4. Faced with electoral setbacks in West Bengal and Kerala, the meet came up with some path-finding decisions. Among them: No more experiments with the Third Front or a Common Minimum Programme, keep both the "neoliberal" Congress and the "communal" BJP at an arm's length, pursue an "independent" socialist economic order and restrict tenures of party secretaries to a maximum of three terms. And not without reason. Never before have the party's fortunes turned a full circle between two congresses. Four years ago when the party held its 19th congress at Coimbatore in 2008, CPI(M) and its Left allies were in an unprecedented position in national politics. The party was playing God to the first UPA government by

T

providing it critical support from outside. Armed with the Left's largest ever kitty of seats in the Lok Sabha, the party held the reins in West Bengal, Kerala and Tripura. Three months later, the Left was banished to the margins after it withdrew support to UPA over the Indo-US Nuclear Treaty. This was followed by a string of electoral debacles. The 2009 Lok Sabha elections found the Left with the lowest ever number of seats following its disastrous experiments with the Third Front. In 2011, the party lost power in both its bastions of West Bengal and Kerala. Never before was the Left reduced to such political irrelevance. The tough decisions were, therefore, expected as the Left seeks to reverse its fortunes. However, CPI(M) failed yet again to come up with any revolutionary idea. Pledging to fight both the Congress and BJP, the party admitted that its experiment with a Third Front has been disastrous.

General Secretary Prakash Karat said that since there could be no agreement with non-Left parties (other than Congress and BJP) on various issues, there was no possibility of a Third Front or a Common Minimum Programme. "In order to build the Left democratic alliance, it is necessary to strengthen CPI(M), expand its base and influence all over the country," he said. The party laid added emphasis to champion the cause of marginalised groups like the Dalits, Adivasis, minorities and women. The organisational report also cautioned against growing indiscipline, factionalism, greed for power, corruption and moral delinquency within the cadre and leaders. The congress also witnessed a candid debate on the party's withdrawal of support to UPA with many delegates criticising the timing of the withdrawal and CPI(M)'s failure to convince the public about its perspective on the issue. A debate also ensued over a new ideological document to correct the party's theoretical perspectives, an exercise held after 20 years. "Socialism of 20th century needs to be reformed in accordance with the needs of the 21st century," said the party's general secretary.
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

CPI(M)

74

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

NEW

