SMITH

NET FLUX

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

Unite for Syria
The Unite For Syria campaign, a movement to end violence in that country, has taken off across social networking sites. Hoping to convince the United Nations to formally condemn Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, the campaign has roped in actors Susan Sarandon, Patrick Stewart, Natalie Portman and Stephen Fry, former frontman of rock band Dire Straits Mark Knopfler and singer Nelly Furtado. The campaign, spearheaded by 200 NGOs from 27 different countries, has spread like wildfire on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube.A string of YouTube videos shows citizens across the world and celebrities holding placards that read `Unite For Syria'and `Stop One Year of Bloodshed'. People have posted messages and videos showing their support on these social networking sites using the hashtag #UniteForSyria. The campaign hopes there will be a crackdown on the regime in the Arab nation that, according to activists, has claimed 8,000 lives. A GEM FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet

Empire Strikes Back
Former executive director of Goldman Sachs Greg Smith sparked an online debate when he attacked the investment bank in a resignation letter published in NYTimes."I can honestly say that the environment now is as toxic and destructive as I have ever seen it," he wrote.New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg and CEO of Morgan Stanley,James Gorman,have defended the bank.But that has not stopped spoofs on the letter.The Daily Mash,a satirical news site,published Star Wars villain Darth Vader's resignation letter from the Empire: "The Empire changed the way it thought about leadership.Leadership used to be about ideas,setting an example and killing your former mentor with a light sabre."

SARANDON

FURTADO

FRY

STEWART

KNOPFLER

PORTMAN

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for foodies, shutterbugs and children. If you own a smartphone, these apps could be useful: Allrecipes When you are sick of eating the same old food, this app could come in handy. Everpix This stores and organises your photos in one place if your phone is cluttered. EverythingButtArt Will not only make your kids giggle, but will give them drawing tutorials.

viral video

Game for Music

The video Game On by the picture-perfect blonde Harris sisters is sure to drum up voters for United States Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum. With a million hits in just two weeks, the video shows sisters Haley and Camille campaigning for the senator, singing "Rick Santorum is our man".

viral video

Mini Adele

web wow

Tech Savvy
Parents need to learn to deal with their tech-savvy children and gadget expert and author Scott Steinberg teaches us just that.Through his new series of books, The Modern Parent's Guide to Kids and Video Games, Steinberg writes that establishing rules for gaming like setting limits on screen time, say one hour a day, is important.While he says that some games can promote exercise and build confidence, adding widgets, software or apps that can detect inappropriate games is also necessary. For more tips, download the book for free at Parentsguidebooks.com.

buzz feed

Cyber Vanity
Proud of your numerous Facebook friends? You are likely to be a `socially disruptive'narcissist, according to recent research by Western Illinois University.The study shows that people with more friends, tagged photos and status updates showed signs of either grandiose exhibitionism or a great sense of entitlement.

An adorable performance of Grammy award-winning singer Adele's break-up hit Someone Like You by a two-year-old girl has gone viral on the Net. The video features Makena Fedorick from Canada sitting on a kitchen table top, dressed in pink with matching plastic beads around her neck. While some of the words are baby talk and she occasionally misses a word, she belts out the chorus with as much emotion as Adele. The video already has 9,92,000 views.

STEINBERG

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

73

