Nation ANDHRAPRADESH

AP'S BOOZE BARONS
They admit to bribing ministers and openly declare names of officials they pay off.The men who control the state's liquor trade seem invincible.
By Amarnath K. Menon

rom a renegade Railway Police constable who made quick money from the illicit ganja trade, Nunna Ramanna has, in less than 15 years, accumulated substantial investments in 71 liquor vends in Khammam district and controlling shares in 80 of them in the neighbouring district of Warangal in Andhra Pradesh. The setting up of a liquor vend costs between Rs 15-40 lakh. On February 21, he declared to the state's Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) that he had paid a bribe of Rs 10 lakh to state Excise Minister Mopidevi Venkata Ramana Rao. It was meant to persuade the excise minister to turn a blind eye to his shops selling liquor at far higher prices, usually 50 per cent above the maximum retail price. ACB has also recovered lists of recipients of pay-offs allegedly from liquor barons and their middlemen. The lists seized from them detail payoffs amounting to at least Rs 700 crore a year, according to industry sources.

F

Botsa Satyanarayana 54
State Congress President He has a stake in
the liquor trade in Visakhapatnam and Vizianagaram districts.

Similarly, Santosh Reddy, 50, began as a clerk at a liquor shop in Warangal. Cartels began forming in Andhra Pradesh after late chief minister Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy introduced auction of liquor shops in 2005. Auctions are held biennially and 6,596 shops have been auctioned till date. At least 12 per cent of the state's revenues accrue from the sale of alcohol. Liquor barons corner shop licences in the name of relatives during auctions and sell spirits at 40 per cent more than MRP. With patronage from politicians and enforcement agencies, they are able to sell both regulated and smuggled liquor freely. All these liquor rajas except Goud are in custody. While their statements made to ACB may not be admissible as evidence in court, unless corroborated by substantive details, the charges are a major embarrassment for the Congress. Both besmirched ministers have denied the charges. "ACB should be careful while mentioning names. It should not rely merely on the testimony of a liquor trader," says Prasada Rao. Ramana Rao says, "I would have resigned if the allegations were made by someone with reasonable reputation." He has also asked Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy to order a probe.

a 50 per cent stake. "We followed the formalities involved in applying for dealership but didn't take it up later," says the minister. Though the excise minister has denied the charges, CPI and CPI(M) leaders have admitted to receiving donations to party fund and activities, including hosting the recent state congress of CPI(M) in Khammam. The admission came after Nunna Ramanna's statement to ACB, in effect, an indirect admission that liquor cartel chiefs pay bribes to be allowed to have their way. Sources say politicians, besides excise and police officials, have made investments in the liquor business too. Among them are Deputy Chief Minister C. Damodar Raja Narasimha in Medak district, Tourism Minister Vatti Vasant Kumar in West Godavari district and Horticulture Minister R. Venkat Reddy in Khammam. Major and Medium Irrigation Minister P. Sudershan Reddy from Nizamabad has major stakes in Sree Venkateshwara Winery and Distilleries and Sree Vinayaka Distillery and Marketing Private Limited. According to sources, the irrigation minister holds 104,88,825 shares in the first company, while his wife P. Sucharitha has 89,89,625 shares.

ACB RAIDS ON LIQUOR BARONS REVEALED A CAREFULLY MAINTAINED LIST OF PAY-OFFS AMOUNTING TO RS 700 CR EVERYYEAR.
D. Prasada Rao 54
Roads and Buildings Minister
He is accused of getting pay-offs through relatives and his personal office staff.

POWER PACK
Liquor barons have accused ministers of helping their cause.
Ramanna, 45, said during interrogation by ACB that he visited the minister at his home and paid the bribe in the presence of one of the minister's friends. Besides the minister, he has accused other politicians, policemen, excise officials and journalists. They are all on his list of people that he had paid

Mopidevi V. Ramana Rao 48
Excise Minister
He is accused of receiving pay-offs besides having a stake in the liquor business.

Vatti Vasant Kumar 58
Tourism Minister
He is accused of shielding a group that has interests in liquor shops in West Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh.

R. Venkat Reddy 66
Horticulture and Sericulture Minister
The minister is accused of receiving pay-offs from liquor traders in Khammam district.

off in return for protection from the law. Ramanna is not alone. Oruganti Easwara Rao, 47, is yet another ragsto-riches story. After working as a driver for a jaggery merchant of Anakapalle in Visakhapatnam district, he established his hold over the liquor trade in Srikakulam district. He has ac-

cused Roads and Buildings Minister Dharmana Prasada Rao of receiving pay-offs. Balraj Goud, 50, who has investments in 30-odd liquor shops in Hyderabad and the adjacent Ranga Reddy district, is on the run. KVR Prasad, 59, started out as a delivery boy at a liquor warehouse in Visakhapatnam.

The Opposition Telugu Desam Party (TDP) alleges that the excise minister used official connections in June 2011 to get distribution rights of Belgium-based beer manufacturer Anheuser-Busch InBev for Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh for Credence Venture Capital, in which his son Mopidevi Rajeev has

Though the minister has no share in the second firm, his wife has 33,40,000 shares. To avoid attention, most ministers are content getting kickbacks rather than investing in the liquor trade. Trade sources, however, contend that Andhra Pradesh Transport Minister and state Congress President Botsa

Satyanarayana is the leader of liquor rajas. His influence and interests are spread over the coastal Visakhapatnam district and his native Vizianagaram. "My family has a 28 per cent stake in 24 shops and there are no irregularities," says Satyanarayana, denying large financial investments and interests in around 60 shops. "Frivolous allegations have always been levelled by detractors against the elected representatives," he says. In the auction system, authorities arbitrarily fix the minimum auction price without taking into account the local demand and supply factors, population and proximity of the shops from other vends in the area. Bidders, who have formed cartels, try to grab licences with extremely high bids that are not easy to recoup. Licence fee for the shops has gone up from Rs 813 crore in 2005-06 to Rs 3,495 crore in 2011­12. Government revenues have trebled in six years. "Our margins have gone down from 30 per cent to 24 per cent," says Andhra Pradesh State Wine Dealers Association President Rayala Subba Rao. While the traders pushed the cartels into a debt trap, they connived with politicians and officials to do unlawful business--selling above MRP and smuggling liquor into the state. Had they traded lawfully, the total loss of the 6,596 licensed shops would have been an estimated Rs 2,550 crore a year. The trade has, therefore, become a noholds-barred business. "Since we were incurring losses, we were forced to sell liquor above MRP. The pay-offs were given only out of the excess selling by dealers and hence it did not dent the government's revenues," says Wine Dealers Association General Secretary D. Venkateswara Rao. ACB raids on the liquor barons, which began in February, have revealed lists of pay-offs that have embarrassed not just the Congress but other rival political parties as well. TDP's N. Chandrababu Naidu has sought a CBI investigation into the charges. YSR Congress party President Jaganmohan Reddy has demanded a judicial probe as the scandal threatens to engulf the Kiran Kumar Reddy government. I

Photographs by A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

58

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

59

