Na tion BY-ELECTIONS

POWERLESS IN POWER
The by-election results are a wake-up call for the establishment. If you don't govern, you will be rejected.

140-member House. All UDF big guns, including Union ministers A.K. Antony, Vayalar Ravi and Chief Minister Oommen Chandy, campaigned. In Andhra Pradesh, separatists swept elections to five out of six Assembly seats in the Telangana region held on March 18. The verdict indicated popular support for the Telangana issue. The ruling Congress was punished for its ambivalence on the issue. Pro-Telangana leaders had forced the bypolls by resigning from the Congress and TDP--parties from which they had been elected in 2009. All five--T. Rajaiah (Station Ghanpur) and Jupally Krishna Rao (Kolhapur) of the Congress and TDP's Nagam Janardhana Reddy (Nagarkurnool), Jogu Ramanna (Adilabad) and Gampa Goverdhan (Kamareddy)--who forced the by-elections have emerged heroes. In the bypoll for Kovur, N. Prasanna Kumar Reddy, who resigned from TDP to join YSR Congress Party, won by 23,496 votes over TDP's S.

KPN

FORMER CHIEF MINISTER YEDDYURAPPA (RIGHT) WITH HIS SUPPORTERS IN BANGALORE

KARNATAKA

RIFTWITHIN BJP RANKS
Knowing BJP's weaknesses, Yeddyurappa makes a fresh bid for the chief minister's office
s BJP likely to do a Dinesh Trivedi in Karnataka? Chief Minister D.V. Sadananda Gowda was allowed to present the state budget on March 21 but the buzz in state BJP circles is that he will be replaced by his predecessor and mentor B.S. Yeddyurappa before the budget reply expected by month-end. The party's national leadership managed to avert a crisis in Karnataka after Yeddyurappa spirited away 66 of the 120 BJP MLAs to a resort on March 18. His supporters demanded that he be reinstated to present the budget. Gowda, however, was given the go-ahead by the national leadership, and Yeddyurappa quietly brought his MLAs to the Assembly for the budget presentation. His supporters claim that the national leadership has agreed to reinstate him "soon" and that is why he did not embarrass Gowda by staying away.

IN A CLEAR MANDATE FOR STATEHOOD, TRS WON FIVE OUT OF SIX ASSEMBLY SEATS THAT WENT TO BYPOLLS IN TELANGANA REGION.
By Sowmya Aji

I

ulers beware. The voter is in the driver's seat and demands good governance. That seems to be the message sent out in bypolls across the country for a Lok Sabha seat and eight Assembly constituencies. The phenomenon echoes the dynamics behind the wave that swept Akhilesh Yadav, with his agenda of development, to power in Uttar Pradesh. In Karnataka and Gujarat, the Congress was the beneficiary of antiincumbency against BJP, which is struggling with internal dissent in both the states. The Lok Sabha bypoll to the BJP stronghold of UdupiChikmagalur on March 18 was hit by attempts by former chief minister B.S.

R

Yeddyurappa to displace his successor D.V. Sadananda Gowda. BJP candidate V. Sunil Kumar lost by over 50,000 votes to Congress's K. Jayaprakash Hegde. Congress leaders, including Union ministers S.M. Krishna, M. Veerappa Moily, Mallikarjun M. Kharge and K.H. Muniyappa put up a sustained and unified campaign. "Our disunity in the region and the damage to our image due to Yeddyurappa's corruption scandals and the Assembly porn episode ensured a victory for the Congress," a BJP MLA admitted. Gujarat sent out a timely warning for Chief Minister Narendra Modi, where Assembly polls are due in December 2012. BJP lost the Mansa Assembly seat in north Gujarat. The seat had been with BJP since 1995. Gujarat Congress Presi-

(FROM LEFT) NARENDRA MODI; SADANANDA GOWDA; KIRAN KUMAR REDDY

dent Arjun Modhvadia says: "This victory is of people's power which the Modi government had tried to throttle through its autocratic ways." Congress candidate Babuji Thakore beat BJP's D.D. Patel by 8,000 votes. Modi's corporate image and diluted emphasis on Hindutva seem to have worked in Congress's favour. A display of unity ensured a win for the United Democratic Front (UDF) in the bypoll to Piravom Assembly seat in Kerala. Debutant Anoop Jacob, 34, of Kerala Congress (J), a UDF ally, won by a margin of 12,070 votes. In contrast, Opposition LDF was a divided house. The win helped UDF retain its strength of 72 seats in the Assembly, two ahead of the halfway mark in the

Chandramohan Reddy. The most significant was Mahabubnagar, where Syed Ibrahim of the Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) lost by 1,897 votes to Y. Srinivas Reddy of BJP. Though a setback for TRS chief K. Chandrasekhara Rao, who is the Mahabubnagar MP, the overall result is still a win for the separatists. Corruption and incumbency have gone against the Congress and enabled TRS candidates to win. TDP also failed because of its ambivalence on the statehood issue. "We have been telling our Delhi leaders that people of Telangana feel that they have been betrayed by the Congress," says Nizamabad MP Madhu Yaskhi Goud of the Congress.
with Uday Mahurkar, Amarnath K. Menon and M.G. Radhakrishnan

YEDDYURAPPA HAS BLINKED FOR NOW, BUT HE HAS VOWED TO TAKE UP THE ISSUE WITH BJP'S NATIONAL LEADERSHIP.

"He has been given a promise on the issue," a minister close to Yeddyurappa told INDIA TODAY. Yeddyurappa is set to hold meetings with the national leaders over the issue. "They want some clarifications and I am going to Delhi to give them those," he said. Yeddyurappa's detractors say Gowda is safe till at least March 30. "After BJP's demand in Parliament that Trivedi should reply to the railway budget debate, how can they not allow Gowda to reply to his state budget?" a minister close to Gowda asked. Around 12 detractors of Yeddyurappa led by Municipal Administration Minister Balachandra Jharkiholi have threatened to resign if he is reinstated. The party is in a fix. Yeddyurappa is the only leader who can win BJP 60-80 seats. He has the support of the Lingayat community, said to comprise 19 per cent of the state's population. "We cannot go to the elections with Sadananda Gowda as our face as he doesn't have the charisma to pull votes. We will have to bring in Yeddyurappa but we have to see how and when, as there are corruption cases pending against him," says a BJP ideologue.
by Sowmya Aji

54

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

55

