Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

SACHIN SINGH
n politics, like in cricket, it matters whether a player is batting for the country or for his I own selfish interest. That choice is often the difference between victory and defeat on the cricket field and between success and failure on the grand political stage. For Sachin Tendulkar, the evening of March 16 brought a 100th hundred and personal redemption. For a cricket fan, an icon had fallen at the altar of self-interest. Tendulkar's milestone came at a very high price for India, a humiliating defeat at the hands of lowly Bangladesh. He batted for himself. Tendulkar scored his first 50 in 63 balls and then, instead of speeding up, took 75 balls more to reach 100. Contrary to the spirit of the one-day game, he was defensive in the slog overs. He played out 5 balls without scoring in the 41st and 42nd, caution at its extreme to make sure he did not trip before 100. His 114 in 147 balls meant that India, batting first, did not get a total high enough to intimidate Bangladesh into submission. Two days later, young Virat Kohli put Tendulkar's selfish knock to shame in a selfless, match-winning knock of 183 in just 148 balls in a high pressure run-chase against Pakistan, a far superior team to Bangladesh. Manmohan Singh isn't quite the Tendulkar of Indian politics. He is too dour, no flair. Yet, like Tendulkar, he was once an icon. He stood out among politicians for his honesty and integrity. More importantly, just as Tendulkar's impeccable batting showed India that it could compete with the world's best in cricket, Singh's bold economic reforms between 1991 and 1996 showed India that it could compete with the world's best in business. In his innings as finance minister, Singh did not bat for himself. The interests of the country were primary. In the aftermath of Singh's reforms, the Congress party spent eight long years outside government. Singh suffered a humiliating election defeat in South Delhi in 1999. The real prosperity from his reforms only began to trickle down in the 2000s. With a little help from a booming global economy, Singh reaped the benefits of reforms in his first innings as Prime Minister when economic growth remained steady between 8 and 9 per cent. By the time he began his second innings as Prime Minister in 2009, it was amply clear that he needed to unleash another round of reforms to keep the Indian economy booming even as the global economy headed into prolonged slowdown. Instead, he got bogged down by corrupt ministers, an unhelpful party leadership and recalcitrant allies. He could have drawn a line on economic policy, his forte, but he did not. Even before Tendulkar laboured to his 100th hundred, Singh had declared that he is batting for self-interest, only to achieve the token goal of becoming the first Prime Minister outside the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty to serve 10 consecutive years in office. His meek acceptance of Mamata Banerjee's demand to sack Dinesh Trivedi was only exacerbated by a Budget which did absolutely nothing to help turn around an ailing economy. Like Tendulkar, Singh may make history, but India will be the loser. It's time for Tendulkar and Singh to call it a day. History is unforgiving to those, even icons, who aspire for a shelf life longer than their use-by date.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

IT'S TIME FOR SACHIN TENDULKAR AND MANMOHAN SINGH TO CALL IT A DAY. HISTORY IS UNFORGIVING TO THOSE, EVEN ICONS, WHO ASPIRE FOR A SHELF LIFE LONGER THAN THEIR USE-BY DATE.

S I G N P O STS
WON Swiss Open Grand Prix Gold, by ace Indian shuttler Saina Nehwal. The world number five defeated China's Shixian Wang, ranked third, 21-19 21-16 in a 48-minute NEHWAL

women's singles final to defend her title. DIED Pope Shenouda III, patriarch of the Coptic Orthodox Church in Egypt for four decades. The 88-year-old worked to keep peace between the Christians and Muslims at home. INDICTED Former prime minister and opposition

leader Khaleda Zia's `fugitive' elder son, Tarique Rahman, over a 2004 grenade attack on current Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina's rally that killed 24 people and injured her. NOTICE issued to Arvind Kejriwal, for calling MPs "rapists, murderers and looters" during an election campaign rally in

February. The Lok Sabha Secretariat has sought a reply from Kejriwal. DISCHARGED Cricketer Yuvraj Singh, from a US hospital after completing the third and final cycle of chemotherapy to recover from a rare germ cell cancer. SINGH
APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

17

NEW

