Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N CINEMA E Y E C AT C H E R S

Bong Connection
Politician and TV bahu Smriti Irani's Bengali film debut Amrita is ready for release after two years. Cast opposite Victor Banerjee in the lead role in Tapan Saha's film, Irani plays a righteous woman. Although the actress has rubbished reports of the character being similar to her Miss Goody Two Shoes telly avatar, the look is an extension of her `Tulsi' days.
IRANI

PRIZE CATCH
Vikram Chatwal, 40, may be getting tubby but he hasn't lost his penchant for leggy waifs. The New York-based hotelier was glued to former Victoria's Secret model Angela Lindvall, 33, when he came to Mumbai for a holiday. His supermodel girlfriend has made it to the cover of every leading fashion magazine, worked with big fashion houses and has even tried her hand at acting. She is involved with environment conservation projects and will be hosting the TV show Project Runway All Stars later this year. Both have their hands full.

LINDVALL

It's a Wrap NEWS, VIEWS AND THINGS THAT MATTER
MUST PLAY GOOD IDEA FIGHTING TROUBLE

Blood Sport
Not only did Indian-American Nikki Haley, 40, become governor of South Carolina, she even wrote a book about it. She has penned a 245-page autobiography, Can't is Not an Option, where she calls politics in her state a blood sport. Releasing on April 3, her memoirs lavish praise on Mitt Romney and Sarah Palin and deal with the infidelity charges against her by lobbyist Larry Marchant and political blogger Will Folks.
HALEY
GETTY IMAGES

Baba Sehgal's new single Praji Kunjam Kunjam Control against killing the girl child "like mutton chop" .
MUST SKIP

Cherie Blair has been roped in to resolve the dispute between the children of Niranjan Hiranandani, Darshan and Priya.
BAD IDEA

A ban in Pakistan, music copyright violation, Agent Vinod has battles to fight off-screen.Will he win them?
INVITING TROUBLE

Television show Uttaran's 18-year leap.Another soap, another leap.We have better things to look forward to.

John Abraham is dancing to Sridevi's Chalbaaz song Naa jaane kahan se aayi hai, with Prachi Desai in I, Me Aur Main.

Mallika Sherawat has signed up for Mumbai Mirror with Sachin Joshi of dud film Azaan. Groan.

Dance Diva
Lauren Gottlieb, 23, danced her way to the top six in the third season of American reality show So You Think You Can Dance. Now she will show her moves in her Bollywood debut, Anybody Can Dance. Gottlieb plays a dancer, Rhea, in the Remo D'Souza-directed 3D film.Trained in jazz, ballet, hip-hop and tap, she was a dancer in Hannah Montana: The Movie. She has also taken part in television shows such as Glee and Ghost Whisperer. Can Gottlieb also be the next Bollywood item girl?
FILMMAGIC

GOTTLIEB

I

80

Volume XXXVII Number 14; For the week March 27-April 2, 2012, released on March 26

Compiled by Nishat Bari and

Tithi Sarkar

