Soc iety ENTREPRENEURS

DREAMS COME HOME
They went abroad, earned an education and six-figure salaries. But old interests tugged. They listened to the heart, packed their bags and reinvented careers in India.
By Aditi Pai and Mona Ramavat
SRINIVAS

RITESH REDDY, 34
Then Senior staff applications manager, Cypress Semiconductors Where California Years abroad 8 Now Hyderabad-based owner of O2 spa, that has 18 outlets across India Education Master's in electrical engineering from Wright State University, 2001, and a management programme from Stanford University, 2005
with business partner Aditya Agarwal, 26, in Mumbai with a kitty of Rs 15 lakh. "When you feel an emotional connect with something, you do it well," she says. It was this `connect' that brought Juhu resident Apurva Kothari, 36, back after a 12-year stint in the US as a manager. Concerned about farmer suicides, he set up No Nasties, a company selling organic cotton T-shirts, in April 2011 with an investment of Rs 5 lakh. The shirts are designed by artists and manufactured at a Kolkata-based factory partially owned by farmer associations. "It helps them fetch a better price and though there's little financial gain for me for now, it's very satisfying," says Kothari. Tannaz Daruwalla, 28, was working with Goldman Sachs in Chicago when her passion for wine took her to Bordeaux, France, in 2007. "I had no knowledge of winemaking but the passion grew until it forced me to quit finance," says Daruwalla, who now works at a vineyard in Nashik. The shift isn't always easy. Shruti Jaipuria, 29, "spent nights crying wondering if the decision was right" when she walked into The Parsons School of Design (The New School for Design) after a brief career in finance. She returned to Bangalore to start interior design company Maia Design in 2010 with "only a computer". Two years later, she has bagged varied projects from spas to homes across the city. Putting their global exposure to use, these young Indians are following their heart and chasing their dreams. Brain drain is truly reversed.
with Ayesha Aleem and Prachi Rege

e grew up "on a diet of films" in Kerala. Education, and a career as an electronics design professional in the US, consumed long years in between. At 44, Prakash Bare, a postgraduate in microelectronics from IIT, Kanpur, was the unlikeliest of debutant actors when he faced the camera for the film What The Sufi Said in 2010. Brushing up his skills with a four-week course in film appreciation at FTII, Pune, he took to the stage and screen. His Malayalam rendition of Waiting for Godot has already done shows in Karnataka and Kerala. In the kitty are a biopic on Malayalam poet P. Kunhiraman Nair, and a feature film Papilio Buddha with New York-based filmmaker Jayan Cherian. "I prefer to walk a new path and even if I fail, I'll be happy I've tried something different," says the Bangalore-based Bare. Swapna Gangadharan, 35, walked a new path too, literally, when she went out for a stroll at a neighbourhood park in New York sometime in 2005. She spotted a jogger and started running behind him. The long run cleared the cobwebs in her mind. The business development professional with New York-based Innova Solutions took to yoga, joined a Sivananda yoga camp in Kerala and became a yoga coach to New York Fashion Week models and Broadway actors. In 2009, she returned to Hyderabad, continued teaching yoga before opening a café three years later. "From a six-figure salary to getting $30 (Rs 1,500) for my

H

SRINIVAS

SWAPNAGANGADHARAN, 35
Then Business development head, Innova Solutions Based in New York Years abroad 7 Now Yoga teacher and owner
ofTruffles café in Hyderabad

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Education Master's in English Literature from Osmania University, Hyderabad, 1998

APURVAKOTHARI, 36
Then Tech Manager, Frog Design Where San Francisco Years abroad 12 Now Owns No Nasties, a Mumbaibased organic cotton T-shirts brand

Education Master's in science, computer engineering, University of Texas at Austin, 1999
first class was quite a shift. But the feeling of enjoying what I was doing was priceless," she says. Bare and Gangadharan are among several young Indians who have given up careers overseas to return home to pursue their interests. Sisters Neelima, 36, formerly a software profes-

sional, and Sushma Reddy, 33, who trained to be a dentist, didn't hesitate "even a moment" before leaving the US to set up a lifestyle store in Hyderabad in 2006. D Cube was truly uncharted territory for them. "I took the plunge and then learnt to swim. But we never doubted about the venture's success," says Neelima. Equally clueless but determined was Ritesh Reddy, 34. The San Jose, California-based chip designer, with 11 patents against his name, returned home in 2008 and toyed with 28 business ideas before zeroing in on the wellness industry. He started O2 spa in Hyderabad with his savings of Rs 30 lakh "although I had no clue how a spa is run". In just four years,

O2 has become a multi-city chain with 18 outlets and another 22 planned for launch by the year-end. Mitali Bajaj, 30, also didn't have a plan in place when she returned to Mumbai in 2007. While working with a citybased construction firm, she stumbled upon an idea--to make real estate "aesthetically appealing". She now runs Dr Art+Design, an art studio in Bandra which customises art for homes and commercial properties. Priyanka Agarwal, 26, with a University of Pennsylvania degree in technology and management, "always wanted to be an entrepreneur". She picked up the idea of an online gift registry from the US and launched wishberry.in in 2010

MITALI BAJAJ, 30
Then Private wealth manager, UBS Location New York Years abroad 6 Now Owns Dr Art+Design, a Mumbaibased art studio

Education Hospitality management from Cornell University, finance management at Ithaca College, US, 2005

68

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

69

