Nation

KARNATAKA
Photographs by ANIL DAYAL

CM PROTECTS PROTEGE
Despite facing 28 chargesheets, actor-politician Yogeshwar remains forest minister
ting a record of having the maximum number of ministers with criminal cases against them." What has worked to Yogeshwar's advantage is the fact that he joined the right faction of BJP at the correct time. He supports fellow Vokkaliga and Chief Minister D.V. Sadananda Gowda against Yeddyurappa. Also, Yogeshwar is the sole BJP face in Bangalore RuralRamanagaram-Kanakapura region, a stronghold of former chief minister H.D. Kumaraswamy, 53, of the Janata Dal (Secular) (JD-S), and Congress's D.K. Shivakumar, 52, before Yogeshwar won. All three leaders are Vokkaligas. Yogeshwar says cases filed against him are politically motivated. "Shivakumar and Kumaraswamy did not want me to grow as a leader,'' he adds. Claiming that he was being targeted for acting against encroachment and granite smuggling, he says, "Shivakumar, who is involved in granite smuggling, is instigating cases against me." Shivakumar contends it is otherwise. "Yogeshwar and Kumaraswamy are foisting cases on me. I have documents to prove that all my activities, including granite mining, are legal. Yogeshwar has no moral right to continue as minister when so many people claim that he has cheated them by promising land in his Mega City Township. How can he stay as minister?" he asks. Political observers point out that the real beneficiary of this fight between Yogeshwar and Shivakumar is Kumaraswamy, MP from Bangalore Rural. The JD(S) leader hopes to benefit as the other two destroy each other's reputation. The internal BJP struggle between Gowda and Yeddyurappa also overshadows the drama. Kumaraswamy, along with Yogeshwar, supports Gowda, while Shivakumar is on Yeddyurappa's side. As the triangular contest plays out, Yogeshwar continues to hold on to power. by Sowmya Aji

HARYANA

HOODAGIFTS A FAMILYREUNION
State Information Commission becomes sinecure

(FROM LEFT) NARESH GULATI; URVASHI GULATI; HARYANA INFORMATION COMMISSION IN CHANDIGARH

for retired bureaucrats from the same family
onsistently used to rehabilitate favourite bureaucrats after they retire from service, the Haryana Information Commission, established in 2005, is now being derisively described as the state's new `home office'. This is after the Bhupinder Singh Hooda government successively appointed three family members as state information commissioners. The incumbent Chief Information Commissioner (CIC) Naresh Gulati, 60, an IAS officer who sought early retirement as Haryana's financial commissioner (revenue) in May 2011, succeeded his own sister-in-law and former chief secretary Meenaxi Anand Chaudhry in the CIC office. Incredibly, Gulati's wife, Chaudhry's younger sister Urvashi Gulati, also found her way into the commission the very afternoon she demitted office as the state's chief secretary. She was sworn in as an information commissioner by Governor Jagan Nath Pahadia amid considerable controversy on March 31. Former chief minister Om Prakash Chautala, who is part of the three-

(CLOCKWISE FROM LEFT) YOGESHWAR, SHIVAKUMAR, KUMARASWAMY
BK RAMESH

C

e has become neighbour's envy, and owner's pride. Eleven ministers of the BJP government in Karnataka have resigned over the past four years after being charged with accusations of corruption. But the party refuses to make this a `Dirty Dozen'. They are not dropping yet another minister, C.P. Yogeshwar, 48, who has been chargesheeted for cheating. Even former chief minister and Lingayat strongman B.S. Yeddyurappa, 70, had to resign after an FIR was filed against him. But filmstar and Forest Minister Yogeshwar remains in power despite 14 cases filed by the Centre's Serious Fraud Investigation Office in March 2012 and 14 other cases filed since 2007. Yogeshwar, who was the managing director of Megacity Developers and Builders Limited, promised land to people in a proposed township on the outskirts of Bangalore during 1995-2000.

H

Those who were promised land charge that they are yet to get any. A Cabinet colleague explains, "He won his Assembly seat in the bypoll in April 2011 despite the first 14 cases of cheating filed against him. The second chargesheet is about the same set of cases. If J. Jayalalithaa can be chief minister, Yogeshwar can certainly be a minister.'' But others are uncomfortable. Another Cabinet colleague of Yogeshwar admits: "We seem to be set-

CENTRE'S SERIOUS FRAUD INVESTIGATION OFFICE FILED 14 CASES AGAINST KARNATAKA FOREST MINISTER YOGESHWAR IN MARCH 2012.

member selection committee alongside Hooda and Education Minister Geeta Bhukkal, objected vehemently to Urvashi's appointment alleging that procedures were ignored in her selection. He claimed that just one name--that of the outgoing chief secretary--was included in the selection process. Chautala refused to endorse the appointment: "Yeh sochte hain ke main unke chayan par dastkhat kar doonga (They think I will sign on their selection)." Defending his decision to re-hire senior bureaucrats, Chief Minister Hooda points to the years of administrative experience such officers come with. "We need the experience of these officials. Where else would I find people with an understanding of government functioning that extends over 35 years?" he says. Former Delhi University professor D.R. Chaudhary, 77, who quit as a member of Haryana's defunct Administrative Reforms Commission in January 2011, says the appointment of civil servants to state information com-

missions is a contradiction in terms. "IAS officers have a lifetime of training in how to withhold information. And we now expect the same officers to ensure transparency," he says. He also questions the wisdom of hiring members of the same family. Naresh Gulati, however, rejects the criticism. "We currently have four information commissioners. Two are former IAS officers while M.R. Ranga is a lawyer and Prem Veer Singh comes from the corporate sector." He also sees no problem with his wife being on the commission. "We served as civil servants in the same state cadre for more than three decades. Why should this be any different?" he asks. The State Information Commission's `family matters' have also drawn flak from the Rohtak-based Haryana Soochna Adhikar Manch (HSAM), an organisation of over 3,000 RTI activists and organisations. HSAM plans to petition the Punjab and Haryana High Court against Urvashi's recent appointment on the grounds that it was arbitrary. "No public notice was issued or search committee constituted to suggest suitable candidates for the job. Appointments are being done in a clandestine fashion without following any norms," says HSAM's convener Subhash, 43. The group's Chandigarh-based lawyer, H.C. Arora, confirmed that a petition would be filed as soon as the court re-opens on April 17. by Asit Jolly

44

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

45

