UP FRONT

WILLIAM ANTHOLIS

STATES OFTHE NATION
ine weeks, 11 states, three conferences, three lec- India's approach to the world. And state leaders are tures, four seminars, a dozen `dinner seminars', increasingly working with one another on issues that and 60-odd interviews with policy-makers, jour- extend beyond India, whether it is counter-terror policy nalists, scholars, NGOs, and business leaders. Getting to or the goods and services tax. That is healthy in any democracy. In the US, the San all those sessions required 14 in-country flights (over 10,000 air km), two trains, 15 cars, 11 mini-vans, two Francisco Bay Area cares about worldwide intellectual property protection and H1-B visas; Florida cares about boats, six autorickshaws. Not that I was counting. My mission: To learn and describe how India's states Latin America; New York cares about global finance and shape the nation's world view. I was joined by my wife immigration; and California, Florida and New York--not and two daughters, aged 8 and 10. to mention West Virginia and Texas--all care about In a phone call this week, just after I had left India, global climate change policy, each in their own way. India's national identity is secure enough that it will Jaswant Singh summed up much of my nine weeks in three sentences. "The rise of states is the most significant not be harmed by a further devolution of power to states political development in the country today," India's great and localities on a range of issues. The system is becomstatesman told me, adding, "the states that comprise the ing more inclusive, and it is taking advantage of impresUnion of India could be countries in themselves. They vir- sive state-level leaders across the country, from a range tually have been different countries in the past." of parties. I was surprised to discover that below the Many Indians still debate whether it matters when it state level, local officials have less authority than at the comes to foreign policy. "Delhi is in charge." "India is not same level in the US. Still, harnessing and steering local dynamism a federal system--it is a unitary system with federal features." "People in the states don't care about global remains a challenge. Federalism can become a issues." Time and again, government officials, journal- problem when states fail to see the bigger picture. Many ists, academics and analysts rattled off for me the "three foreign companies worry about the fracturing of lists"--the public responsibilities that belong to the parties as only leading to gridlock. And in Singh's words, Centre, to the states, and to both in partnerships. Foreign "Indian foreign policy towards Sri Lanka should not simply be dictated by Madras, our approach to Pakistan policy belongs to the Centre. End of discussion. Except that people across the country kept talking determined in Jammu and Kashmir, our approach about the distinct global issues that matter to them. to Bangladesh in West Bengal." In today's India, in today's globally integrated Tamil Nadu looks to Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and economy, that means managing a Thailand--and especially to Sri SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Lanka. And they care about the parliamentary coalition and also global tech revolution. Mumbai working with chief ministers from watches--and weighs in on the Opposition parties. Taken together, Straits of Hormuz and piracy off that is a difficult and dangerous the west coast of Africa. Gujarat two-handed juggling act. Top-down cares about Middle East oil, and no longer seems to work. Leading joins Jammu and Kashmir in a perrequires listening and forging sistent focus on Pakistan. pragmatic partnerships. And then there are largely doThat is the new reality. Regional mestic issues that also shape parties provide more direct repreIndia's world view--and how the sentation of India's states in New world views India. That certainly Delhi. And local control directly afincludes counter-terrorism policy fects citizens in a global age. The and foreign investment laws, and challenge for any Indian leader, as energy policy (especially renewfor any American leader, is to craft able and nuclear energy). It even a clear vision for the country, and to extends to domestic issues such as work with state leaders and repreinfrastructure, or a goods and Regional parties provide more sentatives to bring all of them along. services tax to replace inter-state direct representation of tariffs--both of which might William Antholis is managing director of states in New Delhi. India's speed up foreign investment. the Brookings Institution and a senior And local control directly Intentionally or not, India's states, fellow in Governance Studies. The views and their leaders, are shaping affects citizens in a global age. in this piece are entirely his own.

N

10

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

