Cover Story

DEFENCE

SHOOTING IN THE DARK I
By Sandeep Unnithan & Shantanu Guha Ray

Tatra truck deal has blown the lid off a shadowy world of arms dealers who operate with impunity

n August 2009, a most unusual whistleblower flew into New Delhi. H. Hanumanthappa, 79, a former Congress MP from Karnataka, carried a letter which alleged deviations in the way the defence ministry was buying Czech-made Tatra trucks. He was armed with a confidential report prepared by an employee of Bharat Earth Movers Ltd (BEML). The report alleged the Bangalore-based defence PSU had violated defence procurement rules by buying the trucks not from the original equipment manufacturer but from a UK-based agent, Ravinder Kumar Rishi. The price of the trucks was also being inflated, he said. The trucks were being imported at between Rs 40 and Rs 80 lakh each but sold by BEML to the Ministry of Defence (MoD) for twice the amount, a mark-up of over 100 per cent. This was not the first alarm on the deal. Red flags had been raised on grounds that MoD was dealing with a trading company instead of an original equipment manufacturer. Since 2006, MOD's Defence Procurement Procedure makes it mandatory to deal with original equipment manufacturers. In 2005, Brigadier I.M. Singh in the office of the Master General of Ordnance (MGO), responsible for procuring ammunition and vehicles in the army, alleged irregularities in the purchase of Tatra trucks. He was posted out of the MGO. In 2005, a television channel reported on the deal, wondering how a psu could deal directly with a subsidiary. In 2006, two private sector defence firms, Larsen and Toubro and Tata Power, collaborating on a DRDO project, were asked by BEML to pay Rs 40 lakh extra per

(LEFT) A TATRA TRUCK CARRYING THE PRITHVI MISSILE; A.K. ANTONY

Photographs by REUTERS

Cover Story

DEFENCE
Lt-Gen Tejinder Singh was offering a bribe. CBI has registered a preliminary inquiry into the allegation. The Tatra deal is only the tip of the iceberg. Ambitious arms agents coexist with corrupt officials and easy-toco-opt politicians. Officially, arms agents have ceased to exist at least since August 2006. All defence companies have had to sign an integrity pact where they promise not to hire agents or pay bribes. Manufacturers risk being blacklisted if they use agents. Yet middlemen continue to thrive. `Success fees' of up to 10 per cent for a defence deal are routinely handed out to agents and key decision-makers. The kickbacks are disguised as legal fees to lawyers, consultancies for retired army officials and payments to event management companies. As defence analyst C. Uday Bhaskar puts it, "Our highly bureaucratic and secretive procedures for procuring defence hardware add to the corruption." It's big business. India is the world's largest arms importer. Between 2007 and 2011, the country imported arms worth over $12 billion (Rs 60,000

truck over the initial Rs 80 lakh--the two companies needed 28 Tatra trucks to mount indigenously developed Pinaka rockets they had been nominated to produce. Both companies refused. In March 2010, the MOD bought an additional 788 trucks from Global Vectra, owned by Rishi, at rates that were inflated by over 40 per cent. Over 7,000 Tatra trucks have been bought over the past 25 years for over Rs 5,000 crore. Yet it was only on March 30 that CBI filed a First Information Report naming Rishi as the main accused in a case to defraud the nation. Defence Minister A.K. Antony acted only after he came under pressure from outgoing army chief General V.K. Singh, who was fed up of the sleaze that has crept into the armed forces. In a March 26 newspaper interview, General Singh alleged he was offered a Rs 14-crore bribe to clear `600 substandard vehicles' in this deal. The September 2010 bribe offer, the chief alleged, came from retired Lt-General Tejinder Singh. In his formal complaint to the CBI in April, General Singh named Rishi as the person on whose behalf

ANTONY SECURES HOME FRONT
n order to protect his squeaky clean image,A.K.Antony has always tried to steer clear of allegations of favouritism. But since becoming Union defence minister in 2006,Antony has been liberal in directing investment back home, even though for much of his tenure, the Left Democratic Front (LDF) was in power. In the past five years,Antony has granted as many as six Ministry of Defence projects to Kerala with a combined capital outlay of more than Rs 1,000 crore. In spite of their bitter political differences, Elamaram Kareem, industries minister in the previous LDF government, and Antony worked out a cordial relationship to set up new projects.The alliance came to be dubbed as the EK-AK formula.

The incorruptible defence minister has ensured that plum defence projects land up in his native state, Kerala
A unit under Bharat Electronics Ltd to support outsourcing products for navy and air force and to provide waterfront support to Southern Naval Command. It was inaugurated by Antony in February 2011. 5 Indian Coast Guard Academy, Kannur Kannur was chosen for the academy overlooking Pune's claims. It was inaugurated in 2009 and the foundation stone laid in May 2011. The academy is coming up on 164 acres of land provided by the previous LDF government near the Indian Naval Academy at Ezhimala. With an estimated cost of Rs 720 crore, it is expected to provide training to 400 Coast Guard personnel at a time. 6 National Institute for Research and Development in Defence Shipbuilding (NIRDESH) at Kozhikode It is under the department of defence production in the Ministry of Defence. The foundation stone was laid by Antony in January 2011. NIRDESH is the first of its kind in the country and is wholly funded by the defence ministry and all defence shipyards by M.G. Radhakrishnan in the country.

I

THE BEML DEFENCE AND RAIL PRODUCTS DIVISION IN PALAKKAD

ment of Rs 150 crore. The firm has 450 employees and manufactures components for BrahMos missiles. 2 Strategic Electronics Manufacturing Facility in Kasargode district It is the electronics arm of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Bangalore. It was started with an investment of Rs 200 crore. The firm manufactures radars, navigation systems, mission computers and early warning systems

for Light Combat Aircraft, advanced light helicopters and Sukhois. It is yet to be inaugurated. 3 BEML Defence and Rail Products Division, Palakkad The manufacturing facility of BEML Ltd commenced operations in 2010 with an investment of Rs 260 crore. The firm has 500 employees and manufactures Tatra trucks, pontoon bridge systems and rail coaches. 4 BEL Product Support Centre, Kochi

A.K.ANTONYACTED ONLYAFTER HE CAME UNDER
PRESSURE FROM OUTGOING ARMY CHIEF GENERAL V.K. SINGH,WHO WAS FED UP OFTHE SLEAZE.
MAIL TODAY

1 BrahMos Aerospace Thiruvananthapuram Ltd. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of BrahMos Aersospace Ltd, New Delhi, an Indo-Russian project under the Ministry of Defence. It commenced operations in 2008 by taking over the facilities of a state PSU with an invest-

THE HINDU

Ahead in the arms race
India ranks first among world's top five arms importers in 2007-2011 $12.6 bn

All roads lead to India
Five countries are the main suppliers of India's defence requirements *
$13.7 bn $4.7 bn $1.9 bn

$6.3 bn

$2.4 bn

$5.1 bn

$9.5 bn

Russia UK Israel USA France
* 2007-2011; Source: SIPRI

Splurge offensive
The army, navy and air force have lined up big buys between 2012 and 2016

India

South Korea Pakistan China Singapore

Air Force

Navy

Army

Source: Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI)

$30 bn

$15 bn

$5.2 bn

crore). Over the next decade, India will import arms worth over $100 billion (Rs 5 lakh crore). Among the deals in the pipeline are Rs 90,000 crore to buy 126 Rafale combat jets, Rs 50,000 crore for six submarines and an estimated Rs 20,000 crore to buy 2,700 howitzers. Suppliers include the military industrial complexes of the US, France, Russia, Israel and the UK. A series of scandals has finally cast a shadow over Antony, who presides over a procurement process that includes eight defence public sector undertakings and 40 ordnance factories. He is a traditional Congress leftist, a defender of the public sector, and has built a career on probity. But he appears to have allowed some questionable arms deals to continue unchecked. In 2009, CBI arrested the former chairman and managing direc-

tor of Ordnance Factory Board Sudipta Ghosh. The Ordnance Factory Board is the apex authority that controls the 40 factories under MOD. Ghosh allegedly received bribes from two Indian and four foreign defence firms, which Antony subsequently blacklisted on March 5. Antony said the ban followed advice from CBI, which had collected evidence against these companies (see box: Blocked from Business). The ban may not stop the hectic lobbying for a slice of the arms pie in India. A fortnight before the Indian Government inked a multi-billion dollar deal for 126 new generation fighter jets for the Indian Air Force (IAF) on January 31, Bernard Baiocco, a French arms consultant, visited New Delhi to take part in negotiations with top defence officials. London's The Sunday Times, in a story headlined `Inside a 18 billion dogfight',

$7.3 bn

20

$6.9 bn

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

21

Cover story DEFENCE
H C TIWARI

D E T S I L BLACK
Blocked from Business
On March 5, A K Antony handed out a 10-year ban to six companies for offering bribes to the Ordnance chief
SINGAPORE TECHNOLOGIES KINETICS
No charges have been brought against it. The publicly held company, one of Asia's largest defence and engineering groups, has filed petitions in the Delhi High Court to overturn the blacklisting decision.

LONG ROAD TO ACQUISITION
The defence procurement process is multi-layered and long drawn out. It often leads to delays, even in the purchase of basic items.
ndia spends Rs 2 lakh crore every year to maintain its military, the world's third largest. Its armed forces spend Rs 79,000 crore in importing warships, tanks and fighter jets. The acquisition process begins when one of the service directorates within an armed force lists the parameters of a weapon system. This is called Service Qualitative Requirement. These requirements are forwarded to the Director-General, Weapons and Equipment, a Lt-General who works under the deputy chief of army staff. The DG reviews the case and then forwards the file to the defence secretary for clearance. DG-Acquisitions then enters the scene. Usually an IAS officer of the additional secretary rank, the DG-Acquisitions heads the Defence Procurement Board which has been designated as the Ministry of Defence's (MOD) procurement board for all new acquisitions since 2001.This board is headed by a special secretary or an addi-

THE FIVE

BIG BUYS
Army, Air Force and Navy have all gone in for big-ticket acquisitions

I

ISRAEL MILITARY INDUSTRIES
The state-owned main manufacturer of defence platforms for Israeli Defence Force has been embroiled in the Barak missiles controversy. It participated in Defexpo in Delhi and its last order from the Ordnance Factory in March 2009 was worth Rs 45 crore.

RHEINMETALL AIR DEFENCE
The publicly held Swiss company is one of the largest European suppliers of arms technology. It participated in Defexpo in Delhi and has asked Indian authorities to offer conclusive evidence of the allegations, failing which it will seek legal recourse.

tional secretary. It is assisted by a financial adviser (acquisitions) of the rank of additional secretary and three acquisition managers, three technical managers and three financial managers dealing with land, air and naval systems. It invites commercial bids from leading manufacturers who have been identified as suppliers of military hardware.The hardware manufacturers have to bring in their equipment for field trials, often lasting over a year, in different climatic conditions.Trials are supervised by teams from the Weapons and Equipment Directorate.The directorate carries out a general evaluation report based on the trial results. A Price Negotiation Committee, set up and headed by joint secretary (acquisitions), picks the lowest bidder and begins commercial negotiations. After the deliberations comes the final stage in which a proposal is forwarded to the Cabinet Committee on Security for final clearance. Headed by the Prime Minister,

DASSAULT RAFALE
126 Rafale Multi Role Medium Combat jets for the IAF by 2016--Rs 90,000 crore.

HDW SUBMARINES
VENDORS AND ARMYMEN AT A STALL AT THE DEFEXPO IN DELHI IN MARCH

this apex body includes Union ministers of defence, finance, home and external affairs. A contract is signed with the vendor. MOD estimates that the entire process could take up to two-and-a-half years. In actual practice, it takes over six years for the Government to purchase even simple items like ballistic helmets to protect soldiers.

CORPORATION ZASHCHITA, RUSSIA
The 19-year-old private company, which specialises in manufacturing special and armoured vehicles, has not yet commented on the ban.

T.S. KISAN AND CO, DELHI
The privately-owned company, which makes 155mm Bofors shells and is owned by J.S. Thapar, has been charged by CBI with giving a Rs 30 lakh bribe to then Ordnance chief Sudipta Ghosh.

R K MACHINE TOOLS, LUDHIANA
The CBI chargesheet in 2010 named Sunil Handa, a manager of the private company, for paying a Rs 2.5 lakh bribe to Ghosh for receiving orders in Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra.

said Baiocco, a former employee of the defence firm Thales that contributes radar and electronic systems to Rafale, was part of a team set up by the consortium GIE Rafale, a group of 500 companies involved in making the fighter jets. Janata Party President Subramanian Swamy, whose meticulous investigations into the 2G telecom scandal shook the nation, suggests Baiocco's role was influential. "He stayed in Delhi for nearly a week and met a number of key people. I was told that the Eurofighter (produced by an Italian, Germany and UK consortium EADS) had almost won the Rs 90,000-crore contract to supply 126 multi-role medium combat jets and then, suddenly, everything changed and Dassault won the deal," Swamy told INDIA TODAY. That's not all. On January 30, the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) delayed a Rs 1,850-crore deal for buying

75 basic trainer aircraft for IAF. CCS sought clarifications from the defence ministry after an official complaint from the South Korean government to the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) on the selection process, in which one of its defence companies, Korean Aerospace Industries (KAI), also took part. Switzerland's aviation giant Pilatus Aircraft Ltd was the contender. KAI, placed second in the pricing bid, alleged discrepancies in the commercial bid of Pilatus, which won the bid. The Korean company alleged that the Swiss had not factored the costs of maintenance transfer of technology (TOT) into the bidding price, and were thus able to show a lower bid. "This leaves us (IAF) with a much higher cost of ownership/life cycle of the aircraft," wrote Anantha Venkatarami Reddy, an MP from Andhra Pradesh, in a letter to the Prime Minister in December 2011.

"But despite that, MOD officials decided to ignore all Defence Procurement Procedures to favour Pilatus for reasons only known to them. I am informed that MOD received a lot of technical and financial data from Pilatus post opening of bids in order to complete their files. This is complete violation of the laid down procedures of MOD," Reddy wrote in his letter. For nearly a decade, CBI has chargesheeted arms dealers, MOD and defence officials in as many as 18 cases with little success. In 2005, Londonbased middleman Vipin Khanna and Delhi-based arms agent Mohinder Singh Sahni were chargesheeted for

allegedly earning commissions to facilitate supply of 1,200 anti-material rifles from South Africa's Denel (see box: At Arm's Length). The following year (2006), Suresh Nanda was chargesheeted for allegedly receiving kickbacks in the Barak anti-missile system deal between Israel Aircraft Industries (IAI) and the Indian Army and then in the import of Armoured Recovery Vehicles from Slovakia. Investigations by the country's premier investigating agency have been held up due to pending Letters Rogatory in Israel and UK. The agency also chargesheeted arms agent Sudhir Choudhrie for allegedly earning commission in the 2000 deal to install seven Barak missile systems on Indian naval warships. CBI recently closed the case against Choudhrie after failing to prove whether global remittances into his accounts were commissions, but the Enforcement Directorate will continue a similar probe against the businessman. The same year also saw the agency chargesheeting arms agent Abhishek Verma, who acted as a middleman and earned hefty commissions from Thales of France to push the sale of the French

Six submarines for navy under Project 75 India to start building by 2017--Rs 50,000 crore.

CARBINES, ASSAULT RIFLES
4,60,638 carbines and assault rifles for the army by 2015--Rs 11,572 crore.

SURFACETO-AIR MISSILES
Four regiments of air defence missiles for the army by 2015-- Rs 10,500 crore.

155 mm HOWITZERS
2,700 howitzers for the army by 2017--Rs 20,000 crore.

ON JANUARY 30, A RS 1,850-CRORE DEAL FOR
BUYING 75 BASIC TRAINER AIRCRAFTWAS STALLED AFTER SOUTH KOREA CRIED FOUL.

22

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

Cover Story DEFENCE
TAINT ON

TRUCKS
Tatra's long journey before the brakes were applied on it

`` ``

1997 Ravi Rishi's Tatra Sipox (UK) signs 10-year deal for Tatra trucks with BEML. 2003 Rishi's other company, Global Vectra, signs deal for supply of Tatra trucks to BEML, superseding the earlier contract signed in 1997. The motive behind it is not known. CBI is investigating the case. 2003
BEML MD VRS Natarajan tells MOD

H. Hanumanthappa
Congress leader and former MP

he was compelled to deal with Tatra Sipox. After the breakup of Czechoslovakia,the firm became a majority shareholder in the original Czech manufacturer Sipox AS.

2005 L&T,Tata consortium for Pinaka rockets points out discrepancies in cost of Tatra trucks. TV report reveals that MoD is dealing with an agent,not the original equipment manufacturer (OEM). BEML says Global Vectra is a subsidiary of OEM Tatra.
PINAKA ROCKET

Agents have continued to thrive in India and continued to manipulate the General Staff Quality Requirements.
Ambika Banerjee
Trinamool Congress MP

August 2009 Karnataka Congress leader H. Hanumanthappa writes to Sonia Gandhi alleging MoD is buying Tatras from agent and not OEM. Letter reaches Antony two months later. March 2010 Yet MoD buys 788 Tatras from Global Vectra for Rs 632 crore. February 21, 2012 Antony sanctions prosecution of Ravi Rishi by CBI. March 26, 2012 V.K. Singh alleges bribe offer from a former Lieutenant-General to clear shipment of 600 substandard vehicles. March 30, 2012 CBI FIR names Rishi,`unknown' BEML executives for conspiracy to defraud Government.

submarine Scorpene to the Indian Navy. Verma is out on bail, but the case continues. Much depends on the CBI's ability to extradite Verma's friend Ravi Sankaran, the key suspect in the naval war room leak. In 2007, arms dealer Ravi Rishi's company, Global Vectra Helicorp, was embroiled in a scandal leading to the cancellation of the multi-billion Eurocopter deal for purchase of 197 choppers for the Indian Army. Global Vectra Helicorp was headed by Lt-Gen (retired) SJS Sehgal, also a director of the Vectra Aviation, the sole distributor of the Eurocopter choppers, a perfect example of how retired army officers are co-opted. Sehgal's younger brother, then serving Lt-General H.S. Sehgal, was involved in the trials of the Bell and Eurocopter choppers to select the bidder. The Rs 3,000-crore deal was cancelled after Bell complained to MOD, blaming the brothers for trying to swing the deal in favour of Eurocopter.

``

1986 MoD signs contract with Omnipal, the authorised Czech government agency for defence exports. BEML also signs Transfer of Technology deal with Omnipal under which the trucks would be manufactured in India.

I discovered malpractices in BEML'S purchase of Tatra vehicles in 2009. It was my duty to bring such lapses to the notice of the ministry.

AT ARM'S LENGTH
SUDHIR CHOUDHRIE 64
President, Magnum International and Eureka Sales Corporation

These businessmen have been linked to India's booming weapons bazaar
VIPIN KHANNA 76
Chairman, TSL Defence Technologies

M.S. SAHNI 76
Chairman, Mokul Group of Companies & honorary counsel, Belize

Choudhrie left India in 2006 shortly before CBI filed an FIR against him in the Barak missile case. Another case was registered by CBI against him in 2007 for alleged payoffs to him from Israeli gun manufacturer Soltam. He returned to India in 2011 after CBI closed its cases for lack of evidence. Known as Bunny to friends, he is a major donor to UK's Liberal Democratic Party.

Patriarch of a politically powerful family, Khanna, an NRI businessman based in London, has figured in two CBI cases pertaining to the deal with Denel of South Africa for supply of 1,200 anti-material rifles. Khanna's name first figured in the Justice R.S. Pathak panel probe into the Iraqi oil-forfood scam. The Enforcement Directorate is probing sources of funds remitted to his and his family's accounts in India.

Delhi-based Mohinder Singh Sahni was caught on tape by a weekly magazine talking about approaching then BJP president Bangaru Laxman for an arms deal in 2006. CBI has also established links between Sahni and the charge-sheeted former Ordnance Factory head Sudipta Ghosh. Sahni has been most active in Russia and former Soviet republics.

SURESH NANDA 71
Chairman, Claridges Hotels and Resorts Group

ABHISHEK VERMA 44
Chairman, Atlas Defence Systems Ltd and Atlas Interactive India Pvt Ltd

RAVI RISHI 58
Chairman, Vectra Group

A former Lt-Commander in the navy, Nanda was implicated in 2001 for receiving kickbacks in the Barak anti-missile system deal and import of armoured recovery vehicles (ARV).The Barak probe is held up due to pending Letters Rogatory (LR) in Israel and UK; CBI is scrutinising ARV case LRs. Nanda served a 53day jail term for fudging foreign accounts.

Abhishek was named as a middleman in the Rs 18,000 crore-plus Scorpene French submarine deal, which allegedly involved kickbacks of Rs 500 crore. He spent nearly two years in jail between 2006 and 2008. Verma allegedly hosted parties for army and naval officers in return for favours.

The promoter of the Vectra Group left India over a quarter-century ago. After the fall of communism, Rishi's Vectra Group acquired Tatra and expanded its operations in India and Eastern Europe. One of his subsidiaries, Global Vectra Helicorp, was also embroiled in a scandal leading to the cancellation of the multi-billion Eurocopter deal in 2007.

``

On March 30, CBI filed an FIR against Rishi and started his interrogation for selling overpriced Tatra trucks to the Indian Army. No one disputes the utility of Tatra, named after a European mountain range. They are used to tow tanks, howitzers and carry rockets, as well as Agni and Prithvi missiles. Like the Bofors howitzers, quality is not the issue: A competitor grudgingly describes its "centipede-like ability" to glide over obstacles thanks to a multiwheeled drive. But quality is no reason for graft and inflated pricing. CBI has also registered a case against "unknown" BEML executives for criminal conspiracy to defraud the nation. It has questioned VRS Natarajan, the chairman and managing director of the Bangalore-based defence PSU. BEML had violated rules by dealing with Rishi's firm Global Vectra. But Natarajan has been smart enough to invest in Antony's backyard, setting up a Rs 260-crore factory in Palakkad.

The facility would employ over 500 persons. As a former chief minister of Kerala, Antony had a constituency to protect (see box: Antony secures home front). Such a consideration didn't seem to affect the previous defence minister, Pranab Mukherjee, who did not set up any defence PSUs in West Bengal in his two-year tenure. When it signed the March 2003 deal with BEML, say CBI officials, Global Vectra pretended to be an original equipment manufacturer. It was however an agent for the Czech Republic-based firm that made the trucks. "There is no violation of the defence procurement rules as Tatra Sipox (UK) is an authorised vendor and sold to BEML and not directly to MOD,"

says Diliep Singh, vice-president, communications, Vectra Group. "Tatra Sipox (UK) is a single window for supplying technical support, provides transfer of technology to BEML and develops new products on behalf of both factories (in Czech Republic and Slovakia). It is clearly more than a `trading company'," he said. Rishi, who is being questioned by CBI, is said to have made several revelations that will expand the probe, suggesting a complex network of bureaucrats and army officers he "invested" in. In particular, he has mentioned a bureaucrat couple who are being investigated for amassing excessive wealth. There are chances that Rishi, whose passport has been im-

NO ONE DISPUTES THE UTILITYOFTATRATO TOW
TANKS, HOWITZERS AND CARRY ROCKETS. BUT QUALITY IS NO REASON FOR GRAFTAND INFLATED PRICING.

pounded, could be arrested. Agencies like the ED and DRI will look into the money trail of his multiple companies. "Agents have continued to thrive in India and continued to manipulate the General Staff Quality Requirements and tender requirements. From the smallest tender for shops near defence establishments to big arms deals, agents are everywhere," says Trinamool Congress MP Ambika Banerjee. He recently blamed the Prime Minister and the defence minister for ignoring a number of letters he wrote on defence corruption--the last one written on May 11, 2011-- stretching from bribes in sanctioning military shops to hardware acquisitions. UPA had brought in Antony to clean up the defence ministry; after all, the Congress and the family that controls it had suffered grievously from a previous arm deals. A clean defence ministry was to be the family legacy, not Bofors. Now it may well be Tatra. I

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

25

