Na tion WESTBENGAL

DIDI GETS STATISTICS AS BALM
Finance minister praises investment environment, but Bengal still lags behind
nion Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee believes that West Bengal is "emerging as the new investment destination". The reality, however, doesn't quite support his claim made on April 1 at a seminar organised by the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India in Kolkata. The finance minister, who is also a Lok Sabha MP from West Bengal, rattled off an impressive set of numbers to back his argument. "As of December 2011, the state had about 900 live investment projects worth Rs 6.11 lakh crore. It has a share of 4.4 per cent of the total investment announced by the government and private sector in India," said Mukherjee. The numbers may be misleading. Given the size of West Bengal's economy, its share of investment is quite low. Says a finance ministry official, "West Bengal's share of India's total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is around 6.5 per cent. So, the share of investment ought to be much higher than just 4.4 per cent."

CONTROVERSY

U

Significantly, Mukherjee's claim of the number of investment projects include not just ongoing ones for which money has flowed in, but also MOUs signed and announcements made for which money has not yet flowed into the state. MOUs and announcements do not always translate into actual investment flow. Economist Bibek Debroy sets the record straight: "While some states convert all announcements into actual investment, West Bengal has a particularly poor record at converting announcements into actual investment. Gujarat and Tamil Nadu do much better." Debroy believes that the finance minister's statement is all politics, and divorced from economic reality. "He is saying this to mollify the Trinamool Congress leadership," Debroy said, alluding to the recent tensions between Congress and its largest ally. A political message was central to the finance minister's speech. "I am happy that the new government, under the leadership of Mamata Banerjee, is responding to

"As of December 2011, Bengal had about 900 live investment projects worth Rs 6.11 lakh crore."
PRANAB MUKHERJEE Finance Minister

the aspirations and expectations of the people." he added. Mamata was the first of the four newly elected chief ministers in May 2011 to formally interact with industry at a meeting on June 18, 2011. However, she dampened the mood by stating clearly that her government would not assist industry in land acquisition. The first legislation notified by the new government, the Singur Land Rehabilitation And Development Act, authorised the reacquisition of the land acquired by the Tatas in Singur in 2007 and 2008. The shadow of Singur still haunts industry. Says Mahesh Vyas, CEO of the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE), "New investment announcements in West Bengal declined from Rs 1,64,100 crore in 2007-08 to Rs 91,200 crore in 2008-09, after Singur." According to CMIE, in 2011-12, Banerjee's first year in office, new investment announcements were worth Rs 43,000 crore, less than half the value of announcements in 200809. A senior industry representative said, "All I know is that people still want to get out of West Bengal, not get in." The finance minister may see rekindled optimism in the economic future of West Bengal, but investors remain pessimistic.
by Dhiraj Nayyar

HEEHS' STORY
American historian told to go after anti-Aurobindo book stir
ometime during his threedecade plus stay at the Sri Aurobindo Ashram in Puducherry, American historian Peter Heehs, 62, decided to write The Lives of Sri Aurobindo. "I went on a book tour in the US and I received praise," he recalls. But trouble was brewing back in India. By September 2008, some members of the ashram started protesting against the book. Heehs returned to face cases and petitions for banning his book. And now the book is possibly the reason why he faces deportation if he does not leave India by April 15. Protesters have taken offence to passages suggesting that Sri Aurobindo led the freedom struggle with a communal slant, found spirituality by overcoming psychological problems, and that the guru's relationship with his spiritual collaborator Mira Alfassa might not have been purely platonic. In 2009, protesters obtained an injunction from the Orissa High Court against the sale and distribution of the book. Another case was filed at the Madras High Court in November 2009 seeking his expulsion from the country. The cases attracted the attention of the Union home ministry, which on March 27 informed Heehs that his visa expires in April and that they would not accept new applications from him. Heehs told INDIA TODAY that passages were taken out of context and that protesters hadn't even read his book. "I spent my entire adult life here. Arguments by those who wish me to go are fallacious and motivated," he says. Home Minister P. Chidambaram is reviewing the case and a decision in the case is expected soon. by Lakshmi Kumaraswami
GENERALV.K. SINGH (RIGHT) WITH LT-GEN BIKRAM SINGH
DPR MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

S

ARMY

NOW,ASUCCESSION ROW
After army chief's age row, the designated successor faces legal attacks challenging his appointment
rmy chief General V.K. Singh may have signalled a truce with the Government and indicated that he plans to gracefully ride away into the sunset on May 31. But the army's ugly succession war refuses to fade away. Lt-General Bikram Singh, who is set to take over as army chief on May 31, now faces a two-pronged legal attack challenging his appointment. An April 4 petition filed in the apex court by former navy chiefs Admirals Laxminarayan Ramdas and Vishnu Bhagwat challenges the Government's March 2 announcement of the chief-designate. It alleges Lt-General Bikram Singh's involvement in a reportedly fake encounter in Kashmir in March 2001. A petition filed in the Jammu and Kashmir High Court in October 2011 challenges the official version of the encounter in Anantnag in which Abdullah Bhat, a militant, was gunned down. Lt-General Bikram Singh was then a brigadier commanding a Rashtriya Rifles sector. His convoy was ambushed by Bhat,

A

DEBASHISH PAUL/ www.indiatodayimages.com

THE STALLED NANO FACTORY IN SINGUR

disguised as a beggar. Four persons, including Colonel J.P. Janu and Rifleman Ganesh Kumar, were killed. Lt-General Bikram Singh was critically injured and evacuated to Delhi for medical treatment. On June 13, 2011, a previously unheard of NGO, Youth Empowerment Services Kashmir, asked the police of South Kashmir to re-investigate the encounter. The NGO backed the claim of Zaituna, a resident of Kupwara district, who claimed that her son Bhat was an innocent civilian passed off as a Pakistani militant. Ministry of Defence officials categorically rule out the possibility of it being a fake encounter. "The allegations of a fake encounter 10 years after the incident are a mere afterthought, misleading, mischievous and motivated. The petitioners are levelling false allegations without any basis," the defence ministry told the high court. On April 11, the court gave the state government another week to respond to the petition.
by Sandeep Unnithan

46

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

47

