Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

GHOSTS IN THE DARKNESS
n government, a decision can be good or bad, but ought never to be naïve. The I Government's decision to outlaw middlemen in
UPA

defence deals in 2004 is the perfect instance of naivety. The motivation for the decision was simple enough. Sonia Gandhi wanted to use the first chance she had to exorcise the ghost of Bofors, which had cost her late husband his government and arguably, while inadequately guarded in Opposition, his life. Eight years later, the monster of Tatra, middlemen in tow, shows that the 2004 decision did absolutely nothing to clean up the rot in defence procurement. Banning middlemen ignores the logic of the marketplace. Defence agents have a perfectly legitimate role to play in bringing together the buyers of equipment (the armed forces and Ministry of Defence) and the suppliers of equipment (manufacturers mostly based outside India). In an ideal world, the buyers and suppliers of any goods or service would interface directly. An ideal world, however, exists only in economics textbooks. Middlemen exist in a range of economic activities bridging various gaps between buyers and sellers, most often of physical distance or information. Nobody in their right mind would suggest a ban on stock market brokers who charge a price for buying shares on behalf of investors, or property agents who charge a commission to facilitate the purchase of real estate, or mandi agents who make money by packaging and transporting farm produce to retailers. The logic of the Indian defence equipment market demands the existence of middlemen. India imports 70 per cent of its arms needs from abroad. Manufacturers based in Russia or in the US or in Israel, with limited knowledge of how local sys-

tems operate, inevitably employ or deploy persons in India to lobby and negotiate on their behalf. They have a right to be paid for this service. There are two reasons why arms agents get a bad name. First, they become conspicuously wealthy in what is still considered an unrespectable, immoral trade in India, akin to dealing in drugs. Second, in their underground avatar, they often cross the boundaries of legitimacy and legality by offering bribes on behalf of their clients to officials. While the mores of society take long to change, there are genuine, immediate solutions to the second problem. A ban on middlemen is not one of them. First, abolish the secrecy that surrounds India's defence establishment. National security is not compromised by full and transparent disclosure of all arms purchases. It is, instead, compromised by the purchase of substandard equipment through opaque deals. Second, make defence agents legal. Register them with government. It's harder to be shady in the open. The NDA government had initiated such a move in 2002 after the Tehelka scandal had rocked the BJP, but the requirements for registration, that involved disclosing all financial and bank details, became too intrusive. It's time to bring the idea, somewhat modified to encourage compliance, back to the table. Third, allow 100 per cent FDI in defence. India's public sector units in defence seem to be engaged in trading and assembling, not manufacturing. Locally-based foreign manufacturers will be less dependent on agents. Also, appoint a defence minister who can take decisions and accept responsibility for them. The good A.K. Antony was useful at exorcising the ghosts of the past but is inept at confronting the enemies of the future.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

ABOLISH THE SECRECY THAT SURROUNDS INDIA'S DEFENCE ESTABLISHMENT. NATIONAL SECURITY IS NOT COMPROMISED BY FULL, TRANSPARENT DISCLOSURE OF ALL ARMS AND EQUIPMENT PURCHASES.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Mike Wallace, the grand inquisitor of CBS's 60 Minutes news show. In almost 40 years on 60 Minutes, he worked on some 800 reports and developed a relentless on-air style that was often WALLACE more interro-

gation than interview. RETURNED Star cricketer Yuvraj Singh to India, after his successful treatment for a rare germ cell cancer in the US. "Thank God I am home" was all he said on arrival. BANNED Mobile phones inside the Tamil Nadu Assembly during ses-

sions. Assembly Speaker D. Jayakumar didn't provide any reason for his decision. QUALIFIED Boxer Vijender Singh for the London Olympic Games after reaching the semi-finals of the Asian qualifiers in Astana, Kazakhstan. He has, thus, become the first Indian boxer to qual-

ify for the Olympics three times in a row. STAYED Criminal proceedings against Bollywood filmmaker Madhur Bhandarkar, by the Supreme Court on a rape complaint by actor Priti Jain.
BHANDARKAR

