Mail

High and Mighty
APRIL 16, 2012

The tenth edition of INDIA TODAY Power List celebrates the enduring influence of the business class even as the Citizen Rearmed reaches the pinnacle for the first time in a year the politician lost the argument.

``
A Powerful Lot
The people on the High and Mighty list have done themselves and the nation proud ("Hail the Helmsmen", April 16). They have positively grown and contributed to the nation's growth. The list is source of inspiration for our future leaders. The rise of Anna Hazare has been phenomenal. His fight for the Lokpal Bill and ending corruption has found a huge following in the country. Though his ill-health has become a handicap, he is trying his level best to achieve his aim. As a young student, I feel inspired by these people.
MANTHAN THAKKAR, Pune

Anna topping the Power List proves one thing--that the saint in cotton and cap can still outsmart the satan in satin and hat.
R A J N E E S H B AT R A ,
Delhi

Set an Example
Bibi Jagir Kaur has been found guilty and awarded five years' jail term for the death of her daughter in 2000 ("Death and the Maiden", April 16). It is doubtful that she will go through the sentence like a commoner. She should be dealt with like one and no special concessions and privileges should be granted to her. That will send across the right message to all.
V.K. TANGRI, www.intoday.com

The political top 10 list is reflective of the present political scenario. Sonia Gandhi is still going

It is a shame on our democracy that favourites of political rulers get princely privileges during their jail terms. Inquiry should be made and the guilty punished for providing Bibi Jagir Kaur with special facilities. Privileged treatment to prisoners with a political background is not new, but it must stop immediately.
RATNA LUKE, Kerala

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

``

strong. However, the most surprising package of the Assembly elections was the rise of Akhilesh Yadav, who quietly planted himself on the Uttar Pradesh chief minister's chair. Hopefully, a better administration will be established in the state.
RAJAT KAPOOR, Karad
RAJESH SACHAR

Your Power List seems very accurate and in tune with the times. It shows how the trend is changing. Politicians are no longer the class with influence, rather businessmen and people from other walks of life are making news and contributing to the society in a much better way. Anna Hazare was the most deserving addition to the list. I was, however, disappointed with the poor ranking of Sachin Tendulkar.
TARUN KOHLI, Haldwani

Mail
Unfollow the Leader
The Congress failed to project its chief ministerial candidate in Uttar Pradesh ("Where Have You Been, Rahul?", April 16). Was it so sure of its defeat that it did not feel the need to do so? Rahul Gandhi campaigned in a sustained manner. But credit for the Congress defeat goes to Baba Ramdev and Anna Hazare, who became instrumental in decimating the party. Unnecessary attention is being given to Rahul Gandhi. Rahul and the UPA top rung will have to take charge of the situation and deliver to face next elections with confidence or else the future seems bleak for the alliance. Relying on spreadsheets and questionnaires is, of course, not a good idea.
VIKRAM JOHRI, Mumbai

35
in the elections, and also the degradation in integrity and probity of many legislatures. It has become amply clear how the entire electoral process is managed with the use of big money.
VINAY SHANKAR, Bhopal

The Election Commission has taken many commendable steps within its administrative limits which have checked sundry malpractices. Party bosses have been misusing elected MLAs in Rajya Sabha elections ever since secrecy in voting for Upper House of Parliament was abolished.
SUBHASH AGRAWAL, Delhi

next year. Last year, Bharti Airtel's shareholders approved an `enabling provision for the next five years' that authorises the company's Board of Directors to fix Mittal's annual remuneration `up to' a maximum of Rs 70 crore during the above mentioned period. The provision should be seen in that light and does not mean that Mittal's remuneration will be Rs 70 crore. As a matter of fact, there has been no increase in the total remuneration of Mittal during 2011-12.
RAZA KHAN, Head, Corporate Communications, Bharti Enterprises

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
M AY 1 5 - 3 1 , 1 9 7 7

The Gravel Game
The persistent refusal by the Haryana Directorate of Industries to follow the time honoured practice of leasing out by public auction quarrying rights for bajri (gravel) along the Ghaggar belt in Panchkula has cost the exchequer lakhs of rupees. The department adopted the arbitrary procedure of giving monopoly rights to one particular contractor, Amir Chand Singla, and his associates during the Emergency. This was done under pressure from some political bosses, who allegedly included the son and son-in-law of Bansi Lal, then defence minister, and former Haryana chief minister B.D. Gupta. The quantum of loss to the exchequer may be gauged from the fact that the open auction of quarrying rights on April 14 this year has netted a sum of Rs 4.77 lakh as against Rs 2.50 lakh earned through the "permit" system in 1976-77. Interestingly, the present auction confers quarrying rights for two and a half months only in 26 villages, while the Emergency "permits" were valid for 12 months and extended the rights to about 55 villages along the Ghaggar belt. It would not be unreasonable to believe that the extracted quantity of stones is far in excess of what is shown in the permits. This fact can be verified from the stone crushers who are registered dealers and income tax payees. It can be further cross-checked with relevant entries at the Haryana sales tax barriers where every outgoing truck loaded with bajri is recorded in the sales tax form number 24. by S. P. Sharma
B.D. GUPTA-- PRESSURE TACTICS?

Future Tales
The article on astrology made for an interesting read ("Have a Drink, See Your Future", April 16). I was very surprised to learn about the new techniques that these astrologers are using to predict the future. Who could have imagined that wine and tea would double up as a tool to offer solutions to your problems?
RITA MERCHANT, Bangalore

Though Rahul Gandhi is undergoing a refresher course in Indian politics, unfortunately neither Oxford nor Cambridge run any course on `how to beat the blues'. After working so hard for the elections and poor results, Gandhi's break seems fully justified.
RAGHAV PURI, Delhi

Corrigendum
This is with reference to the April 16 issue of your magazine which carried the `Power List 2012-- High and Mighty'. It has been wrongly mentioned that Sunil Bharti Mittal will receive an annual salary of Rs 70 crore from

Price of Democracy
The recent exposé of tacit horse trading in Jharkhand for Rajya Sabha seats cannot be called new ("Seats For Sale", April 16). It has exposed the misuse of money

The story `High Court Laid Low', that appeared in INDIA TODAY's edition dated December 13, 2010, erroneously stated that "advocate Shivam Sharma, son of Justice Rakesh Sharma who retired in July, has been practising in the Allahabad High Court for the past three years. He recently filed an Income Tax return of Rs 80 lakh". Shivam Sharma has been practising in the Lucknow bench of the court since 2001, the year he was enrolled. Also, his income tax returns for 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 were Rs 2,60,000 and Rs 3,81,000 respectively. The error with regard to the years, place of practice and income tax returns of Shivam Sharma is regretted.

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

