imPACT

to u cat i
The states of Uttar Pradesh and Haryana have opened their doors to an education revolution of sorts with some of the most up and coming private institutions being situated in these areas
ndia is now a great place for pursuing education with a lot of private players emerging in the subcontinent with great courses and international standards at offer. With a population of 1.2 billion people and the highest number of youth in the world, it is rather Utopian to count on government funding for everybody because it is not sufficient. Private institutions bridge this gap and at the same time offer a plethora of avenues for aspiring students to pursue. India is no longer a place where parents need to send their children abroad in seeking for a global standard in education; in fact India is steadily marching towards quality education, international tie ups and is even a hub for international students to seek higher education with some of the best institutes that the country has to offer. The Indian education system has taken a march ahead by collaborating with the best Universities in the world. This has led to a lot of competition leading to even better improvement in the quality of education being offered here. Students these days have broader dreams and there are a wide variety of educational opportunities that are available in the education sector. However, due to steep cut offs and the limited options that are provided by the government educational institutions, a lot of students often compromise on their real career goals and settle down for what is available. The advent of these private players take care of these shortcomings in the system and at the same time make quality education available to those that are most deserving of it. The states of Uttar Pradesh and Haryana have opened their doors to an education revolution of sorts with some of the most up and coming private institutions being situated in these areas. These institutions have been conceptualized by great minds that are success stories personified and they offer the highest quality of education in a somber and placid environment as they are situated far from the hustle and bustle of a busy metropolitan life. A lot of private institutions have made a beeline for this lucrative educational hub of the country. India Today Aspire brings to profiles of some of the most emerging educational hubs in this region.  MEERUT Meerut is an up and coming destination for education in this context. With a rich cultural and historical heritage, Meerut is a salubrious place for academic pursuits. The environment in Merrut is conducive for studying and the best part is that it provides global education facilities in a very earthy surroundings. SUBHARTI UNIVERSITY Subharti Sewa Sanstha was started as social service organization way back in 1977. Main aim of Subharti was to provide medical aid and education to the poor, needy and the villagers. It was also committed to social, communal harmony and national integration and also towards a casteless society. In 1996 Subharti stepped in the field of higher education to start with. It established a Dental College and Medical College, Nursing College, Physiotherapy College and several others colleges. The main campus of the University is in the National Capital Region strategically situated on National Highway-58, Meerut Bypass Road, Meerut. The campus, aptly called Subhartipuram, is spread over a sprawling area of about 250 acres of land comprising of magnificent buildings, lush green lawns and an atmosphere vibrant with over eight thousand people. The University has got constituent colleges which provides higher education in almost all the disciplines like Medical, Dental, Paramedical, Engineering, Management, Law, Journalism, Education, Arts and Science, thus creating highly qualified, academically and technically excellent professionals. The University has also started a number of courses through Distance Education. The Trust was established in 1991 by Smt. Rajwati Bhatnagar in the memory of her educationist husband late Dr. K.K. Bhatnagar. The purpose of the Trust was to guide the energy of the youth of the country in the right direction. This aim could only be achieved by educating the youth. Thus, the trust ventured into the field of education by establishing educational institutions from primary level to higher education. The Trust's aim was to instill the principles of services, nationalism and brotherhood into the young Indian mind in addition to just

In 1996 Subharti stepped in the field of higher education. It established a large number of institutions of higher education. Impressed by the work of Subharti, the State Government granted status of a University. Today we boast of an atmosphere vibrant with over 8000 people, determined to make this a jewel in the crown of the nation
I DR. ATUL KRISHNA FOUNDER PRESIDENT OF SUBHARTI KKB CHARITABLE TRUST

AnimPACTFeature
providing education. The Trust has also been carrying out various other social, national and charitable activities. The University has also started a number of courses through Distance Education and On- Line Education, so that the persons who are already in job and can not pursue regular courses may add on to their education status.The man behind the whole concept is a renowned Surgeon, Educationist, Nationalist, Philanthropist, Entrepreneur and most of all a Humanist, DrAtuI Krishna.  BHARAT INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY Another up coming institute in Meerut is that of Bharat Institute of Technology. BIT was established in the year 2000 with the spirit of imparting technical, managerial and leadership qualities in its students right from its inception. Bharat Institute of Technology, Meerut (U.P) India & Beacon Institute of Technology were formulated with an idea to generate entrepreneurs who could lead from the front. BIT is backed up with a set of highly qualified and experienced faculty from academic & industry background. It also boast of a world class infrastructure with independent buildings for each department, fully furnished in campus hostels with round the clock Wi-Fi connectivity, AC BIT has acquired a unique status in the region and boasts of a gamut of companies recruiting its students. The talent pool is strengthening with time and ensures even more staggering placement records in times to come. And BIT'S saga of success shall still prosper as it now owns a team of Trainers who have the will to win, the zeal to perform and the indomitable urge to reach its full potential.  HARYANA Gurgaon and Bahadurgarh are the most popular region in the NCR and these regions have carved a niche for itself. The corporate world has shifted from the nearby metropolis to establish themselves in these regions and are great places to study in. WORLD COLLEGE OF TECHNOLOGY & MANAGEMENT, GURGAON World College of Technology and Management is promoted by a group of exIITians with profound international Technical & Management education exposure abroad. World College of Technology and Management is part of group of institutions which have about 12,000 students on their rolls spread across Gurgaon, Jaipur & Bharatpur. World College of Technology and Management (WCTM) approved by AICTE, HRD Ministry, Government of India & Affiliated to MO University, Rohtak, has been established with the sole motive of imparting quality technical and management education. The prime focus of the college is on in-depth education, continuous monitoring and evaluation through tutorial, regular lab classes and expert lectures. Utmost efforts are placed to provide world class teaching learning environment with modern pedagogy and most advanced technical infrastructure. The campus community is a rich mixture of life style and personalities. This is one of the rare private institutes, where Chairman besides being M.S., M.Tech and Ph.D from IIT, Delhi & Post Doctorate from University of Leeds, UK an outstanding academician, has vast experience of Technical Education from Universities of America, Austria, Australia and England. The college offers MBA, MCA & B.Tech courses in Computer Science & Engineering (CSE), Information Technology (IT), Electronic & Communication Engineering (ECE), Civil Engineering (CE), Mechanical Engineering (ME) & Electrical Engineering (EE) disciplines. The College also provides learning opportunities to students beyond the curriculum. SAR Java, Auto CAD, Embedded System, Soft Skills, Dot Net and VLSI training students to enhance their technical skill. Students are also groomed in special personality development programmes conducted by specialized faculty. The College runs a professionally organized transport system for students to commute from all corners of Delhi and Gurgaon Strategically located on Farukhnagar (Kherakhurampur), Gurgaon, the College has one of the finest

competitive environment in a global work scenario MR. SHARAD JAIN, TRUSTEE (BIT, MEERUT)
Auditoriums, state-of-the-art research labs and equipments. In pursuit of continuing excellence, BIT has entered into academic tie up with California State University San Bernardino USA. The library prides itself with a rich collection of over 1,00,000 books and 350 national & international Journals of repute. Elibrary with Delnet facility is another feather in the cap. BIT has an excellent track record of placement with a strong alumni base and blue chip companies to their credit. The students are groomed with the in house training cell, in different spheres of personality development, interpersonal skills and mock interviews. They are further empowered in their skills by regular guest lectures, industrial visits and live projects being accorded to them. A leading Professional Institute in Meerut region, BIT takes pride in its motto "Excellence in Education". In recognition of the high standards achieved by the Institute, BIT is accredited by NBA-AICTE for 4 branches of Engineering with which it started in the year 2001. In a short span of 6 years, it has been nominated as the center of UPSEE and CPMT examination as well as UPSEE counselling. It is a premier Institution devoted to nurturing the cause of professionalism in the technical and management fields through exchange of knowledge and experience of expert teaching and management fraternity. This stands true of BIT forging ahead with its sole aim of creating a smarter and more intelligent generation of individuals who have the qualities of the heart and ones who are matchless in intellect and endeavor. Keeping in sync with the changing times the Institute bears with pride the honor of being the only institute in the region that owns its own Training Cell comprising adept professionals who have the passion, the one drive, to groom students and thus transforming them from a novice to a thorough professional.

DR. NARENDRA
CHAIRMAN (WCTM

AnimPACTfeature
infrastructure facilities in the area against a lush green backdrop spread over 18 acres. The Campus comprises of World College of Technology & Management (MBA, MCA, M.Tech & B.Tech), KIMS World Management College (PGDM) Post Graduate Management Programme and Oxford College of Education (B.Ed.) WCTM boasts of fully furnished labs and modern infrastructure, State-of-Art computational faculties with Pentium-IV personal computers & servers, 24 hours internet connectivity with 6 Mbps bandwidth and Wi-Fi Campus, Excellent indoor & outdoor games, Summer training and staff development programmes for faculty, Well maintained canteens available in the campus, Excursion trip to various industries & institutes, Centrally Air-cooled separate girls' & Boy's hostel on 15 acre lush green campus with round the clock security and power backup, Fully air conditioned all class -rooms/lecturer theatres, labs & library,State-of-art library with over 20,000 books & Digital/DELNET & Elearning Connectivity and above all the college is proud to have 100% placement of outgoing batch of MBA & PGDM in companies like Skilrock Technologies Pvt. Ltd, Glaciers Waters Industries, ICICI Bank Ltd., FCS Software Solutions, Valuefirst, Indiabulls, Electronic Arts Games India Pvt. Ltd., Wipro, Compro Technologies, KNOTS, Syntel, Bata India, HCL, Perfect Baud Enterprises, HDFC, EmTech Foundation, Value Research, Rawr Corporate Solution Pvt. Ltd.(Daily Desire), GCPL Technologies, Tikona Digital Networks (Adecco), Mind & Tech Software Venture, SWAY Techno Solutions, Oilco Servics (India) Limited, AGATE Infosoft Pvt. Ltd., TAXUS Meditech, Kalsi Creations Pvt. Ltd., Vinsol (Vinayak Solutions Pvt. Ltd.), GOOGLE (Deputed Through Rofous Software Pvt. Ltd.) The NCR is soon becoming the most sought after region for some of the best emerging private players to set up their institutes. Equipped with a great academic environment and a cutting edge view of the corporate work, this regions provide you the best of both worlds and most importantly a variety of avenues and career paths to choose from while saving up on spending in a similar standard of education abroad.  POM EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS, BAHADURGARH Another fast and growing education hub is the city of Bahadurgarh which is both a city and a municipal council, known as the "Gateway of Haryana", the city is famous for pakoras and is home to the manufacturing units of numerous large companies, including: Hindustan National Glass, Parle Products, Advanced Enterprises and SPL Industries. As urban India rises in prosperity and demand, its next two decades rest on the shoulders of those who are now beginning their higher education. In this new decade, India will have to raise its game to become an even stronger global competitor, the game changers are just getting into college. The country needs people with complete personalities, able to cope with the changing scenario and economic fluctuations to lead the country into prosperous era, so that the dream of India becoming a super power comes to be true. The common outlook of students and parents that the child with maximum marks on the report card is the best needs to be changed, because the country needs people who can innovate and rise and be successful in any situation. From the schooling at PDM Public School to the LIG and PG degrees at various PDM Educational Institutions, the students according to their respective age groups are taught to become complete individuals who are fit to participate in the developing economy so that dream of seeing India as a super economy becomes a reality. With this core goal in mind, the Prabhu Dayal Memorial Religious and Educational Association (PDMREA, popularly referred as PDM) came up with its first Institution named PDM Polytechnic in 1995-96, and then came up PDM College of Engineering in 1999, PDM Public School in 2003, PDM College of Management & PDM College of Pharmacy in 2004, PDM Institute of Engineering & Technology at Karsindhu, Safidon (Jind) in 2005, PDM College of Education, Ultra Modern PDM Dental College & Research Institute & General Hospital in 2006, PDM College of Engineering for Women in 2009 and PDM School of Technology & Management in 2011. A new Institute in the form of PDM International School is coming shortly to add more grace to the PDM Family. Today, it is well established institution spread over 45 acres of land in absolutely pollution free surroundings. The Association has achieved success in the field of education in a short span of time and it plans to add new

The Institution believes in being guided by a universal spirit, operating in hitherto unserved areas like rural and in disciplines where there is shortage of quality manpower. The PDM believes in combining what is best in traditional education and what is latest and appropriate in technology like web based learning, open learning and interactive learning MRJ.S. PRABHU
CO-CHIARfflAN (PDMREA) educational courses every year so that quality education in every field becomes available under one roof for the convenience of the students, which was a dream of Shri Prabhu Dayal Ji, the noted philanthropist, in whose memory PDM Group of Educational Institutions have been established. In the last seventeen years, the success of PDM inspires confidence in its ability to continue to produce those special skills and attitude that produces leaders capable of changing the world of technology, management, pharmacy and dental science. The world class faculty, state of the art technology and consistently high percentage of placements bear testimony to the great hub of pursuing a higher education that PDM is.  GALGOTIAS UNIVERSITY, GREATER NOIDA As a world-class University, Galgotias has a truly multi-cultural, multidimensional, multi-national and multi-disciplinary set up. These rich reservoirs of talent, expertise and industry insight are sharing their thoughts, ideas and knowledge with academicians from IITs, thus offering the students best of both the worlds. Keeping up with international standards of infrastructural requirements, Galgotias University has smart, hi-tech classrooms, well-equipped labs, activity centres etc. designed by Arcop International, a Montreal-based company. Inspired and guided by the global fraternity of teachers here, everything is technologically brilliant and most advanced. With the first-class faculty and facilities, students admitted here can't be anything short of 90 percent holders in their Xllth class. They have to be exceptional, extremely diligent to make full use of the resources available here. With the best offered to them, they need not think of going abroad for further studies. In fact, meritorious foreign students seeking highest quality education are seeing Galgotias University as the world-class centre of learning. All faculty members are Ph.D in their respective fields of specialization. Their knowledge, prowess, innovativeness and of course valuable industry experience will go a long way in grooming tomorrow's super achievers. Galgotias University, an initiative of the illustrious Galgotia Group, has an impressive legacy of eight decades in the field of education. It's got a lineage of visionaries who dream big and achieve bigger. Suneel Galgotia, Chancellor, Galgotia University says "The idea behind creating a world-class university is the fact that students need global exposure, not just during placements, but during the entire training tenure. They need to interact with global students and teachers throughout their learning years, so that their mindset is truly global." t is also dedicated to providing its students with an education that combines rigorous. The programs here are known for their emphasis on critical thinking, taking into consideration the real world scenario and the openness of the learning environment and teaching learning culture. The discussions and interactions in classrooms are so intense that students often move out of the classrooms to the canteens, hostels and other areas of the campus and into the society.

