Na tion GUJARAT

CHANDY (SECOND FROM LEFT) WITH UDF LEADERS AT A MEETING IN THIRUVANANTHAPURAM

GUJARATSCORES APOWER POINT
Unique project harnesses solar power from panels placed on a Narmada canal
n innovative solar power project in Gujarat has started generating 1 MW of power, that is 1.6 million units of electricity per year, enough to meet the domestic power requirement of 16,000 families. The project, mooted six months ago by the state power department, was operationalised on March 28 and will be inaugurated on April 24. In a first, solar panels were placed on a .75 km stretch of a canal of the Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam (SSNN) near Ahmedabad, thus saving land costs as well as preventing water evaporation. The government is also planning to insert micro turbines into the steel structure of solar panels to produce low-intensity hydropower. The state is already the leading solar power producer in the country. Solar parks

A

in Gujarat have been generating 600
MW since March. This is twice the so-

SOLAR POWER PLANT ON THE NARMADA DAM CANAL, NEAR AHMEDABAD

lar power generated in the rest of the country. One particular plant at Charanka village in north Gujarat produces 214 MW--the largest single park in Asia to do so. This solar energy prevents eight million tonnes of carbon dioxide from being released into the atmosphere; it also represents 9,00,000 tonnes of coal and natural gas saved annually. By 2022, the state plans to produce 10,000 MW of solar energy. Says D.J. Pandian, state energy secretary, who oversaw the execution of the project, "When Chief Minister Narendra Modi mooted the idea in 2011, many thought it was difficult to execute. But we took the risk and today it is a reality. Solar plants require large tracts of land for installation as well as water for maintenance. This project requires

none and also saves money by preventing evaporation of the dam water." S. Jagadeesan, managing director, SSNN, says the project has greater potential: "Solar power generation is possible on 3,500 km of the Narmada dam's 7,600-km-long branch canal network." The project, implemented in collaboration with US firm SunEdison, cost Rs 17 crore, which is higher than the cost of Rs 10 crore required for a regular solar project. Pandian says this being their first attempt, they ended up spending Rs 5 crore more over the projected cost. He assures further research will bring down the costs and there would be no cost overruns next time. "If the micro turbine experiment succeeds, we might be able to bring it down to a level lower than the cost of a regular solar project," he says. "This project is revolutionary. There is also a possibility that the flowing water below will keep the solar panels warm and in the process may end up producing more power than a normal solar project," says Pashupathy Gopalan, managing director of SunEdison, India. Power from the plant, in which 3,616 solar power panels have been installed, will be fed into the local grid for use by surrounding towns and villages. by Uday Mahurkar

Photographs by C. SHANKAR

KERALA

ALLYCORNERS CONGRESS
Induction of a fifth Muslim League minister is surrender to blackmail
he induction of a fifth minister from the Indian Union Muslim League (IUML), an ally of the UDF government in Kerala, has plunged the Congress-led coalition into a fresh crisis. The events have created fissures not only in the ruling coalition but also the Congress. Chief Minister Oommen Chandy is accused of succumbing to the League's demand despite objections raised by the Kerala Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC). The number of ministers from minority communities--Christians and Muslims--has reached 12, more than that of Hindus in the 20-member body. To placate Hindu groups, Chandy has reshuffled portfolios of Congress ministers. He has given up home and gifted it to a Congress minister belonging to the Nair community, while revenue has been handed to another minister from the powerful Ezhava community. On April 11, Chandy decided to grant the fifth berth in spite of a decision on April 3 by KPCC against the move. M. Ali, the league's fifth minister, was sworn in on April 12 along with Kerala Congress's Anoop Jacob, who won the Piravom bypoll held in March. Later, Chandy announced the reconstitution of portfolios held by Congress ministers without consulting KPCC or UDF or even anyone within his own camp. "I needed only the high

T

M. ALI (LEFT) BEING SWORN IN BY GOVERNOR H.R. BHARDWAJ

command's sanction, which I have secured," says Chandy. It has now been revealed that although Congress President Sonia Gandhi was not happy with the changes, she agreed to Chandy's proposal at the last minute after he put pressure on her through her political secretary Ahmed Patel and Defence Minister A.K. Antony. Hindu organisations like the Nair Service Society (NSS) or Sree Narayana Dharma Paripalanayogam (SNDP), which back UDF, are unhappy. "The reshuffle is just a gimmick to mask their capitulation before the minorities," says G. Sukumaran Nair, general secretary, NSS. Though KPCC President Ramesh Chennithala has been silent in public,

sources say he has complained to the Congress high command about being kept in the dark. Chandy informed Chennithala just before the swearingin ceremony. Muslim League's workers staged a march to Chennithala's home to protest against his reported views. The crisis has jeopardised UDF's prospects in the by-election to Neyyattinkara Assembly seat in Thiruvananthapuram district in June. UDF is already in a precarious position with just 72 members in the 140member Assembly. A defeat in Neyyattinkara would once again challenge the government's survival as its majority would come down to three in the Assembly.
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

48

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

