NET FLUX

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

smart sheet

Bob Bytes
Anyone who isn't slightly wary of the line "Nomoshkar....ek mineet...", has probably been living under a rock.Those chilling words spoken by Bob Biswas, the name of the villain in the recent thriller Kahaani, have become a rage, so much so that the character now has his own Facebook page. "There is no psychopathic laughter, no twitching, no punch dialogue. He is the friendly neighbourhood-hired assassin. He is Bob Biswas," reads the page that has more than 10,000 likes. Played brilliantly by Bengali actor Saswata Chatterjee, the character has terrified, but at the same time intrigued the on-

A GEM FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

Much Ado about Kony
In a blog in The Atlantic site,writer Teju Cole put the Kony phenomenon in perspective.Calling it `The White Savior Industrial Complex' , he disagreed with the approach taken by Invisible Children (the makers of the Kony 2012 video) "because there is much more to doing good work than `making a difference' . There is the principle of first do no harm.There is the idea that those who are being helped ought to be consulted over matters that concern them." He added that what the continent needs is a more equitable society, robust democracy and a fairer system of justice.
COLE

SASWATA AS BOB BISWAS; (INSET) THE FACEBOOK PAGE

line world for being what is perhaps the most unassuming insurance agent-turnedcontract killer. Bespectacled and pudgy, Biswas utters his

catchphrase before shooting his victims. Fans have posted hilarious tributes to the killer--there was SpongeBob Biswas, Bob Biswas vs Batman, and one that brought up the fact that the character has an eerie resemblance to a certain TV news anchor.

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for music lovers, party animals and those who are single. If you own a smartphone, get these apps. Moshcam virtually takes you to those concerts you have missed. Enjoy the music. Yoke helps you identify and meet single Facebook friends and their single friends. Find love here. UpTo lets you see friends' upcoming events and helps you coordinate with them on meeting up.

web wow

Women with Spunk

Jezebel, a women's blog, gets 2,00,000 hits a day from across the world. The website, owned by Gawker Media, covers entertainment, fashion, culture and politics. The blog was founded by Ann Holmes, 39, a former journalist. One of the site's principles is to avoid saying misogynist things about women's weight.

viral video app buzz

Romney Rap

Online Googly
Form a cricket team and bowl googlies and hit sixes on CricVille, a multiplayer online game that recently launched an app on Facebook.The game was developed by Adithyaa Srikkanth, 27, CEO and founder of ZealCity Studios and Online Interactive Entertainment Company. He speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. When and why did you start CricVille? A. I conceived the game a year ago, but launched it on Facebook only recently. I wanted people to get more social while playing their favourite game. Q. How has the response been so far? A. Over 1,000 people signed up in three days.We are aiming for 1,000 more. Q. New developments? A. We will launch a new version of the game in time for IPL, but it'll be more of an international premier league.
SRIKKANTH

buzz feed

Hoodies United
Less than a month after the death of Trayvon Martin,17,right-wing attorney Geraldo Rivera blamed Martin's hoodie, saying it caused his death as much as his alleged shooter George Zimmerman.In response,citizens and celebrities took to social networking sites to show their solidarity with the Martin family.Rappers Diddy,Nelly and the entire Miami Heat basketball team tweeted pictures wearing the garment.

Grand Old Party frontrunner Mitt Romney has been frequently criticised during the US presidential campaign for his conflicting views. This led Hugh Atkins, an Australian law student, to ask the question, "Will the real Mitt Romney please stand up?" With some clever editing, Atkins made a video in a week by splicing speeches made by Romney, politician Newt Gingrich and Barack Obama to the tune of rapper Eminem's The Real Slim Shady. The video has gone viral.

NEW

