UP FRONT

MAHESH BHATT

WE ARE WHATWE WANTTO HIDE
I
t has become commonplace to catch politicians a towel to cover anyone's modesty. You can no longer have the best of both worlds. You watching pornography in public. But I am not surprised. Nor am I going to gloat and say Gotcha! It can either be anonymous and safe or you can be a proves beyond doubt that in India, if you're famous, you celebrity in a goldfish bowl with no hiding place. are living in an aquarium. Increasingly, high-profile Intrusive technology and the growing culture of tabloid movers and shakers will have people intruding into journalism will make people in the public arena even their sacred space. Privacy can no longer be used as a more vulnerable. It is especially true in the case of fig leaf by celebrities of any kind. And in any case, what right wing parties, whose value system is not in operadoes that fig leaf cover? That you have a sweet tooth for tion in reality--in fact has never been in operation. sex? All through human history, the sexual appetite of But those in power operate on the principle that people human beings has continuously got the better of them. need to be rescued. They seek privileges on that This public distaste for sex is an archaic morality im- ground. They ask us to step aside when they board an posed on us. We are all hard-wired into wanting sex. It aircraft. They want us to pause as they race past us on a crowded street. They want us to stand outside so they is the albatross we cannot shake off. Yet, all through history, human beings have been get the best seats in the auditorium. It is only natural that the collective rage of the comcaught in compromising situations. Our leaders have become custodians of this bogus lie that sex is something mon man is being unleashed upon them. Yet they will not best left for the bedroom, and perhaps not even there. drop this façade of high moral authority. They will only They preach what they don't practise. In fact, we are become smarter as stripping the powerful of their masks what we want to hide. Those who don't have to proclaim becomes a national sport, as it is in the West. Ever since they are religious or political figureheads can live with the Christine Keeler scandal in 1963 in England, which cost then secretary of state for a certain degree of tranquillity SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com war John Profumo his job, it's because they have no fear of been a familiar narrative. It alpublic exposure. They don't ways titillates. There is nothneed to have their guard up at ing more exciting than to all times. But that is the probwatch the fall of an icon. It's lem with celebrities. They are the ordinary man's `Aha!' moall afraid of being discovered ment. Aha! So he's just like me. for who they are, they are You could call this a stressfrightened of public glare. buster for a stressed nation. And yet one wonders why As long as people choose to would our chosen representaclimb on a pedestal, saying tives sit in the Legislative they are better than us, sepaAssembly and watch pornograte from us, or holier than us, raphy on their phones? It is they are asking for it. There is because the powerful feel they a parallel in my own industry. are invisible. They feel they If any so-called art movie or are wearing a bullet-proof documentary shows anything jacket. It is like death. It hapdebased, it becomes aesthetic. pens only to other people. If a commercial film shows But things have changed beluscious images, it is dubbed cause of pressure from media C-grade cinema. It's all part of and civil society. There is a All through human history, the game. The public figure level playing field now. People the sexual appetite of human will do something embarrassin the public eye are not albeings has continuously got ing, the media will make him lowed to get away with the headlines, thinking it has hypocrisy. The appetite of the the better of them. This done a public service, and the public for public naming and public distaste for sex is an people's love for vicarious shaming has grown. The moarchaic morality imposed on pleasure will be satisfied. Till ment you say you are Mr or us. We are all hardwired into the next sex scandal. Ms Clean, you open the doors wanting sex. It is the albato scrutiny. The public is no longer in a mood to throw in tross we cannot shake off. Mahesh Bhatt is a filmmaker

10

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

