Signature
R O U G H

KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

PARLIAMENT'S PAAN SINGH TOMARS
hy do we cringe when Sharad Yadav says in Lok Sabha: "Is tambu mei bambu laga W ke rakhiye adhyaksha ji". Is it because he is addressing the very softspoken Meira Kumar whose most censorious comment till now has been to ask raging MPs to "baith jaiye"? Or is it because he chose to speak the same language as those he was attacking, Team Anna, whose latest slogan echoes Paan Singh Tomar's emblematic dialogue: "545 mein se 163 dakait aur beimaan, phir bhi mera bharat mahaan?" A character in Anita Desai's In Custody calls Hindi a "vegetarian monster", "that language of peasants, raised on radishes and potatoes". Writing about it in her new book, English Heart, Hindi Heartland, scholar Rashmi Sadana compares Old Delhi, seeped in culture and graceful Urdu speakers, with the new hinterland, devoid of grace and teeming with Hindi speakers. Indeed, as the rest of India takes over Delhi, the language of power is changing. No longer are those in power desperate to attain a stamp of approval from the English-speaking elite. Like Akhilesh Yadav, they are quite happy to treat English as a foreign language, understanding it perfectly well, but answering in the shorthand that suits them. And the elites are quite happy to embrace this snub. They have seen that their fluency in English, the language of 20th century India, does not help them in the 21st century. Mamata Banerjee accuses her critics of doubting her sanity merely because she is not an English speaker ("Just because I cannot speak good English, doesn't mean you can bulldoze me every day"). But anyone who has to do business in West Bengal--unfortunately a dwindling community--has to get clearance from her first. Narendra Modi's open disdain for liberals translates into a complete disregard for English speakers-- something Nitin Gadkari pointed to in 2011 when he said "if anyone speaks up for Modi, he is attacked by the English media". But increasingly, they can't do without him, because he speaks the neutral language of money. The Karunanidhi family struggles with English, and anyone who has seen their history of trying to find an intermediary to Delhi would like to stick to their comfort zone. Indeed, Karunanidhi had once compared Hindi to food from a hotel, English to food prepared by a cook according to instructions, and Tamil to food cooked by the mother who knows the family's needs. As coalition politics becomes embedded in Delhi's culture, the traditional English-speaking elites will have to get used to a new dialect, and this urge of allies to be fed by the mother. In that sense, perhaps, we are returning to Mahatma Gandhi's original distrust of English as a sign of slavery, rather than the post-independent acceptance of English as a link language. Understanding it is essential, but speaking it is not necessary. Could it have something to do with English-speaking allies like J. Jayalalithaa, Naveen Patnaik and the Left parties being slippery customers? It also has to do with a new world, as Sadana points out, which consists of readers of Chetan Bhagat novels. It offers them a "kind of passport" to the urban middle class they aspire to, but increasingly in their own accent. 

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

NO LONGER ARE THOSE IN POWER DESPERATE TO ATTAIN A STAMP OF APPROVAL FROM THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING ELITE. THEY ARE QUITE HAPPY TO TREAT ENGLISH AS A FOREIGN LANGUAGE.

S I G N P O STS
WON Gold, by India's women boxers M.C. Mary Kom and L. Sarita Devi at the sixth Asian Boxing Championship in Ulan Bator, Mongolia. The team finished with a rich haul of two MARY KOM

gold, four silver and two bronze medals. GRANTED Permanent commission, by the Indian Army to serving women officers in legal and educational branches. Women officers in the Short Service Commission would be absorbed on a permanent basis in the next two months after the

necessary screening and training procedures. CLEARED A bill seeking to give a woman a share in her husband's property, by the Union Cabinet. The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010, also aims at giving rights to adopted children on a par with biological offspring.

DIED Former chairman of Press Trust of India P.K. Roy. The 91year-old was president of the Indian Newspaper ROY Society and the Audit Bureau of Circulations for several terms.

APRIL 9, 2012  INDIA TODAY

17

