Int erview of theWeek CHRISTINE LAGARDE
Speaking softly in her accented English, International Monetary Fund (IMF) Managing Director Christine Lagarde says though she is the first woman to helm the Fund, she won't be the last. The 56-year-old displays complete candour when she says, "You have to grit your teeth a little harder, because you want to demonstrate that yes, we can do it and other women can do it after me. It's a great challenge, a great task and a great job." A former synchronised swimming champion who is keen on scuba diving and power yoga, her athletic frame belies her age. After cutting her teeth as chairperson of Chicagobased law firm Baker & McKenzie, her powers of persuasion--backed by a lack of pretension--make her a powerful negotiator in the world of high street finance. In an extensive conversation with SANDEEP BAMZAI, she says capitalism will survive the repeated stress tests it is being subjected to. Q. You have been saying since late 2011 that the global economy has entered a new "dangerous phase". On the face of it, markets seem to have calmed down in the last couple of months and there has been some movement from policymakers in Europe to ease the immediate crisis. Are you any more comfortable with the global scenario today than you were, say, three months ago? A. We are not out of the danger zone, but we have avoided the worst. Things have improved, thanks to strong policy measures--in particular by the European Central Bank (ECB) and European countries. Recent economic indicators suggest an uptick in activity, mostly in the US. But let us not get ahead of ourselves. Gains could easily be reversed. Major economic and financial vulnerabilities remain. We need to use this breathing space to build on what has been done. Q. A fresh rescue fund for Greece has been put in place. But it comes with such stringent austerity conditions that it could push the nation into an even deeper recession and perhaps even a deeper debt trap. Do you think the measures can turn counterproductive?

``

A. The Greek government's new programme is explicitly designed to help the country's projected recovery. The overall objectives are growth, competitiveness and jobs alongside sustainable public finances and stable banks. What is crucial is to increase employment. Unemployment remains high at 18 per cent with youth unemployment at almost 45 per cent. We need to recognise that the Greek economy is set to contract further in the short run. Fiscal adjustment should be done in a way that protects the most vulnerable, and distributes the burden fairly across the population. Q. Are elevated oil prices adding to the problems of the global economy? The reason for the oil price spike seems to be tensions with Iran. What is the IMF's view? A. The possibility of sharply higher oil prices, driven by geopolitical-related supply concerns, is certainly a risk for the global economy. The impact on prices will be quite large if a disruption in supplies involving Iran, the world's third largest exporter of crude oil, were not compensated by other oil producers. A halt of Iran's exports to OECD economies without offset from other

sources would probably trigger an initial price increase of 20-30 per cent, with other producers or emergency stock releases offsetting over time. Q. The IMF is seeking more funds for itself ($500 billion) and is also asking Europe to increase the size of its firewall. What is the objective behind this? Do you fear that other nations may need a bailout? A. We estimate a global potential financing need of $1 trillion in the coming years in an adverse scenario. To play its part, the IMF would aim to raise up to $500 billion in additional lending resources. We are consulting the membership. Our financing is for all members, Euro area or otherwise. Boosting the Fund's lending capacity is about two things: Supplementing the resources Europe will be putting on the table, but also to meet needs of `innocent bystanders' affected by contagion, anywhere in the world. Q. You have asked other nations, including emerging economies like China and India, to lend more support towards Europe. How successful has that pitch been? A. We are discussing with all our members options for increasing Fund

52

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

``
AFP

WE ARE NOT OUT OF THE DANGER ZONE YET

resources. Emerging markets such as China and India are very important members and part of these discussions. Emerging market economies will play a bigger role going forward. This is obvious, and cannot be ignored. Look at the IMF high table. For the first time ever, there is a deputy managing director from China and now the secretary of the our executive board is from China. The proportion of Indian economists at the IMF is double of the quota. The human and managerial talent from emerging economies will play a significant part. In fact, the head of the Asia and Pacific Department at IMF is also an Indian. Asia's share of capital and voting rights is going up. The shift of power is taking place. I think advanced economies need to learn from the way India and China have handled the pressures lately. Q. Are you disappointed with India's economic performance? A lot is being made domestically of the policy inaction that has pushed growth rate and investment rates lower. A. Indian authorities have said on several occasions that India has the potential to grow at 9 per cent, but reaching those growth rates will require substantial reforms. The 12th Plan

Approach Paper has identified the right areas for reforms. I agree that infrastructure, especially power and investing in education and healthcare, are the key. Together with enhanced social programmes, raising agricultural productivity is also very important. We think also labour market and financial reforms would boost growth and help create more formal sector jobs allowing India to capitalise on its demographic dividend. India has generally pursued a very inclusive reform process, seeking broad consensus on reforms which takes time to build but usually pays off by reducing the probability of backtracking. Q. India seems to be stuck with a persistent problem of inflation. Even today, after 13 interest rate hikes, we can't say that inflation concerns are

Advanced economies need to learn from the way India and China have handled the global slowdown.

over. Does that worry you? A. The RBI has done the right thing by tightening monetary policy to fight inflation. We also agree that pausing is currently appropriate as growth has also slowed. Because inflation has been elevated for some time, it may take time to bring it down to the averages prevailing in the mid-2000s. Fiscal consolidation will help reduce demand pressures. And finally, easing some bottlenecks, for example in the food supply, could help deal with structural pressures on food prices. Indian authorities are rightly fighting inflation on several fronts. Q. What can the government do to revive growth and investment? A. India is a supply-constrained economy. Bringing back high growth will require removing those constraints. Reforms that can address this include those needed to improve infrastructure, such as mining, energy pricing and land acquisition; the Goods and Services Tax; and advancing financial reforms, especially boosting the development of the corporate bond market. Fiscal and financial reforms should also be implemented to increase resilience and make growth more inclusive. Addressing problems in the power and coal sectors are the immediate priority given the linkages across all sectors. Q. What is the long-term prospect for India? A. India is a bright star with many strengths that will serve it well, including its great entrepreneurial spirit. I welcome the initiatives to scale up the use of Aadhaar, which should ensure maximum impact of Government money on the lives of people who need it the most. India also has an important role as a voice of emerging and developing economies. Reform is difficult in any country, and in a large and heterogeneous place such as India achieving consensus can take a long time. The Budget reiterated the Government's commitment to many important reforms to taxation and the financial sector and the Fund strongly supports those. We hope the Government can build on those and move forward with other structural reforms to facilitate infrastructure investment and liberalise the labour market. 

APRIL 9, 2012  INDIA TODAY

53

