Cover Story ARMY
GENERALV.K. SINGH

GENERAL SINGH'S WAR ON INDIA
Vindictive army chief seeks to damage country's honour out of personal pique
By Sandeep Unnithan

G

eneral Vijay Kumar Singh began to plan his revenge on February 10, the day the Supreme Court struck down his effort to prolong his tenure as Army chief through a change in the date of his birth. His rage was silent and invisible. He planned his offensive with military precision. He seemed indifferent to the fact that, in the process, sensitive national interests might get hurt.
the Northeast, formed for conflict with China, at a time when Chinese President Hu Jintao was a state guest in New Delhi. On March 28, the army chief forwarded a complaint to CBI against Lt-Gen Dalbir Singh Suhag, commander of the Dimapur-based 3 Corps, based on a letter sent by a Trinamool Congress member of Parliament to Defence Minister A.K. Antony over a year ago. It related to procurement scams in a secret unit called the `Special Frontier Force' (SFF) operating under Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), comprising Tibetan guerrillas. Officially, the Government denies the existence of this covert SFF. General V.K. Singh's anger was directed at those who would benefit from the fact that he would retire in May. He wanted to destroy his potential successors, and if in the process the Army

His three-pronged offensive was well timed: the week beginning March 26. Parliament would be in session, but the spotlight would have shifted from the Budget and be available to his controversies. Delhi would also host the BRICS Summit that week; and a military-civilian confrontation would get sensational play before the heads of China and Russia, to the acute embarrassment of the Indian Government. This last was designed for maximum outrage. The general's strategy included revival of an incident in 2011, a claim that he had received a bribe offer from a retired general. The second weapon was a top secret letter he had written to the Prime Minister warning of the perilous state of the Army's defence preparedness. The third missile was the revelation of a top secret force in

AP PHOTO

Cover Story

ARMY
be with officers. But he was livid. "Why did the chief of army staff himself not immediately have the person offering the bribe arrested?" an outraged Jaswant asked. Lt-Gen Tejinder Singh had retired just two months before the alleged bribery attempt. The Army Act applies to service personnel three years after they retire. In another instance, Lt-Gen Avadesh Prakash, who retired on January 31, 2010, was court-martialled on December 3, 2011. Prakash was dismissed from service with retrospective effect and stripped of his rank, pension and other benefits for influencing a private developer in the Sukna land scam. The same process could have applied to Lt-Gen Tejinder Singh. Another salvo was fired on March 27: a newspaper carried details of a top secret letter written on March 12 by the army chief to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. In the letter, the chief said that the army's tanks were out of ammunition, the infantry preparedness was critically low and that the air defence was "97 per cent obsolete". The implication? Corruption and the defence ministry inactivity were eating into defence preparedness. The target? Once again, the defence minister. These revelations swamped headlines as India hosted heads of the world's fastest growing economies, Brazil, Russia, China and South Africa at the fourth BRICS summit in Delhi. If China was smiling at the wretched civil war in Delhi, it kept its satisfaction out of sight. This boomeranged on the army chief as it was believed that he was behind the leak. An enraged Janata Dal (United) immediately demanded the chief be sacked. Rashtriya Janata Dal

and India got hurt, so be it. Lt-Gen Suhag is the second down the line of succession. He takes over as army chief from General V.K. Singh's successor, LtGen Bikram Singh, in 2014. The army chief, who retires on May 31, claims that officers who follow him have been helped by vested interests. General V.K. Singh began his offensive with a TV channel and newspaper interview in which he claimed that a retired general had walked into his office in September 2010 and offered him a Rs 14 crore bribe. This was Lt-Gen Tejinder Singh, who retired as Director General, Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA). But the target of the offensive was not the former military spymaster. It was Defence Minister A.K. Antony, 71, a politician whose reputation in money matters so far has been as spotlessly clean as his white dhoti and starched shirt. General V.K. Singh told him of the bribe offer in September 2011. Antony recalls: "I was shocked. It took me two minutes to regain my composure. Then I told him to take action but he told me I do not want to pursue it." But Antony has no convincing explanation for his inaction, for instead of ordering an immediate inquiry, he did nothing. Antony claims General V.K. Singh did not want to pursue the matter, but the decision was his to take, not the general's. How could he condone an allegation of corruption at the highest levels through silence, particularly when the bribery conversation had been taped? "I don't know why he did not want to pursue it at that time," Antony explained. BJP leader Jaswant Singh is both a former army officer and a defence minister, and his natural sympathy tends to

MARKED ANTONY
or over a year defence minister A.K. Antony sat on the sidelines of an impasse between army headquarters and the defence ministry. The ministry would not clear Army Chief General V.K. Singh's new promotion policy that affected the promotions of 60 Brigadiers and Major Generals. It was not the first case of his dithering on a major policy issue. The army chafes at the minister's management style where major decisions are either referred to the law ministry or left to the bureaucracy. If General V.K. Singh has come off looking like a man on a mission to take down an institution with him, Antony has looked increasingly inert. On the age row, Antony allowed the issue to fester for over a year, evasively referring it to the Attorney General. On the bribery charge, he allowed the general to keep it private. There was no written evidence for the allegation, necessary to commission a probe, he later said. There was none even when he ordered the CBI investigation on March 26. Antony's failings can be traced to his career as Kerala chief minister. He has been seen as a quitter when he comes across a crisis--resigning three times in a five-decade political career, twice as chief minister in 1978 and 2004, and once as a Union

The defence minister's inability to take tough decisions dates back to his days as chief minister
in the communal carnage at Marad in Kozhikode in 2003, where eight persons were hacked to death. Antony failed to take tough action against the accused. Antony's hurried resignation as Union civil supplies minister in 1993, when his ministry was involved in the sugar import scam, was seen as early evidence of his being a quitter. Many thought he should have booked the crooks in his ministry instead of leaving in a huff. He was brought into the defence ministry in 2006 when Pranab Mukherjee moved to replace K. Natwar Singh in the foreign ministry. Into his second term, Antony will find it hard to surpass Mukherjee's record as a nononsense defence minister who held his bureaucrats and military chiefs on a tight leash during his two-year stint. An explosive burst of temper once caused a senior bureaucrat to pass out. Antony, on the contrary, is soft to the point of being inaudible. Inactive at times to the point of being called DNA. Do Nothing Antony. The defence minister has allowed far greater autonomy to the armed forces and bureaucrats. His ability to float above the chaos and corruption in the defence ministry earned him the moniker of Saint Antony, a minister of high personal integrity but lacking the gravitas to transform the ministry. The label of inactivity has been a hallmark of South Block during Antony's six-year tenure. It could well become his legacy. by M.G. Radhakrishnan

RIVEN BY SCANDALS
The Army's hitherto spotless reputation has been sullied by a spate of recent incidents

F

CASE Army chief's bribe charge
General V.K. Singh claims in media interviews and Army press releases from March 5 onwards that a lobbyist, who had "just" retired, offered him a bribe of Rs 14 crore to clear a contract for 600 "sub-standard" heavy vehicles.

STATUS The Government on March
26 asked the CBI to investigate the army chief's allegation.

CASE Adarsh building scam
Promoters violated several laws and got fast-track clearances to build a 31-storey structure on disputed defence land in Mumbai.

STATUS

HT PHOTO

ANTONY OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT ON MARCH 26

Cabinet minister in 1993. This time, however, he did not offer his resignation. Perhaps, because he now straddles both party and Government: He is an adviser to Congress President Sonia Gandhi and a senior member of the Cabinet. Yet the stigma of a minister unable to take tough decisions still dogs him. As chief minister in the United Democratic Front (UDF) government of 2001-2006, he led a Cabinet whose ministers faced serious charges of corruption and even involvement in sex scandals. Members from the Muslim League, UDF's second largest constituent, were involved

CBI has so far made seven arrests, including two retired major generals, two retired brigadiers and three bureaucrats.

CASE Jodhpur land scam
Nearly 5 acres of defence land worth Rs 16 crore, located in the heart of the city, was transferred to a private trust belonging to the royal family of Jodhpur in 2007 without requisite government orders or approvals.

STATUS On January 9, the defence
minister ordered a probe headed by an additional secretary-rank officer.

CASE Defence land
scam in Srinagar
Defence land worth Rs 200 crore near the high-security Srinagar airport was grabbed by land mafia. BJP brought the issue in focus in August 2011.

DESCENT INTO VENDETTA
The Army chief has countered his detractors with a blitz of reactions

"The Supreme Court has upheld my integrity and honour while asking the Government to withdraw the December 30 order, against which I had gone to the court. I thank the honourable Supreme Court."
February 10, after the PIL on his age controversy was dismissed.

"I have a responsibility towards the army and its men and have to attend to the unfinished tasks that I had set out for myself. I cannot quit until I complete what I have started. Organisational interests are supreme."
March 12, on the retirement age row

"I started with a particular thing (campaign against corruption). People are feeling that all their wrongdoing has been exposed."
March 14, pointing to the unearthing of the Adarsh Housing Society scam

"Just imagine, one of these men had the gumption to walk up to me and tell me that if I cleared the tranche, he would give me Rs 14 crore. He was offering a bribe to me, to the Army chief. He told me that people had taken money before me and they would take money after me."
March 26, on an attempt to bribe him

"Meri baat sunkar raksha mantri ne apna matha peet liya tha (Antony hit his forehead in dismay when I told him)."
March 27, on informing the defence minister about being offered a bribe

STATUS CBI registered a preliminary inquiry in November 2011. It is set to file an FIR in the case.

CASE Sukna land scam
Several Army officers, including two serving Lieutenant-Generals, were accused of violating laws and military norms to favour a private contractor to take over a 71-acre plot next to the military station at Sukna in north Bengal in 2008.

STATUS A serving Lt-Gen, P.K. Rath,
was court martialled. Former military secretary Lt-Gen Avadesh Prakash was also court martialled.

Cover Story ARMY

HARDWIRED FOR KICKBACKS
There are systemic loopholes in the defence procurement process that leave the door ajar for intense lobbying and shady deals

"ARMYCHIEFRE COMMENDED ME TO THE NSA"
In an interview before filing a criminal defamation case before a magistrate in New Delhi, Lt-Gen Tejinder Singh, former director-general (DG), Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), tells Senior Editor SANDEEP UNNITHAN he was on a good wicket with the army chief. Q. Did you meet the army chief and offer him a bribe? A. Absolutely not. I used to meet him frequently while in service as DG, DIA. I didn't report to him, but always kept him in the loop and shared intelligence with him. We had a professional relationship. He had even written a letter to National Security Adviser Shivshankar Menon recommending my case for chairman of National Technical Research Organisation sometime in May-June 2010. Q. Why did you meet him in his him anything? How can I offer him a bribe? I'm not his bum chum.The meeting lasted 15 minutes and he offered me a cup of tea. He always asked me what people thought of him and I used to tell him he had a good reputation. Q. Why does the army chief say you offered him a bribe? A. Because by April 2011, he had begun suspecting me of planting stories against him in the media and he went into a huff. I did not try and clarify anything with him because I never felt the need to do so. Q. There are reports of a taperecording of a conversation where General V.K. Singh is heard asking you to leave his office. A. He dare not shout at me. No one knows whether such a tape exists. This seems to be one more item of slander which will not hold up to forensic examination.

MIDDLEMEN MUDDLE
Before 1987, the Ministry of Defence maintained a list of 100 defence agents, which was revised annually and had names of agents like Sudhir Choudhary, Suresh Nanda and Vipin Khanna. Some defence agents often figured in CBI's annual Undesirable Contact Men list. In 1987, Ottavio Quattrocchi, an Italian businessman who represented petrochemicals firm Snamprogetti, was accused of using his proximity to Rajiv Gandhi to facilitate the purchase of howitzers from Swedish firm Bofors AB. Investigations were eventually inconclusive about whether kickbacks were received. In 2000, the Central Vigilance Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General and Central Bureau of Investigation recommended that defence middlemen be legalised and be asked to register with defence ministry. In 2002, the Ministry of Defence asked defence agents to register and provide their banking and financial details. No one signed up for it for fear of harassment.

cent) and Singapore (4 per cent). Foreign firms need to employ locals to liaise with the armed forces and defence ministry officials. Government retains discretion at multiple stages of each defence deal that is in the works. There is room, therefore, for manipulation.

EIGHT STAGES OF A DEFENCE DEAL
Defence agents can be used to influence the process at four stages, which can take a decade. For example, the 126 combat fighter aircraft deal worth Rs 80,000 crore that was eventually won by French firm Rafale took eight years to complete from start to finish. Six bidders entered the competition at the beginning. These were reduced to two after technical evaluations. And then Rafale was chosen over Eurofighter for offering a lower price. 1 The Government seeks information about the product and floats a tender. 2 Manufacturers submit bids which are then evaluated for technical compliance. Lobbying takes place to knock out competitors by manipulating technical criteria. 3 The product is tested in the field and trial report submitted. Lobbying can take place to eliminate some players by deeming their equipment inferior for Indian field conditions. 4 Companies are shortlisted. 5 The lowest bidder is selected. 6 Price negotiations start with the lowest bidder. There is lobbying by the winner to get a better price. 7 Draft of the deal is sent to the Cabinet Committee on Security for final clearance. There is often lobbying to scrap the deal altogether and restart the process. 8 The deal is done.
by Shantanu Guha Ray and Dhiraj Nayyar

LT-GEN TEJINDER SINGH

office in September 2010? A. I had gone to meet him in his office in South Block for some personal work. This was about my appointment as NTRO chairman. I did not represent those companies, so how could I offer

ON PAPER
In 2004, the newly elected UPA Government made it mandatory for all defence deals to include an "Integrity . This required defence equipClause" ment suppliers to "unequivocally" state that no firm or individual was used to facilitate the deal. If a supplier is found to have contravened the clause, the deal can be cancelled and money refunded.

IN PRACTICE
India imports a majority of its arms supplies by volume. Between 2007-11, India was the world's largest recipient of arms, accounting for 10 per cent of global arms imports, followed by South Korea (6 per cent), China (5 per

chief Lalu Prasad Yadav smelt political ambitions in the general's utterances while Samajwadi Party's Ram Gopal Yadav advised him "not to speak much" as it could undermine the credibility of the Army. "Publishing secret communication within the Government cannot serve our national security," a miffed Antony told Parliament. Arun Jaitley, the Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, described the situation as "curiouser and curiouser". "Something is wrong with our statecraft. Issues which should be settled behind closed doors, are now becoming the subject of an unnecessary debate, which in the context of the armed forces, ought to be avoided," Jaitley said. The general tried to protect himself with denial, calling it an "outrage". "Official communication with the PM, Defence Minister, or anybody for that matter within the COAS is privileged information. The leaking of the letter should be treated as high treason. This cynical approach to tar my reputation has to stop." But this volley and counter volley may be missing the point. This

THE BACKLOG IS SO HUGE THAT GENERAL V.K. SINGH'S PREDECESSOR GENERAL KAPOOR HAD SAID THE ARMY WOULD MEET ITS ACQUISITION NEEDS ONLY BY 2022.
astonishing virtual revolt is further evidence of the fact that the government has proved totally inept at handling a major crisis. Everyone could see what was coming, but neither Antony nor the Cabinet had either the foresight or ability to forestall the worst non-military debacle to befall the Indian Army, an event that will cast a long shadow into the future. The weakness of the Government has corroded its moral authority; it is impotent before an Army chief on the rampage. Old bureaucrats with a steely reputation are shocked. "Does General V.K. Singh think he's in Pakistan? He's gone berserk. In a democracy, the civilian authority is in charge," former national security adviser Brajesh Mishra fumed. The point about defence preparedness has some merit, although the manner in which it was raised has none. The army chief's letter to the Prime Minister also sought to pin the blame on an unresponsive civilian defence ministry. Why are there delays in procurements and acquisitions, he asked. The question again was asked to the army chief by the Ministry of Defence's (MOD) in-house magazine Sainik Samachar in January 2012. General V. K. Singh offered an elaborate response. "The procurement process is long and fairly detailed and there are a large number of stakeholders at each stage. Also, military modernisation and capability development is a capital-intensive venture with long gestation periods. As per the defence procurement procedure, time taken for procurement of any equipment involving trials is 34 months," he said. He attributed the slippages in stipulated time lines to "lack of adequate Original Equipment Manufacturers for major equipment for armoured, artillery and

Surjit Singh
GUEST COLUMN

DON'TSACK THE CHIEF, SEND HIM ON LEAVE
V.K.Singh's age issue should have been settled much earlier
ndia's borders are peaceful today. Pakistan is occupied on its western borders, there is no threat from China and even Jammu and Kashmir is under control. There is only the matter of the Maoists. But there is a full-scale war inside South Block. I consider General V.K. Singh a fine soldier. It is a treat to watch him handle ceremonial occasions. And outside, as an ambassador of the Indian Army, I think he is as

STUCK IN RED TAPE
Soldiers suffer as politicians and bureaucrats dither
Light Utility Helicopters worth Rs 100 crore The decision to buy 197 helicopters to replace ageing Cheetah and Chetaks is yet to be taken since 2005 . 155 mm howitzers, over 2,700 guns of four different types worth Rs 22,000 crore The Indian Army has not bought a single new howitzer since its 1987 purchase of over 400 Bofors guns.

I

Singh's media revelations have taken all of us by surprise. We will hopefully know the truth after the CBI inquiry. Why he chose to release this information about the attempt to bribe him at this juncture is a mystery to me. I do not want to comment about any individual but an army chief making such public statements is rare. In fact, there are definite orders on what all you can say publicly. But the issues that General Singh has raised in his

REPUBLIC DAY PARADE IN JAMMU

AP PHOTO

good as any we have had. He's got into a rather unfortunate situation. Whatever has been happening over the past three months is most unfortunate. The issue of his age should have been settled much earlier in his life. You do not make an issue out of your age, no matter who you are. Civil-military relations have never been good. They were good when I was a young officer in the mid-1970s. Of late, the bureaucracy has got complete control over promotions, postings, awards and punishments in the army. Civil-military relations have reached a stage of complete breakdown. The bribery scandal and the general's letter to the Prime Minister are most unfortunate. I wouldn't know if these are part of a larger design or merely a coincidence. General

March 12 letter are endorsed by a large number of army officers on the ground. Civilian control over military is desirable. But it should not become a civilian dictatorship over the services. It would be unfair to now take the kind of action that was taken against Admiral Vishnu Bhagwat. I would suggest this: Send the officer on leave for 30 days. There is a very well laid-out procedure in the army. The vice-chief officiates. He is a member of the Chiefs of Staff Committee. The very important decisions can be postponed. Let the man de-stress himself. Both sides--the Government and the army chief--must now, more than ever, exercise equanimity and act sagaciously.
Maj-Gen Surjit Singh (retd) spoke to Asit Jolly

air defence". If there was a crisis in the army, the chief was being economical with the truth. The facts in the general's letter to the Prime Minister were not new. "Hollowness," a term which General V.K. Singh used to describe the Army whose core had been eaten away through neglect, dates back to a classified Army study made by General J.J. Singh in 2005. The backlog of pending helicopters, howitzers and missiles is so huge that General V.K. Singh's predecessor, General Deepak Kapoor, said the Army would meet its acquisition shortfalls only by 2022. This is a gigantic failure of civilian authority and if serving and retired generals are angry, they have every right to be so. Finance Ministers have provided the funds. Pranab Mukherjee's Budget this year set aside Rs 1,64,000 crore for defence, Rs 59,000 crore merely to buy new weapons and equipment, a 15 per cent increase over last year's budget. Yet, mere budgetary increases do not translate to enhanced defence capability. As General V.K. Singh himself explained, the main culprit is a lengthy decision process. It takes the army eight years to buy anything from a simple infantry rifle to a sophisticated attack helicopter. Yet, it was again the timing of the Army chief's warning to the Prime Minister that aroused suspicion. The

Cover Story ARMY

THE RING AROUND THE GENERAL
Lt-Gen R.K. Loomba
Former director-general of Military Intelligence
The Army chief seeks Loomba's advice though he retired in 2010.The two are believed to have been in close touch since the age row broke out.

The army chief leans heavily on colleagues and his daughter for advice
Mrinalini Singh
Army chief's elder daughter
The elder of the Army chief's two daughters, Mrinalini is married to Lt-Col Sangram Singh, currently posted in Sudan, and lives with her parents at Army House, Delhi.A lawyer by training, she has been actively involved in media management and has worked extensively on his legal campaign.

Brigadier A.K. Singh
Military adviser to army chief A close confidant, the brigadier from the Punjab Regiment took over as the Army chief's military adviser on January 24, 2012.

Lt-Gen Sanjiv Chachra
Military secretary
The defence ministry initially rejected his selection as military secretary but V.K. Singh prevailed upon them to clear the appointment.

Lt-Gen S.K. Singh
Vice-chief of army staff
The colonel of 8 Gorkha Rifles became vice-chief in the middle of the age controversy.

Lt-Gen A.K. Singh
Southern Command chief He was the Army chief's partner in an ambitious new doctrine to transform the force into a more potent fighting unit.The army chief keeps in touch with the officer.

Lt-Gen B.S. Thakur
Director-general Military Intelligence Thakur is said to be part of the group that decided to divulge Lt-Gen Tejinder Singh's name in an official Army statement on March 5.

Colonel Parashar
Retired officer, personal friend The Army chief is believed to seek spiritual advice from the retired colonel.
SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

letter was written just 10 days after the MOD's March 2 announcement that Lt-Gen Bikram Singh would take over as the next Army chief after General V.K. Singh retired on May 31. The Sainik Samachar interview was timed to appear on Army Day, January 15, this year. On January 16, a fortnight after MOD rejected General Singh's statutory complaint seeking to change his date of birth, the chief approached the Supreme Court. The gloves came off after the February 10 verdict where the Supreme Court endorsed the Government's stand. General V.K. Singh's coterie says many more explosive revelations are in the pipeline. It is not an empty threat. The chief has 60 more days to plan fresh

installments of his deadly shoot-andscoot revenge. The Government can only guess what his next moves are. While several serving officers have distanced themselves from the army chief, he has found support in the veterans' community. Over 160 officers from the three services, including former navy chiefs Admirals L. Ramdas and Vishnu Bhagwat, signed on a petition to President Pratibha Patil on March 3. The signatories requested for a restoration of the general's 1951 date of birth and a quashing of the appointment of General Bikram Singh as the next army chief. Ramdas blamed MOD for leaking his letter: "Only one man benefits from the leak of the army chief's letter to the PM: the Raksha Mantri."

GENERAL V.K. SINGH'S COTERIE SAYS MANY MORE EXPLOSIVE REVELATIONS ARE IN THE PIPELINE. THE CHIEF HAS 60 MORE DAYS TO PLAN FRESH SALVOS.
26
INDIA TODAY N APRIL 9, 2012

Other democracies have seen generals attempt to rise above their authority. America's experience is both exemplary and salutary. In 1951, the dimunitive US President, Harry S. Truman sacked an iconic national hero General Douglas MacArthur for insubordination. When MacArthur threatened to expand the Korean War into one against China. In 2010, President Barack Obama fired the extremely popular General Stanley McChrystal, commander of the US forces in Afghanistan, for a magazine interview where he lampooned members of the administration. In 1998, George Fernandes sent Admiral Bhagwat packing for refusing to accept the appointment of a deputy chief of naval staff. Instead of a government, Delhi has a vacuum. A general has exposed its weakness, even if in the process, he has destroyed himself. Both the general and Government have betrayed the trust Indians reposed in them. I

