UP FRONT

PRATIBHA PRAHLAD

THE MORALITYTRAP
T
here is a lot of hypocrisy whenever we subject due to marital problems and marry his current love politicians to strict moral codes because they are, who went on to bear a child. This is transparency, after all, part of the society. India has never been honesty and truth, I trust. Whatever happens in secrecy over-obsessed with who the politicians are meeting or is cowardly and deceitful. If an Indian politician had the moral courage to be what their personal preferences or sexual habits are. There have been sly references in the past to powerful open about his romantic interest, when in power or out politicians' romantic interests. But never to their carnal of power as a parliamentarian, I would still respect him. interests. The controversy over Abhishek Manu Singhvi But if he were to do this in secrecy and hiding, while pretending to have a perfect family life, it is wrong. is not even romantic. America has always had a stricter code of conduct for Peeping into peoples' private homes and bedrooms and making it public speaks of acute depravity. Privacy its politicians than India has. Any American running for should be respected. Singhvi himself says in his resigna- president is always seen holding hands and giving toothy tion letter to the Congress party that even if the CD is gen- smiles with his spouse. They have to present the perfect uine, it was consensual between two adults. If there was American family picture. But how true this picture is, in some inequality, we can step in and talk about violation the context of most of America, I am not sure. The wives of rights. But I do think an individual has to choose what are always seen laughing, waving, air-kissing. I guess it is about presenting an emotionally and sexually satisfied is right or wrong for himself within his family life. Power is an aphrodisiac. Politicians in power in any image. The concept must be that the greatest husband society, be it the West or the East, tend to indulge in and father will make the greatest president on earth. Former Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi is sick sexual activities to enhance their sense of self, or maybe their sense of power over other people. In my mind, and needs treatment. Using his public office and stature anything that has to do with male power over female or to procure young girls as an indulgence is unpardonable. I want to make a distinction here about the social meany other subject of society is immoral. Love and sex are equations of equals, and should not become a power dia in peoples' bedrooms and the media recording MLAs in the Karnataka Legislative play. Be it Clinton and his esAssembly watching porn. Those capade with Monica Lewinsky, or SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com MLAs had a public duty, as elected the case of our own Abhishek representatives. Their time in the Singhvi, it is a power play beAssembly is paid for by the taxcause one has something to offer payers. They are supposed to because of his power and infludeliberate, argue and do the best ence and the other wants what is for the people of Karnataka duron offer. It is consensual, but it is ing that time. If they watched an act between two unequals (the porn in their own houses late in giver and the taker) and that is the night, it would be of no connot acceptable to me. cern to me. But they were sitting As for the refrain, `leaders to in the Assembly and playing porn be subjected to strict code of convideos, when their minds had to duct because people tend to emube engaged in the passing of late them', for goodness' sake, legislation. The media has every Abhishek Singhvi is no mass hero. right to capture misdoings of pubNor is he a leader worthy of emulic persons in a public place. lation. He is a career lawyer and a Abhishek Singhvi did whatcareer politician who has worked ever he did in his private space his way up in the system. People in his private time. If he did know the distinction. indulge in this act in Parliament Looking at some international Power is an aphrodisiac. or in any public office, then there parallels, the French have never could be censure. Now, he merits bothered about morality. For Politicians in power in any them, fidelity is not a major issue. society tend to indulge in sexual only pity. I admire Nicolas Sarkozy. As activities, to enhance their sense French president, he had the Pratibha Prahlad is a classical of self, or maybe their sense of courage of conviction to divorce dancer. This article is based on her power over other people. his wife during his presidency conversation with Sowmya Aji.

12

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

