Na tion MAYAWATI

MAYAWATI STARTS TARGET PRACTICE
Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister focuses on the next Lok Sabha polls and eyes a pan-India role
By Priya Sahgal

our security towers with armed guards, barbed wire and 18-fthigh sandstone walls surround Mayawati's home at 13 A Mall Avenue in Lucknow. The Akhilesh Yadav government may have taken down the barricades on Mall Avenue that Mayawati had in place when she was chief minister, but she still knows how to keep out the undesirables. The Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) office across the road seems equally deserted except for a handful of party officials. The only sound is the low hum of a TV whose volume is turned up whenever there is news concerning BSP. This is in sharp contrast to the Samajwadi Party (SP) office at Vikramaditya Marg which is buzzing with party workers and the media, despite the newly installed security apparatus at the gate. But inside 13 A Mall Avenue, there is a nuanced lowering of the barriers. Over the last month, the 43 intercoms inside the house have been working overtime as Mayawati has been meeting a spate of visitors. All except three--her younger brother Anand Kumar, his wife Vichitra Lata and their daughter--belong to the BSP cadre. Those who have met Mayawati say the initial shock of defeat has long worn off. She has a new target in place: Lok Sabha 2014. "Don't forget that unlike the SP leadership, Mayawati is a national leader," points out Swami Prasad Maurya, Uttar Pradesh leader of Opposition and BSP state president. This is one reason why she gave up her MLC nomination and has moved to Delhi as a Rajya Sabha member.

F

MAYAWATI IN PARLIAMENT COMPLEX ON APRIL 27
YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

MAYAWATI'S MAIDEN INTERVENTION IN PARLIAMENTWAS TO DEMAND PROMOTION QUOTA FOR SC/ST EMPLOYEES IN HER STATE.
When she arrived at the Upper House on April 24, she was escorted by aide Satish Mishra while the rest of her party MPs greeted her with bouquets of roses. A smiling Mayawati, dressed in a cream salwar kameez, wasted little time in Parliament. Once she had taken oath, she stepped out and walked purposefully towards the first car waiting at the gate. The car, belonging to junior foreign minister E. Ahamed, had a red beacon; Mayawati's Ambassador has none. Realising her mistake, Mayawati sheepishly asked Mishra where her car was and walked towards it. The BSP chief later told the media that her mission in Parliament would be "sarvajan hitay, sarvajan sukhay (the gain of all, the welfare of all)". She was also critical of the Congress move to nominate Sachin Tendulkar to the Rajya Sabha. "I know very well their intentions behind this move," she said enigmatically. But when it came to actor Rekha, a bete noire of Jaya Bachchan--one of Mayawati's own detractors, she simply stated, "I don't watch films. All my time is spent in strengthening my party." Clearly this was no defeated leader but a spirited woman already working on her next challenge. With the two national parties in a shambles and the next Lok Sabha likely to be a hung House, Mayawati is ready to step it up.

"Mayawati is hoping by then antiincumbency will set in against SP in Uttar Pradesh. She is also focusing on reviving the party in the rest of India," says a BSP leader. At a rally during the Uttar Pradesh polls, Mayawati had somewhat ambitiously stated, "I hold the master key to power." She is now working hard to ensure that this comes true, not just for Uttar Pradesh but also the rest of India. With an average 10 per cent vote share across the country, BSP is the third largest national party. Mayawati had, in fact, kicked off her 2009 Lok Sabha campaign from Kerala, even though the party is yet to make a dent in the south. Apart from its 80 MLAs in Uttar Pradesh, the party currently has seven MLAs in Madhya Pradesh, six in Rajasthan, three each in Uttarakhand and Delhi, two in Chhattisgarh, and an MLA each in Haryana and Himachal Pradesh.

The three BSP MLAs played a crucial role in government formation in Uttarakhand recently, with both the Congress and BJP wooing her. One of her MLAs is now a minister in the Congress-led state government. Citing this as an example, Mayawati has told party workers to ensure that BSP plays a similar role in the next Assembly elections due in Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh. Party cadres in Uttar Pradesh have also been told to escalate the attack against SP, with Mayawati leading from the front, as usual. On Ambedkar Jayanti, April 14, she chose to make her first appearance in Uttar Pradesh since her defeat in the Assembly elections. After offering flowers at an Ambedkar statue, she issued a dire warning to the Akhilesh Yadav government in reaction to comments that the state government was planning to build hospitals in her Ambedkar parks. "Any attempt to alter Dalit memorials or construct anything else on the attached land would lead to a law and order crisis not only in Uttar Pradesh but also nationally," she thundered. A BSP Lok Sabha leader says erecting statues of Ambedkar, Kanshi Ram and herself was a shrewd move on her part. "They have an emotional value for Dalits all across India," he said, pointing to an editorial in a daily by Ambedkar's grandson Prakash Ambedkar. Usually critical of Mayawati, Prakash had echoed her threat of a law and order breakdown if any of the statues were touched. The statues have consolidated the Dalits and Mayawati's stature as their tallest leader, towering over other Dalit leaders such as Ram Vilas Paswan in Bihar and Ramdas Athavale in Maharashtra. She is certainly no has-been regional leader. Before the election results, her government-allotted Mall Avenue home in Lucknow had `Chief Minister' written in brass letters on the gatepost. She has simply scrawled the word `Poorv (former)' ahead of it in chalk. So sure is she of a comeback during the next Assembly elections. 

MAHARASHTRA

NOW,THE BAD NEWS
EC may bar Ashok Chavan from contesting polls for three years over case of `paid' news
he Election Commission (EC) is likely to disqualify former Maharashtra chief minister Ashok Chavan from contesting any election for three years. The grounds--allegedly hiding expenses on his campaign during the October 2009 Assembly elections. The Supreme Court on May 2 cleared the decks for EC action by rejecting Chavan's plea to stop a probe into the matter. Chief Election Commissioner S.Y. Quraishi is expected to deliver his verdict before he retires on June 10. Chavan, an accused in the Adarsh Housing Society case, won from Bhokar, Nanded, by a margin of 1.25 lakh votes. His opponent, independent candidate Madhav Kinhalkar, filed a complaint with EC, accusing him of hiding expenses on a `paid' supplement titled `Ashok Parva' (The era of Ashok) in leading Marathi daily Lokmat. Chavan and the daily's management say the supplement was not a paid one. EC began a probe into Kinhalkar's charges. Chavan, then, filed a petition in the Delhi High Court in 2010 demanding a stay and later approached the Supreme Court in November 2011 after the high court rejected his contention. EC has reportedly found facts that corroborate Kinhalkar's complaint. It will now record Chavan's defence. If found guilty, EC can disqualify Chavan and bar him from contesting elections for three years. Kinhalkar has also filed a case against Chavan in the Bombay High Court seeking his disqualification. by Kiran Tare

T

40

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

