PEOPLE WITH ROYAL HOSPITALITY

IKMITTAL
business tycoon was bom in FEB in 1948  and fortune did not come easily to him. 톍efutness and hard work, combined with IT to face and overcome the most overwhelming odds can best characterise this phenomenal entrepreneur. In 1969, Mr. Mittal laid the foundation of The UTOUER Group, which was into the field of Interior lighting. It soon grew to be Mumbai's largest and most sposticated showrrom with the widest range of exquisite and ornate lights and chandeliers. Entrepreneual success cannot be curbed and so the group gradually diversified into other interior related industries and was the first one in India to import a wide range of Italian marbels. In the last decade the UTOUER Group has ventured into the field of construction and has in its portfolio, a landmark corporate building, the UTOUER Chambers at Andheri, Mumbai. Soon after that group also started a Brokerage firm and became one of the top brokerage firms on the Bombay stock exchange and National stock exchange. The UTOUER group, down the years has been privileged to be associated with a prestigious clientele such as Presidential House, Parliament House, Tatas, Godrej, Reliance, to name just a few. Presently the UTOUER group is making more aggressive forays in the field of of real estate with a focus on the construction of A-grade commercial and residential properties. After making name in real estate Mr. Ashok Mittal entered into a new venture... Hospitality industry and has a 5 star property in the heart of Delhi by the name of Hotel The Royal Plaza. The group is all set to form its own chain of hotel. Soon the group would have 2 more hotels in Mumbai and Goa. . fl Hospitality industry was always a passion for him an with the establishment of a hotel in the heart of Delh his dream has come true.

. In the era of growing and expanding hospitality Hotel The Royal Plaza, New Delhi offers travellers a unique retreat. It is conveniently located in Lutyen's Delhi with proximity to Connaught Place, India Gate, Parliament Street, Jantar Mantar and other historical sites of Delhi, making it a perfect choice for discerning business and leisure travellers.

T

he decor and interiors of Hotel the Royal Plaza have been inspired by the Renaissance period and is reflected in the exquisite art collection. The exquisite lobby boasts of French frescos and is adorned with onyx pillars embellished with 24 carat gold leaf work, stunning crystal chandeliers and an exclusive inlay work of semi precious stones and mother of pearl which create an atmosphere reminiscent of Victorian grandeur. The elegantly appointed 419 rooms feature luxurious & modern amenities.

The interiors are inspired by European designs giving them a very comfortable, cozy and pleasing ambience. Dining options and Entertainment Lutyen's - Our 24 hour coffee shop, offers panoramic & serene view of pool and Roman garden, making it a perfect place for business discussions or leisurely get-togethers. Jasmine-It is an authentic oriental cuisine restaurant with a delectable repertoire of specialties from Mainland China. Nyxfgoddess of the night) - An impressive night club & lounge that boasts of classic Italian marble, period style furniture, and state of an art sound system. The night club offers two private lounges Hera (queen of gods) and Zeus(king of gods) for private parties which have personalized bartenders, hostesses and are equipped with Karaoke system with both Hollywood and Bollywood numbers. Onyx bar - is an oasis of music and heady cocktails. Wooden floor, leather chairs combined with chic mahogany interiors. The bar is cozy, warm, dimly lit and has an extensive drinks list. Lord Curzon Club & Lounge an exclusive space for the resident guests of the Club Floors, ensuring a seamless service for breakfast, Hi-tea & evening cocktails Pastry Shop - Lord William Tea Lounge offers a selection of teas and coffees with a variety of accompaniments and relaxing music. Swimming Pool- Temperature controlled, sky lit eco-friendly pool is located in tranquil settings and ensures round the year luxury. Banquets - It provide a perfect setting for any special occasion featuring more than 8000 sq. ft. of flexible banquet and function space. We offer our infinite variety of services tailored especially for our distinguished guests to facilitate seamless experience.

IS THEBE ANTHING "BENIGN" ABOOT SYNCOPE"?
I I
3. Holter Monitoring can be done to determine transient disturbances in heart rate Holter monitoring can be done which patient needs to wear for 24 or 48 hours or for up to 30 days 4. Tilt-table test (HUTT) can be used to uncover neurocardiogenic syncope and is usually done on an outpatient basis.  WHAT HAPPEN IF SYNCOPE IS NOT TREATED? Syncope is a sudden event and can be life threatening is not treated properly. Fainting can cause injury if it occurs while participating in an activity like driving a car.  WHAT ARE THE TREATMENT OPTIONS AVAILABLE FOR SYNCOPE? Following are the available precautions and treatment:  Life Style Modification -Avoidance of triggers known to cause syncope. -Drink plenty of fluids  Increase salt intake -Avoid temperature extremes -Avoid long periods of standing, and never stand up quickly or "jump up" quickly from a reclining position.  Be vigilant for the onset of warning signs  WHAT IS SYNCOPE? Syncope is the medical term for fainting and precisely defined as a transient loss of consciousness followed by the return to full wakefulness. Syncope often include dizziness and temprorary loss of vision commonly referred as "blackout", nausea and abdominal discomfort.  WHAT IS THE CAUSE OF SYNCOPE? Causes of syncope may be Non Cardiac or Cardiac Non- Cardiac- Dehydration causing vaso -vagal syncope or reflex syncope  Hypoglycaemia  Brain Stroke Cardiac- Abnormal Heart Rhythm  Structural Heart disease (Heart Valve)  Congenital Heart Disease  WHAT ARE THE TYPES OF SYNCOPE? Neurocardiogenic or reflex syncope underlie most forms of syncope. It is by far the most common cause of transient loss of consciousness. The three main types of reflex syncope are neurocardiogenic syncope, carotid sinus syncope and situational syncope. Neurocardiogenic syncope is provoked by triggering events such as prolonged standing, emotion, pain, sight of blood. Carotid sinus syncope is caused by stimulation of the carotid sinus baroreceptors in the neck, which leads to low blood pressure or slow heart rate or both. Situational syncope is defined as loss of consciousness at the onset of, during or directly after swallowing, defecation, micturition or coughing.  HOW COMMON IS REFLEX SYNCOPE IN A POPULATION? Most of us have experienced an episode of pre-syncope or syncope in our life-time. Neurocardiogenic syncope is labeled as a benign syncope. However it has its nuisance value for unpredictability of occurrence. Recurrent episodes of fainting spells however require further treatment as they are associated with fall and injuries which at times may be severe or fatal. Neurocardiogenic syncope is much more common in older patients due to autonomic disorders. However in the age group of 12-18 years it is very commonly seen due to bat eating habits, stress and not enough intake of fluids.  HOW SYNCOPE CAN BE DIAGNOSED? As with most medical conditions, the history is the key in finding out why a patient faints. Initial diagnostic tests may include an 1. Electrocardiogram (ECG) 2. Screening blood tests like a complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes, glucose, kidney function tests and Thyroid blood tests

IDR.VANITAARORA
Sr. CONSULTANT & CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIST, MAX SUPERSPECIALITY HEALTHCARE HOSPITAL, SAKET, NEW DELHI

 Drug and Device Therapy a. Drugs- If syncope is caused by abnormal heart rate drugs can be given to treat that. b. Surgery- If there is a mechanical obstruction to blood flow, that obstruction must be removed surgically. c. Device Therapy- If syncope is related to arrhythmias there are two options. If it's caused by slow heart rate then Permanent Pacemaker Implantation is required to treat this problem. If syncope is due to abnormal high heart rate or a family history of unexplained sudden cardiac death, these patients should be implanted with an ICD which detects arrhythmias and uses electrical shocks to restore normal heart rhythm.
aroraheartrhythmdoc@gmail.com, Mob: 9818569111

I

