SIMPLY DELHI

Camping

ON A NATURE TRAIL
Bringing city kids closer to nature, Camp Anubhav presented by Rocksport Adventure helps inculcate life skills, especially confidence among children. "Participating in outdoor camps builds energy and inspires the spirit of exploring the unknown. The good part is that parents are becoming more aware about the positive aspects of adventure camping," says Piyush Khandelwal, Founder Director, Rocksport Adventure. This summer, the camps will be organised at Nainital, Shimla, Jim Corbett and Rani Chauri. These camps are not just about fun and games, but also focus on training techniques to survive in the jungle. Trained instructors teach participants the basics of surviving and facing adversities in the great outdoors. So, one learns how to read maps, rope climbing, rifle shooting, horse riding, building paper shelters and lighting a camp fire. All of the staff members here are certified instructors from prestigious institutes such as Nehru Institute of Mountaineering (Uttarkashi). Instructors also educate participants through games and interactive activities about environmental awareness. Age group 9 to 16 years Cost Rs 1,500 per day For registrations contact Piyush Khandelwal on 09811398050

Fun on the go
Choose from our list of supercool adventure and learning camps
ALLISON KWESELL

BY EKTA ALREJA & SHILPA MEHTA
he heat may be scorching and unbearable, but summer vacations are no fun for anyone if children are cooped up indoors all day. This year, give them something apart from the run-of-the-mill activities they do every year. Adventure or learning camps that are held outside the city not only keep them busy with a host of activities, they are also an important exercise in personality development, confidence building and social development. Read on as we bring you groups and organisations which can make this vacation a summer to remember for your child. I

FOR THE ADVENTURERS

T

Youreka's outdoor camps can be a great opportunity for your child to make friends and learn in an exciting manner at the same time. With its 16 years of experience and impeccable safety record, Youreka offers activities like trekking, rock climbing and archery amongst others. The camps use the outdoor adventure activities to build leadership qualities in children. One of the unique things about this camp is the `Cool Book' which each child must have. These are reflection diaries which kids fill up every evening and then share their thoughts with their particular groups. This summer, Youreka is or-

ganising camps at four campsites--there are three in the North of the country and one in the South. The activities include outdoor survival, vertical limits, mountain biking, mount geo, jungle safari, film craft, riverside backpacking and rafting. In addition, this year, they also have seven day expeditions which include exciting trips to Spain with activities like sailing and snorkelling. Age group 9 to 17 years Cost Rs 15,000 to Rs 19,500. For the Spain programme, Rs 1,45, 000+visa. For registration contact Youreka's Delhi office: 011 40801100

GAME PLAN Inme (Infinite me) promises exciting camps for your little ones without burning a hole in your pocket. Their camps are an ideal blend of adventure and learning, where the kids are taught a wide range of activities and techniques, both indoors and outdoors. Their jungle safari camps include activities like backpacking, rock climbing, mountain biking and high-altitude expeditions or scuba diving programmes in the Andaman islands. Apart from this, Inme

also offers customised programmes such as astronomy and photography programmes, according to your child's interest. Inme offers camps in collaboration with schools such as the Doon School, Aditya Birla World School, Lawrence School and others. Age group 9 to 17 years Cost Programmes in India, Rs 16,000Rs 22,000; abroad Rs 2.25 lakh For registration contact Bougainvillea Marg, DLF City II, Gurgaon, 0124 401 4663, 011 46714663
PRADEEP KUMAR

s-20

SIMPLY DELHI N MAY 2012

