GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI
RAHULWITH SINGH

IN THE DRIVER'S SEAT
rust Rahul Gandhi to take instant action. With Congress workers in Amethi complaining about inaccessibility and ineptitude on his recent two-day visit, Rahul effected an immediate demotion. Kishori Lal, his pointman who would drive him around the constituency, was relegated to the backseat of the Toyota Fortuner. In the driver's seat was the chief architect of Rahul's Uttar Pradesh campaign, Kanishka Singh. Brother-in-law Robert Vadra would sit behind the wheel whenever Rahul toured, before he discovered the joys of riding alone.

T

T.NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

DIDI'S FAVOURITE COMMUNIST

THE BROTHER RETURNS
ilasrao Deshmukh will never learn. Not only is he jostling to return as Maharashtra chief minister, but also he wants a Cabinet berth for his brother Dilip. As a first step he managed to get a ticket for Dilip for elections to the state Legislative Council, due on May 25. Dilip's charitable trust in Aurangabad stands on non-transferable wakf land and the Wakf Board passed strictures against the acquisition in 2010. Dilip was a minister in Ashok Chavan's Cabinet between March and October 2009 but Chavan did not repeat him after winning the Assembly elections.

T

RAJA

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

his is one Communist Mamata Banerjee has no objection to. Word on the street is that she will support CPI leader D. Raja's candidature as vice-president. Hamid Ansari's term ends on August 10 and Mamata may well support Raja's candidature. She and the Dalit leader have been friends from their days in youth politics. Raja, 63, was also often the recipient of caricatures she drew while listening to debates in Parliament.

V

PAWAR PLAY
harad Pawar has suddenly discovered a sense of humour. Recently, when asked to react to rumours that Maharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan would be replaced soon, Pawar looked surprised and asked, "But why? He has such a clean image." But files are piling up, decisions are not being taken, stuttered the questioner."Ah, but don't forget," reiterated Pawar gently,"he has a clean image." Only Pawar can make it sound like an insult.

PAWAR

S

14

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

GLASS HOUSE
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

LOOKING FOR RINKLE
here is Rinkle Kumari? Pakistani tweeple were abuzz with the question last week when reports surfaced that the Pakistani Hindu, who was allegedly forced into conversion, had been attacked near Rahim Yar Khan. It turns out that Rinkle, now known as Fariyal Shah, has applied for a passport because she wants to travel to Saudi Arabia with her husband for a pilgrimage to Mecca. She denies she was attacked and says her husband and she are staying at Mian Abdul Haq's house in Ghotki in Sindh. Yes, the same legislator who is accused of abducting Hindu women and forcing them into marriage with Muslim men.
RINKLE

BULLET POINTS

W

W

PATEL (LEFT) WITH MODI

RIVALS AT HOME
ivil rights activists are not the only ones who want to see the back of Narendra Modi. Longtime rival Keshubhai Patel, whom Modi replaced in 2001, has started taking potshots at him too. On May 6, he called for justice for the Patels at a mass marriage in Veraval, saying,"We should get united and fight against evil forces with vigour. After all, our clan goddess, Khodal Maata, carries a sword in hand." A month ago, he had invoked Krishna, the "justice giver" . Naturally, Modi's supporters are now citing chapter and verse to show how Patels have benefited the most in agriculture and industry under their very own `loh purush'.

C

hat it lacks in substance--and it lacks a lot--the Antony Committee report has made up for in style. In keeping with Rahul Gandhi's short attention span, the report was drafted in sharp bullet points. This is in accordance with Junior's instructions to the party when he took over as general secretary in 2007. He told the publicity department to publish pamphlets only in bullet points. Naturally, none of the bullets are meant to shoot the actual culprit of Congress's loss in Uttar Pradesh. Yes, he who cannot be named.

OF THE

JOKE
O F T H E W E E K

WEEK
Narendra Modi's fake Twitter handle Marendra Nodi@MarendraNodi

Only in India actors are playing cricket, cricketers are playing politics, politicians are watching porn, while porn stars are becoming actors.

"I'm deeply hurt by charges that the United States is biased against Muslims."
HILLARY CLINTON US Secretary of State

Mitron! We've increased our wind power generation substantially. With all that PR hot air, it was a breeze!
Manmohan Singh's fake Twitter handle Dr Moneymohan Singh @DrYumYumSingh

"The Government has behaved (on NCTC) in a manner that reminds us of the viceroys of yore."
NARENDRA MODI Gujarat Chief Minister
SINGH

"Even if the chief minister is kidnapped, nobody should be let off. That should be the policy at the national level."
RAMAN SINGH Chhattisgarh

Chief Minister

They said shrink the government. So we shrank governance to shrink the government.

with PRIYA SAHGAL, KIRAN TARE, SHAFI RAHMAN, UDAY MAHURKAR

16

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

