Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

CRUISING TO STARDOM
Delhi girl Ridhima Sud is a model, actor and the fresh face in a Pond's advertisement directed by Dibakar Banerjee.Atheatre professional in New York,she will make her debut in the feature film The Owner, which chronicles the journey of a backpack.The movie entered the Guinness World Record s for being filmed by 25 directors from five continents.Bollywood, with the role of a 17-year-old,is the twenty-something's next stop.

VS

SUD

MAKIJANY

Manjari Makijany, 25,daughter of the late actor MacMohan, aka Sholay's Sambha,is taking her short film The Last Marble to the Seattle International Film Festival later this month. She does lighting for theatre and has worked as assistant director on Wake Up Sid, 7 Khoon Maaf and the Indian segments of The Dark Knight Rises as well as Mission : Impossible-- Ghost Protocol.Now she is writing a romantic comedy and planning a feature film.

KARN

Twice Lucky
Looks like director Raj Kumar Gupta has taken a shine to newbie actor Myra Karn. In 2011, he cast her as Jessica Lal in her debut film No One Killed Jessica. This year, he has cast Karn again in his romantic thriller Rapchik Romance. An engineering graduate, Karn is from an Army background and was preparing for her MBA entrance exam when she was spotted. "Acting only happened by chance. I am not sure that I want to pursue it for the rest of my life," she says. Wonder what Gupta thinks.
MAIL TODAY

The Right Prescription
Syed Sehrish Asgar, 25, became the second Muslim woman from Jammu and Kashmir to clear the All India Civil Services Examination after Leh's Ovessa Iqbal in 2010. Asgar secured the 118th rank. She says she owes everything to her family. "As a doctor and an administrator, it would make me more able to serve people," she says.

ASGAR

BACK-UP OF THE WEEK Carla Bruni reveals her plans to resume making music, following Nicolas Sarkozy's decision to quit politics. PAIRING OF THE WEEK Cousins Kareena Kapoor and Ranbir Kapoor may come together to play brother and sister in a film by Zoya Akhtar.

SHOW OF THE WEEK Aamir Khan's Satyamev Jayate captured the nation's imagination with its appeal to the head and the heart. EXPORT OF THE WEEK Delhi Belly is the fourth Indian film after 3 Idiots, Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara and My Name Is Khan to be released in Hong Kong.
I

64

Volume XXXVII Number 21; For the week May 15-21, 2012, released on May 14

Compiled by Nishat Bari and

Prachi Rege

