AnimPACTreature

Asia's first and a one of its kind University, the University of Petroleum and Energy Studies offers courses that are domain specialized and help you cut to the chase in getting a proficient career.
he University of Petroleum and Energy Studies {UPES), situated in the calm and serene backdrop of the Himalayan foothills, offers courses that are both Unique and of utmost importance in nation building. The University is aptly dubbed as an "Industry Feeder" University because the courses here are super specialized, so much so that a student enrolled in UPES can directly fit into the functions of any organisation as they are already trained in the specialized skills of their respective fields, it is also the First Energy University in the country to establish a working Bio-Fuefs Research Laboratory (BRL) to conduct research in the production, evaluation and utilization of bio-fuels. The University is also actively involved in giving back goodness to the society with its various Community Outreach Programs like adoption of five nearby village schools. The University is also active in providing financial and material aid to needy students in its nearby areas. Established in the year 2003 under the legislation of the State of Uttarakhandthe 'Energy Acres' as the sprawling thirty acres campus is called, caters to over five thousand students and has about 250 highly skilled faculty in its ambit. A Wi-Fi enabled facility, the 'energy acres1 house about 600,000 square feet of built up area, 100 multimedia enabled classrooms, 61 super specialized laboratories, a new age learning resource center, an advanced computing center, a well equipped gym, playing fields, excellent cafeteria and food courts and extensive hostel facilities. The University boasts of a well equipped library constructed in a whooping 22000 square feet area with a seating capacity for over 400 students and an inventory of over 50,000 volumes of publications including books, standards, reports, proceedings and more than 150 national and international journals. The technical labs at UPES are called 'living labs' because the students and faculty conduct experiments in these labs in unison. The labs are essentially the soul of the campus with them being abuzz on a constant basis with eager students and mentors engaged in academicals as well as research and development related pursuits. The 'Advanced Computing Center' at UPES adheres to international standards when it comes to its systems and infrastructure. The 2500 computers strong center has been powered by both Sun and Intel based systems running a wide array of applications like Auto CAD, SolidWorks, CATIA, Mathernatica, Adobe Creative Suite etc.

t

The University offers 47 graduate and post-graduate programs to its various students. The University has three constituent colleges - College of Engineering Studies, College of Management and Economic Studies, and College of Legal Studies. Probably the only Legal Studies institute in the nation to offer a B.Tech to its graduates.
This university also has collaboration with IBM India to offer various cutting edge B.Tech Computer Science Programs. The Engineering disciplines range from Applied Petroleum Engineering, Chemical Engineering with specialization in refining and Petrochemicals, Geo Informatics Engineering, energy technology, Aerospace Engineering (this department's students have been felicitated by NASA), Mind frame technology, and Mechatronics Engineering etc to name a handful. The management courses are equally exclusive with disciplines like Oil and Gas Marketing, Auto Retailing, Energy Trading, Aviation Management, Port and Shipping Management, Infrastructure Management etc in its plethora of courses at offer. The Law colleges do not fall behind with the thread of unique programs running through its various courses like Integrated L.L.B programmes with specializations in Intellectual Property rights, Cyber Law etc. The university also offers distance learning programs through the Center for Continuing Education fCCE), Dehradun. The center is engaged in offering programs to all those professionals who opt to pursue further education, enhance their skills and deploy the thus enhanced skills to execute challenging professional tasks. Higher Doctoral Degree Programs, Part time PhD Program, MBA for working professionals, BBA Programs and B.SC Lateral Entry Programs are some of the programs offered by CCE. UPES also partners with the Center for Management Development (CMD) to offer various skill development courses under different management functions. These cutting edge programs are designed for working professionals. This very Unique and exemplary institution has collaborations with many Universities worldwide namely The University of Aberdeen, Coventry University, European Business School University, Russia-India Science and Technology

AnimPACTpeature
RESEARCH PROJECTS Title of the Projects Establishment and Demonstration of Hydrogen Production and Utilization Facility Through Photovoltaic Electrolyzers System at Solar Energy Centre (Recently Sanctioned) Establishment of Biogas Development & Training Centre (BTDC) for Uttarakhand and Western UP region MNRE & UCOST Solar Energy Future in Uttarakhand-Mapping the way , a dialogue on issues and needs (Recently Sanctioned & completed) Performance Enhancement of SVO By Hydrogen Supplementation in a IDI Diesel Engine (Recently Sanctioned) Integrated Research, Development and Demonstration of Biogas Generation from Leaves, Fruit hull & Deoiled cake of Jatropha using CSTR Digester and its Purification/Upgradation for Utilization in VehicleXSubmitted on 03.02.2011 and Revised Proposal incorporated with the reply of experts comments was submitted on 23.03.2011) Center, The New Russian University, Tomsk State University, Marist College, University at Albany of State University of New York and Seneca College of Applied Arts and Technology. These Universities are constantly engaged with UPES for various learning and education exchange programs. It is little wonder that UPES is highly preferred by prospective employers due to its cutting edge courses and specialized trained students. Asia's first and a one of its kind University, the University of Petroleum and Energy Studies offers courses that are specialized and help you cut to the chase in getting a proficient job. UPES boasts of a cent per cent placement assistance and prides itself in getting its students as incumbents in various organisations across various sectors like IT, Aviation, Infrastructure, Port & Shipping, Electronics, Oil & Gas, Power, Automobile, Logistics, International Business etc. The University has carved a niche for itself in terms of research and development activities. Noteworthy is the Institute for Alternate Energy and Research' (IAER) which provides research opportunities across various sectors like Renewable Energy Systems. Sustainable Development, Environmental and Energy Economics, Nanotechnology, Large Scale Infrastructure and Project Finance etc. To study in UPES is a unique opportunity given the uniqueness of the University. The salubrious surroundings and the state of the art curriculum and international recognitions and collaborations makes it a place of education that you just cannot give a miss.

DST

"Installation of Novel Biomass Pyrolysis Pilot Plant and its Performance Evaluation for Bio-oil production using different biomass feed-stocks" "Analysis and Improvement of Oxidation behavior of Biodiesel"

DST

This university has an impeccable record of placements. Over 4000 students of the university have been placed in around 350 National and International companies and AflNCs

www.upes.ac.in

