BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE HIMALAYAN HEIST
hy do intelligent people commit murder? Hatred, envy, their loot; they fought over the cost of cash-and-carry. Their greed may be familiar primal motives, but desire son Bo Guagua's champagne and Ferrari lifestyle in Britain remains many phases away from deed unless you are and America was public. No fellow politburo member raised an idiot, or deranged. Murderers are not suicidal, or they the delicate question of where his funds were coming from. No one raised an eyebrow, because you would run out would end their problems with a different form of death. Clever people kill is because they think they can get away with of eyebrows if you began raising one at every instance of murder. The dream of a perfect murder thrives in life and high-level Chinese corruption. State media has reported fiction. A ruling class has a complacent variation: Since it that one railway official, Zhang Shugang, stole $2.8 billion and squirreled it out of China. A Chinese bank has said that controls the system, it imagines it is beyond accountability. We may never know which tipping point drove the ris- some 18,000 officials had disappeared with $120 billion. ing stars of Chinese politics, Bo Xilai, politburo member This is merely what has been admitted. Comparative figures for India are still in that nebulous and supreme commissar of Chongqing, and his wife Gu Kailai, to murder their friend, a British businessman, Neil zone of suspicion and speculation, but we can safely conHeywood, whose body was found in a city hotel on clude that the corruption virus is free from ideological conNovember 15. For 12 weeks they got away with murder. straint. The last two decades have been good for both They prevented an autopsy. They ordered police to attrib- democratic India and authoritarian China, pushing them to ute death to alcohol poisoning, although Heywood did not the top of international attention. Now the two-timing tiger drink much. They silenced Heywood's Chinese wife with and double-faced dragon are offering fresh templates in corruption creativity, to the joy of a cluster of western banks threats and perhaps money. Nothing would have continued to happen but for a where their loot is parked. In both China and India, the political class has watched bizarre intervention. In February, Bo's once loyal vice mayor Wang Lijun suddenly appeared at the American consulate in wealth being created at an unprecedented pace, to an Chengdu and told astonished American diplomats and intel- unimaginable extent, and decided that it wants its share. The ligence officials enough of the truth and the cover-up. The system is silent because it is complicit. It began with officials Americans did not give him asylum, but ensured that he was being on the take; they are now on the make, as never behanded over to Beijing rather than Bo's henchmen, or he too fore. An IAS couple living in Bhopal has been discovered with might have died of "alcohol poisoning". The cover provided many hundreds of crores raked from defence and other by the Communist state to a politburo member, whose me- deals; the husband was once both signing a deal and respondieval self-enrichment and tyranny had been protected and sible for vigilance. The dacoit was in charge of the police staimplicitly encouraged by the state, was suddenly unsustain- tion. Both India and China have figureheads at the top who able. The Communists did not stop their crooked comrade trot around the world's capitals offering sagacious comment, because they wanted, but because they were forced to. and occasional advice, while behind their deliberately indifBo Xilai was not a law unto himferent backs merry hell goes on. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com self; he was the law unto an oligarchy The significant difference is that that has feasted, with a ravenous apdemocracy provides Indians the petite, upon the prosperity of the nachance to punish on an industrial tion. There is not enough space to go scale, in election. Across the into rapacious details of how Bo, Gu Himalaya, all that public opinion can and their immediate and extended do is speak in Chinese whispers. family looted their country; but trust Chinese punishment is piecemeal, me, Indian corruption suddenly bedelivered under compulsion, when a gins to look like small potatoes. scapegoat is needed to appease mass Figures filtering through social hunger minimally. Media, silent media, considered reliable enough under orders, switches to a chorus for quotation by responsible newspaunder orders. pers, indicate that Bo and Gu ferreted One murder, said the wise actoraway at least $800 million to safe philosopher Charlie Chaplin, makes havens outside China. They made a villain; if you kill millions, you beOne murder, said the wise actorthis money through a confection of come a hero. If everyone is a crook, philosopher Charlie Chaplin, fake jobs, and uncomplicated, oldmakes a villain; if you kill millions, no one is guilty. But there is one silfashioned bribery in cash or through ver lining of reassurance. Even in shares of companies which got con- you become a hero. If everyone is China, it is still difficult to get away a crook, no one is guilty. tracts. Heywood was a courier for with murder. 

W

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

