Business & Economy

COALINDIA

CHARITYBEGINS ABRO AD FOR COALINDIA
GETTY IMAGES

A British hedge fund is set to take the public sector giant and Indian Government to court for selling coal cheap and violating rights of minority shareholders
By Shravya Jain
TCI Cyprus Holding and Ireland-based

TCI VS COAL INDIA
Hedge fund shareholder demands Coal India be managed differently

London-based hedge fund, with a 1.01 per cent stake worth Rs 2,200 crore in Coal India, is getting ready to take one of the world's largest coal mine operators and the Indian Government to court. Christopher Hohn, 46, who runs the The Children's Investment Fund (TCI), a for-profit venture based in the UK, will file two separate lawsuits in India for abuse of rights of the minority shareholder by Coal India, which has a market cap of Rs 2.2 lakh crore. Hohn's $8 billion (Rs 40,000 crore) TCI is famous for its shareholder activism in Europe. In 2007, TCI, founded in 2004, shot off angry mails to ABN Amro Bank asking for overhaul of its weak management. In 2008, Vedanta faced TCI's ire when the fund threatened legal action against the mining firm's restructuring plans, forcing it to back down. Hohn is unabashed about TCI'S aggressive stance. "We have an investment philosophy that looks for strong companies and we are not afraid to be in situations that make others a little nauseous," he said in a rare interview to Financial Times, London. Some of TCI's biggest investments include stakes in Rupert Murdoch's News Corp and Walt Disney. According to data compiled by InGovern Research Services, TCI acquired more than 1 per cent stake in Coal India in the quarter ending June 2011 through two of its subsidiaries--

A

Talos Capital. The hedge fund is filing two lawsuits, one against Coal India and other against the Indian Government, under the bilateral investment treaty between UK and India. "It is clear that the Indian Government is intervening in a diplomatic way and not supporting minority shareholders in a fair manner," says Oscar Veldhuijzen, partner at TCI. From June 30, 2011, to date, Coal India's stock price has fallen 11 per cent from Rs 392.40 to Rs 349.65. The firm has hired Luthra & Luthra for the lawsuits. TCI's main contention is that Coal India's pricing policy for coal--it sells coal at 70 per cent lower than market prices--breaches the company's duties to maximise value for shareholders. It believes the company has lost close to $19 billion (Rs 95,000 crore) in discounted pricing. The fund is also against the Government's presidential directive that forced Coal India to sign fuel supply agreements (FSA) with power companies, committing to provide 80 per cent of their coal requirements. TCI contends that the FSA should only be signed if the coal for those agreements is sold at the market rate. It has also been advocating that dividend payout be raised to 90 per cent of the company's profits, which amounts to around Rs 17,000 crore. For 2011-12, the company paid a dividend of Rs 5,400 crore to the Government, which holds 90 per cent stake in the company. The Government disagrees with

TCI

The low pricing of coal is leading to a loss of Rs 95,000 crore every year.
CIL

Coal prices are lower for the benefit of electricity consumers.
TCI

Government is abusing the rights of minority shareholders under the garb of public interest.
CIL

COAL INDIA CHAIRMAN NARSING RAO (LEFT) AND TCI FOUNDER CHRISTOPHER HOHN

SRIPRAKASH JAISWAL Coal Minister

26

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

``

HOHN IS SURE TO FIGHT TOOTH AND NAIL. HE IS NOT AS INTERESTED IN MONEYAS IN HIS DESIRE TO BE PROVEN RIGHT.

Hohn's contention. "It is incorrect to perceive that there is an abuse of minority shareholders. In fact, Coal India's profits have gone up in the current financial year and they have also given a larger dividend," says Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal. There was a rider in the company's prospectus that the Government has a right to take decisions in public interest, so the company did not mislead investors during the time of its public debut, says Bhavesh Chauhan, senior research analyst at Angel Broking. "I don't think TCI has a valid leg to stand on," he adds. Furthermore, the coal company has fulfilled other milestones mentioned in the prospectus, so the investors haven't entirely been short-changed. Others believe TCI is doing a great service to minority shareholders.

"The hedge fund's arguments are progressive for a change," says Kotak Institutional Equities analyst Murtuza Arsiwalla who concurs that a higher profitability for Coal India is eventually beneficial for the people of India, as they own 90 per cent of the company and still protect the interests of minority shareholders. "They are right in being concerned about the impact on dividend, but they have no right to be dictating terms on the country's policy," says a top official in Coal India. Hohn is sure to fight tooth and nail. He is not as interested in money as in his desire to be proven right. "He likes to win arguments, and the money is simply evidence that he won," wrote The Economist, referring to the cases he has fought in the past. Son of a Jamaican car mechanic, he met his wife American-born Jamie CooperHohn while studying at Harvard

Always mentioned in the IPO prospectus that the Government would direct pricing if a key sector like power was in need of reforms.
TCI

Raising dividend to 90 per cent of profits will benefit both the Government and minority shareholders.
CIL

Profits have gone up in the current financial year and they have already been given a larger dividend.

``

It is incorrect to perceive that there is an abuse of minority shareholders.

Business School. He is famous across Europe as a new age venture philanthropist--applying venture capital concepts to charity. He has structured TCI in such a way that every year it automatically donates 0.5 per cent of profits of the fund's assets to his wife's charitable organisation, The Children's Investment Fund Foundation (TCIF). The organisation focuses on improving the lives of poor children in Asia and Africa. If TCI loses, analysts fear it could pull out, like it has done in the past in other companies where it has taken the battle to the management. In 2009, TCI was responsible for the biggest single sell-down by a foreign institutional investor when it liquidated its stock in eight banks in its portfolio--Bank of Baroda, Punjab National Bank, Union Bank of India and others--which amounted to Rs 3,113 crore. At present, it does not have more than 1 per cent stake in any Indian company other than Coal India. This is a situation best avoided. "Buyers will be harder to come by, given overhangs of government policies and stagnant production levels," believes D.K. Aggarwal, CMD of SMC Investments and Advisors. But if it wins, it could set a precedent. "Any outcome in favour of TCI may embolden other investors to file suits against promoters and directors of errant companies," says Shriram Subramanian, founder and managing director of InGovern, that does corporate governance research. So far, it has already managed to instigate other independent directors to object to the FSAs and ensure a minimum 0.01 per cent penalty as well as several escape clauses in the draft. "Coal India is by far the best investment opportunity in India. It is a sleeping monster," Veldhuijzen said in an interview to Bloomberg in July 2011. Will Hohn manage to wake it up? 

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

27

