Nation DEFENCE

INDIATAKES ON CHINA
Anti-satellite capability can target space satellites and act as deterrent against India's powerful neighbours
By Sandeep Unnithan

ANDHRAPRADESH

FRAUDSTERS CHEATFAITH
Conmen dupe hundreds of Dalit Christian villagers of Rs 450 crore under the cover of religious charity

HOW ASAT WORKS
Uses elements of ballistic and missile defence programme

ndia now has the capability to target and destroy space satellites in orbit. "Today, we have developed all the building blocks for an antisatellite (ASAT) capability," scientific adviser to the defence minister and Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) chief Vijay Saraswat told INDIA TODAY. This capability has given India a deterrent against China. In January 2007, a Chinese ASAT missile destroyed an unused weather satellite. The test opened a new flank of vulnerability in India's $12 billion (Rs 60,000 crore) space infrastructure. India has 10 satellites including the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) new Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT) 1. Launched on April 26, the spy satellite can identify one-metre wide objects from space. China's alarming test spurred India's quest for a similar satellite-killing system. The successful April 19 trial of 5,500 km-Agni V Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile that Saraswat calls a "game changer", is another step towards the capability to target objects in space. The missile scaled a height of 600 km before re-entering the atmosphere. "DRDO will field a fullfledged ASAT weapon based on Agni and AD-2 ballistic missile interceptor by 2014," says a top government source who does not want to be named. This weapon is unlikely to be publicly tested. This was confirmed by Saraswat

I

Kill Vehicle to attack satellites Two-stage rocket
Long Range Tracking Radar Present range: 800 km Future range: 1,500 km

bit Or

ilitary satellites ost m m f o

ASAT MISSILE

to be fielded by 2014

2,000 km

"Collection was done under the cover of Christian welfare to woo the investors."
DUPED INVESTORS IN NELLORE
Photographs: P T HARIKRISHNA

BVR KUMAR SP, Nellore

PTI

who says that India will not test this capability through the destruction of a satellite. Such a test risked showering lethal debris in space that could damage existing satellites. Instead, India's ASAT capability would be fine-tuned through simulated electronic tests. Most military satellites orbit up to 2,000 km above the earth's surface in low earth orbit (LEO). Seeking to guide India's responses to this emerging threat, Space Security Coordination Group (SSCG) was set up in 2010. Chaired by the National Security Adviser Shiv Shankar Menon, SSCG involved representatives of DRDO, Indian Air Force (IAF) and National Technical Research Organisation (NTRO). Besides laying

THE AGNI V LAUNCH FROM ORISSA'S WHEELER ISLAND

"India now has all the building blocks required for the functioning of an anti-satellite capability."
VIJAY SARASWAT DRDO chief

down the Government's space policy, this body will also coordinate response on an international code of conduct in space. The US responded to the Chinese test by downing an unused satellite in 2008. In June 2010, the US indicated that they would consider a new treaty for restrictions on space-based weapons. A new treaty would foreclose India's options for testing ASAT weapons. Indian analysts say it could lead to a new restrictive regime on space weapons, like the present treaties on testing and posses- sion of nuclear weapons and long range ballistic missiles. The SSCG has directed DRDO to accelerate its ASAT capability. Another key ASAT milestone capability will be reached with the first test of a PDV interceptor later this year. This slender two-stage missile can destroy incoming ballistic missiles at an altitude of 150 km. The Ballistic Missile Defence (BMD)

project that aims to protect the country from hostile ballistic missiles has, in fact, developed the three critical elements required to destroy satellites. A long range radar able to detect them and a missile that can inject a "kill vehicle" or warhead into an orbit that actually homes in to destroy it. All these elements have been developed under the BMD programme. The DRDO's Long Range Tracking Radar can scan targets over 600 km away. The `kill vehicle' has been developed as part of the ballistic missile system. It has both electronic and radio-frequency guidance that can home in on ballistic missiles and satellites. "Unlike a ballistic missile, a satellite has a predictive path. A satellite has a diameter of 1 meter while our BMD system can track and destroy targets less than 0.1 metres," says Saraswat. 
For full text of VK Saraswat interview log on to: www.indiatoday.in/saraswat

onmen defrauded poor Dalit Christian villagers of more than Rs 450 crore in the name of religion. As many as 18 cases have been filed in various districts of Andhra Pradesh since November 2011 against 111 people for misappropriation of funds, cheating and conspiracy. The faith cashiers, who are now on the run, initially enlisted the support of local church pastors for their monetary schemes. The pastors then, perhaps unwittingly, canvassed the programmes among poor Christians, mostly Dalits residing in the colonies for Scheduled Castes and Tribes in Nellore district. The agents made unrealistic promises that their deposits would multiply. On the face of it, the schemes were different but they all had the same underlying modus operandi. One such scheme collected Rs 11,000 from a depositor and paid Rs 3,000 for the first two months and Rs 6,000 from the third till the eighth month. At the end of it, the investor got a

C

cumulative Rs 54,000 inclusive of the initial deposit. Fake trusts and societies in Chennai, Hyderabad and Nagaland collected large sums. Eight trusts and societies lured more than 1,50,000 people across 13 of the 23 districts of Andhra Pradesh. "Money was collected under the cover of Christian welfare in order to win over the poor investors," said B.V. Ramana Kumar, superintendent of police, Nellore district where more people have been hoodwinked than in any other. In the most popular scheme, agents promised returns as high as six times within six to 10 months, say police sources. The state Criminal Investigation Department has begun a probe. The agency has, so far, found that about Rs 450 crore had been deposited by the people. The final tally is expected to go up. Even after six months of the probe, only 26 of the 111 accused have been arrested, while Rs 18.67 crore has been recovered or frozen.
by Amarnath K. Menon

42

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

NEW

NEW

