Nation

ASSAM
over some of Surajit's items and the same day, Colonel Subramanian C., the media officer, admitted that "the intelligence was credible but the operation did not go as per norms" and announced an internal inquiry. That the Army did not follow norms is evident from the fact that they did not involve local police or the village headman in the raid, as required by the Armed Forces (Special Powers Act), 1958. The search team neither prepared any search and seizure list at the location nor did it inform Jorhat police, which has led to serious allegations of robbery against those involved in the raid. The involvement of Nirmal Gogoi, a neighbour of Surajit and an alleged car-jacker, also raises suspicion of robbery. "The intruders kept asking my family about cash," says Surajit. The police investigation has made little progress since then and Surajit is yet to get back several of his items. He has sought help from every possible corner--from General V.K. Singh to Defence Secretary Shashi Kant Sharma to the National Human Rights Commission, which, in a letter dated February 4, 2012, has written to the defence secretary to submit an action taken report within four weeks. Surajit finally filed a writ petition in Gauhati High Court on May 3. On May 24, the Army filed an affidavit in court that Surajit was involved in extortion and abductions, gave shelter to ULFA militants and was himself a surrendered militant, charges he vehemently denies. The Army Court of Inquiry, convened on December 29, 2011, has reportedly indicted the commanding officer of the secret surveillance unit, Colonel Govindan Sreekumar, and accused him of extortion. On May 19, General V.K. Singh issued a showcause notice to Lt-Gen Suhag on account of the "lapses". While the issue muddies the Army's succession plan and prompted the Ministry of Defence to examine the legality of General Singh's action, all Surajit wants is the Army off his back. "Armymen keep shadowing me. I want an end to all this," he says. I

NO CAUSE FOR AGGRESSION
Army intelligence operation goes wrong, setting off ripples in wrong places
By Kaushik Deka

SARABJITSINGH

No End In Sight
Sarabjit Singh, jailed in Pakistan, files fifth clemency plea
AFP

urajit Gogoi, 45, a contractor with the military engineering services in Jorhat, Assam, lives life king-size. A spacious house and a fleet of six cars were visible signs of a prosperity which was not commensurate with his declared annual income of Rs 5.40 lakh. Perhaps that led Army intelligence to suspect his involvement with militants and led to a botched "intelligencebased search operation" that prompted General V.K. Singh, then Army chief, to issue a showcause notice to Lt-Gen Dalbir Singh Suhag, in line to become Army chief in 2014. At around 1 a.m. on December 21, 2011, a team of 15 masked people in Army fatigues swooped down on Surajit's home at Rowriah in Jorhat when he was away in Guwahati on business. The intruders blindfolded his wife Renu, 35, sons Bitu, 21, and Ashish, 20, and daughter Pallabi, 13, and ransacked the house for half an hour, taking away Rs 1.5 lakh in cash, jewellery worth 5.6 lakh, and Surajit's .32 pistol, among other things. The traumatised family then called Surajit and the local police from a neighbour's house. Surajit filed an FIR at the Jorhat police station later in the day but the first vital clue came three days later when Sandeep Thapa, a havildar at-

S

O

THE ARMY DID NOT INVOLVE LOCAL POLICE OR THE VILLAGE HEADMAN IN THE RAID, AS REQUIRED BYTHE ARMED FORCES (SPECIAL POWERS ACT), 1958.

SURAJIT GOGOI IN HIS RANSACKED HOUSE IN JORHAT

tached to 3 Corps, called his family using one of Surajit's phones. On December 28, a police team went to the 3 Corps headquarters at Rangapahar and interrogated Thapa who revealed that the search team was lead by a woman captain, Rubina Kaur Keer. 3 Corps officers handed

To gauge popular perception,the India Today Group has launched the PickYour President campaign. We invite readers to pick their choice for the next President.
ONLINE POLL RESULT SMS POLL RESULT

SMS PREZAFOR APJ Kalam 73.85 67.34

SMS PREZC FOR SMS PREZB FOR Pranab Mukherjee Anna Hazare 11.04 14.73 10.08 12.32

SMS PREZE FOR SMS PREZD FOR Hamid Ansari Manmohan Singh 3.38 2.66 1.62 2.92

Or to pick your president, log on to www.indiatoday.in/prez<http://www.indiatoday.in/prez>

n May 29. Indian national Sarabjit Singh, who is on death row in a Pakistani jail, filed his fifth clemency appeal to Pakistan President Asif Ali Zardari. "I have spent 22 years in prison for a crime I have not committed," said Sarabjit in his petition. The 49-year-old was sentenced to death for his alleged involvement in a bomb blast case in Lahore in 1990. The fifth petition, signed by one lakh people, urges Zardari to free Sarabjit on humanitarian grounds. The petition also carries letters from two prominent Indian Muslim clerics--Delhi's Jama Masjid imam Maulana Syed Ahmed Bukhari, and caretaker of the shrine of Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti in Ajmer, Syed Muhammad Yamin Hashmi-- addressed to the Pakistan president. "Sarabjit's release will help in promoting goodwill and communal harmony between the two countries," Bukhari says in the letter. Sarabjit's plea comes days after India's Supreme Court allowed 82year-old Pakistani microbiologist Khalil Chisti to return to his country

SARABJIT'S RELATIVES IN AMRITSAR DEMAND HIS RELEASE

"I HAVE SPENT 22 YEARS IN THE PRISON FOR A CRIME I HAVE NOT COMMITTED."
Sarabjit Singh in his petition on humanitarian grounds. Chisti was released on bail after Zardari wrote a letter to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in April. Following high-level diplomatic talks, Chisti walked free from Ajmer Central Jail. Press Council of India Chairman Markandey Katju also sent three appeals to Zardari for granting Sarabjit pardon, but there has been no response from him. Katju also wrote to former Pakistani senator Syed Faseih Iqbal, urging him to take up the Sarabjit's case. On May 27, Iqbal agreed to help mobilise public opinion in his favour. With fresh support pouring in from both sides of the border, it is to be seen whether Zardari will reciprocate India's Chisti gesture by releasing Sarabjit. by Shafi Rahman

For the week ending May 30, 2012; figures in percentage

JUNE 11, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

53

NEW

NEW

