Jug Suraiya
GUEST COLUMN
The writer is a columnist and author

MISSION MAMATA

Inside the secret assembly of powers threatened by the Bengal Chief Minister

Civilisation The Way We Know It is none of the things we suggested. It would seem that The Single Most Dangerous Threat To Civilisation The Way We Know It is someone called Mamata Banerjee. ISI Is she a breakaway faction of the Hurriyat? Hungary Who de cat? (Who is she?) North Korea Kimchi? Maoist Chairman Mao is our Chairman! (Standard Maoist response to anything they can't understand.) Marxist You mean that gaga woman? Venezuela Gaga? Mamata Banerjee is Lady Gaga's real name? No kidding? Wow! Marxist Oof, oh! Not gaga as in Lady Gaga. Gaga as in crazy, zany, loony, batty, off one's rocker, paranoid... Venezuela (cutting Marxist short): OK, OK. We get it. So the person in question is a bit eccentric. So what? If there was Venezuela Hola, amigos! (Hello, friends.) a global contest for eccentricity my president would win Hungary Yo, bro. Wassup? How're they hanging? (Since no hands down. But that hardly qualifies him to be the Single one but Hungarians can understand Hungarian, at interna- Most Dangerous etc, etc. tional fora Hungary's official language is North Korea Kimchi! SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com American street slang.) ISI No compromise on Kashmir! North Korea Kimchi! (The North Korean Hungary Gimme a five, man! delegate has been instructed by his Maoist Chairman Mao is our Chairman! Supreme Leader not to say anything but Mamata Banerjee is not Chairman Mao! `Kimchi' right through the discussion, Ergo, Mamata Banerjee is not our lest he inadvertently says something that Chairman! QED. might reveal details about the country's Marxist What a nonsense! (`What a nonnuclear arsenal.) sense' in Bengali Marxist doctrine means Indian Maoist Lal Salaam! (Red salute!) `Utter rubbish'.) Indian Marxist Cholbe na! (It won't do!) (The figure at the head of the table hands Pakistan's ISI Hindustan murdabad! over another slip of paper to Venezuela who reads from it.) (Needs no translation.) Venezuela (reading from paper): `Mamata Venezuela (indicating the enigmatic figure Banerjee constitutes The Single Most at the head of the table): OK, so we've all gathered here at the behest of our host to identify The Single Dangerous Threat To Civilisation The Way We Know It beMost Dangerous Threat To Civilisation The Way We Know cause she is attempting to change the world historic order It. So, what is The Single Most Dangerous Threat To by projecting herself as the strongest leader Bengal has ever Civilisation The Way We Know It? The White House? seen.' Well, well, what do you know. Changing the world hisVolatile oil prices? The UPA Government's decision to hike toric order, eh? That's pretty serious stuff. So shall we decide the price of petrol by 7.50 rupees a litre--whatever the heck to eliminate this Mamata Banerjee, whoever she is? Eliminate her from the history books, of course. Not elimia rupee is--that's got the Indian middle class up in arms? nate her in real life. All in favour say `Aye'. Hungary Greece getting its ass kicked, yo? (Everyone says `Aye', except North Korea who says `Kimchi'. North Korea Kimchi? The figure at the head of the table stalks out with ISI Indo-Pak peace process? Interlocutors on the a satisfied air.) Kashmir issue? Hungary Who dat dude, Jude? (Who was that?) Maoist Class enemies? Venezuela Dunno. He never introduced himself. But I heard Marxist Running dogs of capitalism? Venezuela (opening the folded sheet of paper passed on one of his followers referring to him by a synonym for Great by the figure at the head of the table): It seems we've all Leader. I think the word used was Netaji... got it wrong. The Single Most Dangerous Threat To North Korea Kimchi! (North Korean for `Holy cow!')

I

n an interview with an American daily, Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has said that there is an international conspiracy involving Pakistan's ISI, North Korea, Venezuela, Hungary and Indian Marxists and Maoists to eliminate her. INDIA TODAY investigates this nefarious plot and reveals the mysterious mastermind behind it all. (The following discussion takes place in a conference room located deep within a remote territory referred to on the map as Terra Incognita. The participants in the discussion sit at a table presided over by a strange figure taped up like an ancient Egyptian mummy. It remains silent throughout.) The people present, with the exclusion of the mummified figure, greet each other with their national salutations, beginning with Venezuela.

46

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 11, 2012

