Na tion SONIAGANDHI
SONIA GANDHI

SONIAESCAPES CAPITALHEAT
Congress president finalises presidential nominee before leaving for the US

SHEKHAR YADAV

ongress President Sonia Gandhi spent a hectic three days before leaving for the US on June 6. Sonia, 65, is expected to be in New York for a medical check-up and further treatment of her as-yet-undisclosed ailment. She is slated to return on June 12. Sources claim that before she left for the US, Sonia finalised her party's presidential nominee. There was certainly an unusual sense of urgency in Sonia's public meetings and appointments before she left. On June 4, she chaired the meeting of the party's apex decision-making body, the Congress Working Committee (CWC), sending a tough message to her partymen to put up a united front. The CWC also authorised Sonia to decide on the candidates for the presidential and

C

vice-presidential elections. She spent June 5 and the better part of June 6 meeting allies and trying to build a consensus on the candidate. Rashtriya Lok Dal chief and Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh met her on June 5. Ailing DMK chief M. Karunanidhi deputed his son M.K. Stalin to meet the Congress president on June 6. In May, the Congress president had dispatched Defence Minister A.K. Antony to Chennai to take the DMK patriarch on board to endorse the UPA nominee. According to sources, Sonia also spoke to Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee and Nationalist Congress Party leader Sharad Pawar on the phone. After the CWC meeting on June 4, and amid hectic parleys over the presidential candidate, Sonia also re-

ceived an unlikely visitor at her 10, Janpath home--BJP President Nitin Gadkari. Though his visit fuelled speculation, Gadkari later clarified that he had gone to invite her for his 25-year-old son Sarang's wedding reception to be held at Ashoka hotel in Delhi on July 2. Sarang takes care of his Nagpur-based Poorti Industries. Secrecy still shrouds Sonia's ilness. It is widely believed, but never confirmed, that she had undergone surgery and received treatment at New York's Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in August 2011. She returned to India on September 8, 2011, only to go again on February 28, 2012, for what was described as a "routine check-up" by the Congress. She had spent a week in the US then.
by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

To gauge popular perception,the India Today Group has launched the PickYour President campaign. We invite readers to pick their choice for the next President.
ONLINE POLL RESULT SMS POLL RESULT
26
INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

SMS PREZAFOR APJ Kalam 69.44 66.5

SMS PREZB FOR SMS PREZC FOR Pranab Mukherjee Anna Hazare 16.74 15.35 9.31 12.3

SMS PREZD FOR SMS PREZE FOR Hamid Ansari Manmohan Singh 2.95 2.55 1.54 3.32

Or to pick your president, log on to www.indiatoday.in/prez<http://www.indiatoday.in/prez>

For the week ending June 6, 2012; figures in percentage

