(Feature Noida Institute of Engineering and Technology (NIET)

An Enriching Haven for Technical Education
Over the years, NIET has provided the highest quality technical education to students from various states of India admitted on the basis of merit. Its graduates may be found throughout the world in all areas of engineering, management, computer applications and pharmacy
he world is witnessing a sea change in the knowledge sector and this has necessitated changes in India's education system making its horizons broader in order to cater to the global needs. Ancient India, known for its rich cultural heritage boasted of housing world's largest Universities like Nalanda and Takshshila, where knowledge of wide range of subjects was imparted. Medieval India witnessed decline in traditional Indian systems and education during 'British India' saw the dominance of 'pre-Newtonian' and 'pre-Marxian' thought based institutions, fit only to serve British interests. Post independence institutions of excellence were created in selected regions, however North Eastern part of India continues to languish in the absence of proper infrastructure and adequate support systems. The educational scenario in North India is going to improve in the coming years. Since, the prosperity in this region is consistently improving and the people want to make over the educational gap. The social pressure is very high to thrust the new generation for higher education. Noida Institute of Engineering and Technology (NIET) is an all-India Institute for higher education. It was established in year 2001 with the aim of providing quality higher education at par with international standards. It is located in the Institutional Area at Greater NOIDA in National Capital Region of Delhi. It persistently seeks and adopts innovative methods to improve the quality of higher education on a consistent basis. The vision of the institute is to be an institute of academic excellence in the field of education, with future plan of becoming a deemed university, earn name & hence win faith of the society and the institute works on the mission to impart to its students high quality education, develop their skills, broaden their mental horizon, and nurture them into competent and talented

t

professionals to meet the challenges of the new millennium. The unique selling proposition (USP) of Noida Institute of Engineering and Technology Greater Noida is "a team of dedicated, highly qualified and experienced faculty and staff, excellent infrastructure and an excessively large number of quality placements (500+)". The campus has a progressive atmosphere with students from various states of the country. Experienced and learned teachers are strongly encouraged to nurture the students. The global standards set at NIET in the field of teaching and research spurs on in a relentless pursuit of excellence. In fact, it has become a way of life for us. The highly motivated youngsters on the campus are a constant source of pride. ' The quality mission of NIET differentiates it from the others. Today, NIET excels in all the three facets of Technical Educations: Quality in teaching (more than 400 faculty members with more than 30 PhDs), quality in research work (two research journals and consistent publications in SCI journals), and quality in placements (more than 500 placements in just three months). This mission is achieved by the perfect coordination of the three stakeholders of the Institute. The union of the three sets represents the NIET family and intersection of the three sets represents the core team in working for the achievement of the quality goals.

Over the years, NIET has provided the highest quality technical education to students from various states of India admitted on the basis of merit. Its graduates may be found throughout the world in all areas of engineering, management, computer applications and pharmacy. NIET symbolizes the maturing of Indian technical ability and "can-do11 entrepreneurial spirit With such a vibrant campus it is not surprising that more and more companies are recruiting employees from NIET. This year saw more than five hundred placements in the first three months of the hiring process itself. A finishing school has specifically been created to polish the skills of our students and equipped them for the corporate sector. Some of our

nnimPACTfeaiiire regular recruiters are TCS, Indian Armed Forces, Wipro, Headstrong, BSES, Club Mahindra, Tata Sky, ING Vysya, Union Bank of India, Unique Infoways, HCL, Viswa Infra, HLF PPT, Lifecell international, Hindustan Latex Ltd., Appco Marketing India Pvt. Ltd., CADD, Kain Tech, Solutions, Tata Indicom, TCL, BGR, Acer India, Win Medicare, Max Hospital, Murugappa among others. In a recent survey, the institute has been ranked third in North India immediately after two NTs as far as placement is concerned. The Institute's Memorandum of Understanding with various international universities like University of Plymouth UK are our major strength. They provide for an exchange of students and faculty and encourage joint research projects for the mutual benefit of the two institutions. The journey of this institute had been extraordinary. The institute had made a humble start in 2001 and today has attained the leading position in 2012 with mind boggling all round growth in various professional domains. The institute has been rated as the best in the region. The visitors to this institute include all top-notch from Indian politics, bureaucracy, industry, academia and research organizations.
To cater the needs of the needs of the specializations being offered by the Institute about 120 Labs are developed in the Institute. It includes the Parallel computation based supercomputer; Workstations based CAD labs, Cutting edge Microwave Lab, Central Instrumentation room, and 13 research labs. The library of the Institute is well stocked. It has more than 90000 volumes, more than 1200 journals and digital library facility. Quality of incoming students is automatically regulated as top merit students of UP state engineering entrance examination opt for this institute. The faulty selections are done in multiple initial testing rounds, demonstrations followed by persona! interviews. The selection panel comprises the celebrities from academia and industry. The departments of the institute are equipped with state-of-the-art class rooms and laboratory facilities. Digital class rooms are there in the institute. State-of-the-art computer laboratories and laboratories for core engineering exist in the institute. Other central and departmental facilities include Wi-Fi campus, computerized central library, hi-tech computer centre, world class gymnasium, medical unit, comfortable hostels, student owned cooperative mess, bank and amphitheatre.

I Dr. O.R Agarwal
MANAGING DIRECTOR

NIET fries to provide a comfortable and academically charged working environment to its esteemed faculty members apart from deserved incentives and facilities. To its students also, NIET offers scholarships based on merit and also helps underprivileged students in whatever way it can.
BRANCHES Institute offers eight £08) undergraduate courses in engineering in the disciplines of Computer Science and Engineering, Information Technology, Electronics and Communication Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical and Electronics ; Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering and Biotechnology. Institute offers seven (07) postgraduate courses in engineering in the disciplines of Software Engineering, VLSI Technology, CAD, Computer Science and Engineering, Telecommunication Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Power Electronics. The other postgraduate courses offered by the institute are Master of Business Administration and Master of Computer Applications. The institute also offers an independent programme of Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM). ACHIEVEMENT 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Ranked 93Id best institute in India by IDC in Dataquest / 26 pool campus events Accreditation of Two B.Tech courses Accreditation by TCS Accreditation of Two B.Tech and MBA courses Tie up with Plymouth University UK, Ranked 41st best institute in India by IDC in Dataquest 117 companies for campus selections More than 500 campus placements in just three months and ranked 21sf Best Institute in India by Silicon India.

