BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

UMM... MAYWE BORROWTHE QUEEN?
he British royal family may not be much of a family-- allowed her eyes to moisten. It is well known that the only time the Queen smiles Queen Elizabeth II is happily married, most of her children are happily divorced--but by golly, is it royal! The is at the races. On June 3 she beamed. Britain's House of Windsor has survived with grace and diamond jubilee of her reign was the ultimate costume drama. It slipped from one century to another with wisdom because it understood something that its equivasangfroid born out of majestic indifference to common style, lents across Europe never could comprehend: That influwhich is as it should be. If royalty were deflated by common ence is a better bargain than power. Through the turmoil of sense it wouldn't look very exalted, would it? Who on earth the 20th century they never claimed victory so could not be could wear trousers with yellow strips running along the blamed for defeat. European autocracy was fatally wounded side, as in the worst Hollywood parodies, and live to tell the in the First World War, which ended in 1918. The Romanovs tale, except the princes of the House of Windsor? It was real of All the Russias collapsed midway. The Hapsburgs of only in the sense that it was occurring at a particular time Austro-Hungary could not survive defeat. The Kaisers did not survive surrender. The Ottomans of Turkey refused to and place. Its magnet was set in the ethereal. Even nature knew when it had met its equal. London's depart ceremoniously and so were kicked out unceremonirain is, of course, quintessentially British, so the four-day ously. The Windsors left the foreground to politicians, who pageant began in dark, gloomy, threatening and wet weather. were dispensable and dominated the background, where But while English rain has every right to make ordinary they became indispensable to their people. When it comes to a bond with their subject, this buck citizens miserable, it dare not tousle the hair of Her Majesty. It paused just long enough for her to enter the comfort zone stops at Buckingham. No politician was permitted on-stage of the royal barge, a gold-plated float that looked like it had during the jubilee celebrations, least of all the Prime once been owned by the original river queen, Cleopatra. Minister of Britain, who is merely elected. Democracy was When a courtier, trying to be familiar in front of the cameras, sent off on a much-needed holiday. So when the fireworks relapsed into smoke, the band thought that the weather was safe enough a topic for his Queen, she turned in that uniquely arch-motherly way and stopped playing and litter was cleared on the morning after, asked, "Were you surprised?" Breathless BBC, which mutes what did it all mean? More than words can easily communisound to protect the royals from any surprise, raised the cate. The British people were uplifted; the symbol of their state volume on this remark and all Britain sighed in joy and had raised their spirits and restored their sagging self-belief. Depression is not an exclusive British phenomenon. It adoration. Another decade had been purchased from history. A prosaic analysis of Queen Elizabeth the Second's would take a very optimistic, or indeed a very foolish, Indian to look jolly today amid the corrupreign, written perhaps by a nasty SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com tion of Delhi and disarray across Frenchman, would indicate that the country. But when Indians seek while her father lost India, all comfort from their symbol of state, she did in six decades was to lose who do they get? Pratibha Patil. every bit of the rest of an empire That is descent to existential angst. that had arguably begun its ascent I have a solution. Why shouldn't four centuries ago when Elizabeth India borrow the Queen of England the First shooed off the Spanish for a bit? We would keep her only Armada. But only the dyspeptic refor the winter months, when the call unnecessary facts. Our contemweather in any case is foul in porary Elizabeth is both traditionBritain. The Queen is still happy to alist and realist. She took the depardisplay the India connect. Her top ture of nations in her stride. jewellery comes from the subcontiEmotion is a liberty that is not pernent: The Lahore diamond, which mitted to an empress. The one thing she flashed during the jubilee, and that grieved her during six decades the Kohinoor. Her residence in on the throne was the loss of her Delhi, Rashtrapati Bhavan, was personal yacht, Britannia, commisbuilt by an Englishman so she sioned by a royalist Winston The Queen is still happy to display should be able to live in the style to Churchill in 1954 and decommisthe India connect. Her top jewellery which she is accustomed. sioned by that deceptively oily Tony comes from the subcontinent: The And a coronation in Delhi Blair in 1997. It was famously the Lahore diamond, which she flashed would give her a third reason only occasion on which the Queen to smile. wept; or, to put it more accurately, during the jubilee, and the Kohinoor. 

T

JUNE 18, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

