AnimPACTreatiire
hri Ram Institute of Technology is a rising star in terms of placements. In a recent campus selection of TCS 210 students got placed. This bumper placement created a history in MP where by SRIT gave TCS highest no of students for year 2011 in MP .Out of these 210 students, 84 students were from CS, 63 from EC, 40 from IT, 10 from Mech, 3 from M Tech & 7 students were from MCA. If we go with overall ranking of no of selection of students in TCS in MR SRIT is at no 1 followed by DAW Indore, TIT is in 3rd place followed by JEC Jabalpur at 4th place. Apart from TCS, other companies have also come for open or close campus drives in which 57 students were placed with Zensar, 8 students in Persistent, 8 in Hexaware, 20 in Syntel, 30 EA Sports, 12 in Paladion, 20 students in Wipro & around 150 + selections in other companies. Around 500 students of 2011 batch of Shri Ram Group of Institutes have been placed so far & the campus is still going on. Shri Ram Group of Institutes offers courses in BE, B Pharma, D Pharma, MBA, MCA & M Tech. The faculties comprise of the alumni's from IIT, VIT, Bits Pilani etc and other premier institutes, who are proficient in their subjects. They inculcate in the students technical as well as vocational skills so that the students get prepared for the corporate world. This is achieved by setting up of good syllabus which adheres to the practical aspects of education. The advice of experts is taken from time to time and new ideas & concepts are incorporated in the teaching methodologies. The Chairman of SRGI Shri RKarsoliya admitted that since the year 2001 when our college was established the main motive of our college has been to provide quality education to the students. We have never compromised in the path of giving quality education to the students as a result our college is one of the best college in terms of technical education in MP At present Shri Ram Groups has over 80 acres of wide area campus in which there are 3 engineering colleges viz. Shri Ram Instt of Technology, :3$R1T), Shri Ram Instt of Sc & Technology (SRIST) & Rewa Shiksha Samiti's Group of Institutions (RSSGI). Each college is provided with AC class rooms. There are 1800 computers in labs with WIFI campus and smart board facilities id projectors etc.

Shriram Group of Institutes, Jabalpur

GIVING NEW DIMENSION

ERA'S IUCKNOW MEDICAL COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL
ra's Lucknow Medical College and Hospital was established in the year 2001 under the aegis of the Era Educational Trust. The College has been successfully running a 920 bed hospital catering to thousands of inpatients and outpatients for more than a decade. The college is equipped with all the latest facilities and advanced technology for patient care and student education. It is recognized and accredited by the Government of India and Medical Council of India, New Delhi. It is listed with WHO/AVICENNA and IMEO/EAIMER Directories. Era's is a Post Graduate Medical College offering M.D./M.S./Diploma in 18 subjects.150 students are inducted for the M.B.B.S. (Bachelor of Medicine. Bachelor of Surgery) course annually. We also offer courses like Bsc. Nursing, Diploma in General Nursing and Midwifery (G.N.M.) and various Paramedical and Allied Diploma courses Student Centered teaching and training is carried out by highly qualified and experienced faculty with emphasis on Structured Interactive Studies, Integrated Learning Program and Problems Based Learning. The College has also developed its own 3D Animation and 3D Models for better understanding of the students.

E

We envisage a world where good health is not just the privilege of the rich but the basic right of all, with this in mind, we offer comprehensive patient care to the poor and the needy on charitable basis. We educate our students to become trained professionals who not only do their best to heal the ailing but do so with caring and genuine concern about their patients physical and mental well being. Our commitment to research is firm as any teaching institution cannot go a long way without having a dedicated team of researchers. In recent years our faculty members and students have published 63 original research articles in peer reviewed, indexed international journals and 200 research articles in national journals. The clear vision of our trustees and the untiring efforts of our faculty has earned us a name internationally. Our students have brought us laurels from both national and international arenas. We feel blessed in our success but also fee! humbled by our achievements. We wish to be recognized as the best and for that our sights are set on what remains to be achieved globally.

AnimPACTreature

APG Shimla University

13th National Conference of Practising Company Secretaries
The Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) organized the 13th National Conference of Practising Company Secretaries on the Theme: Emerging Opportunities Preparedness for PCS at Srinagar. Shri Omar Abdullah, Hon'ble Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir and Dr. M Veerappa Moily, Hon'ble Union Minister for Corporate Affairs graced the occasion.
While addressing the conference Omar Abdullah, Hon'ble Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir said that the role of company secretaries is extremely important in ensuring ethical risk management. He explained that the company secretaries have to see that the companies adopting unsound business practices do not get away with such practices. Speaking about the business environment, he said that today the consumer is king and businesses going abroad, the times are changing and there is need to have right people at right place. Dr. IV! Veerappa Moily, Hon'ble Union Minister for Corporate Affairs in his address said that the government is formulating Competition policy and corporate governance policy and that the company secretaries are going to ptay an important rale in the proposed company law. The conference was also addressed by Naved Masood, Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Mustaq Ahmed, Chairman & CEO of J&K Bank. Speaking on the occasion Mr Naved Masood, Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs said that the company secretaries are the conscience keeper of entire structure of corporate governance. There is very high hops from profession of Company Secretaries. Mr Mustaq Ahmed, Chairman & CEO of J&K Bank also addressed the conference and emphasised that the rote of company secretaries has multiplied and that they Nave to upgrade the levei of compliances, governance and integrity. Earlier, Mr. Nesar Ahmad, President of the ICSI, in his address said that the .profession of company secretary is contributing to trie development of the State of jammu & Kashmir and has pians to upgrade its infrastructure in the State to attract more students. He further explained that the institute is proposing to enter into 3 Memorandum of Understanding with the University of Kashmir in this regard, Mr. N K Jain, Secretary & CEO, !CSi made the concluding remarks and

estled in the majestic Himalayan Mountains, APG Shimla has built a campus that embodies its vision of the future. From futuristic classrooms and accommodation facilities to a dedicated sports complex and 24-hour health services, all situated in the lushness of a thirty five acre verdant environ, APG Shimla students can look forward to living, studying, and blossoming at one of the most indisputably unique campuses in the country. The University aims at the holistic nurture of its students and unwaveringly believes that gaining knowledge of just one particular subject is not enough in today's hypercompetitive world. Hence, APG Shimla offers its students not only yoga classes and breathing technique tutorials, but also the option of choosing from a wide range of foreign language options. APG Shimla has also pioneered the use of music therapy, in which music and all of its facets is employed to help the students improve and maintain their health. APG Shimla takes pride in the amazing quality of its faculty, a cadre of academically and professionally experienced teachers whose selfprofessed aim is to mentor and nurture the next generation. APG Shimla students will also have the opportunity to attend lectures and presentations from a distinguished group of guest lecturers, which includes worldrenowned experts and corporate ieaders. Overall, the faculty encourages creativity and independence with the watchwords being, "We don't want to teach our students what to think, but how to think" Practical training courses and internships are an integral part of a comprehensive education; they provide students with a gateway into the world after university. Receiving practical training in the second, or even the first year, will give students the chance to learn things that they can apply in their studies, besides giving them a head-start after they graduate.

I

At APG Shimla, we believe in the value of our unique holistic philosophy; the unparalleled depth
and breadth of our courses; our exceptional faculty;

our unwavering commitment to engendering a fearless, flexible, and creative culture; and the cutting-edge facilities and infrastructure within a very affordable fee structure along with the advantage of being nestled in the serene beauty of our campus. We
aim to produce nothing less than the next generation

THE INSTITUTE OF Company Secretaries o f j
IN P U R S U I T Of, I.BOFS;**'""*' 1 1 - * **S

of Indian and global leaders.
I Pramod Goyal CHAIRMAN

