Education is increasingly becoming the primary determinant of overall development in the emerging knowledge economy in India. In the past 5-7 years, India has seen tremendous growth by the spread and arrival of new institutes, with private entrepreneurs joining hands with universities setup by the government. These institutions which are offering professional courses in Technical and Management Streams are empowering the nation with a generation which is ready to take on the world to make it a Knowledge Superpower. Today Universities/ Institutes have also come up very aggressively in spread of quality education through private partnership to offer widespread reach to various professional and academic courses. The Universities / Institutes are not only offering quality education at par with any national level institution but they are also helping so many parents and children to realise their career goals and quality life.

Dr K.N.Modi University

70 years of Excellence in Education
Dr K.N. Modi Foundation had setup its first educational institution way back in 1942, at Modinagar. Today, the foundation has eighteen running educational institutions in Modinagar. These include a management college, three engineering colleges and two pharmacy colleges. The Foundation also has a K-12 model School, with a newly opened branch at Newai and several Inter Colleges.
r K.N.Modi University is a non-profit institution and has been established by Act No 8 of 2010passed by the Government of Rajasthan & recognized by UGC under section 2(F) of UGC Act, 1956. The University is a result of a powerful vision to create a leading in the region. At present, The University offers BBA, BCA, B Tech, MBA, MCA, M.Tech and B.Com {Computer Application) along with MA Education and Ph D apart from Diploma in Engineering, Diploma in Sales Management & Certificate in Retail. The University encourages the spirit of enquiry among all students. A significant expression of this is the research-oriented work that is an integral part of the every syllabus. The University has become the participating University of National Knowledge Network. NKN is a State-of-art multi-gigabit pan -India network for providing a unified high speed network backbone for all knowledge related institutions in the country. The purpose of such a knowledge network goes to the very core of the country's quest for building quality institutions with

D

requisite research facilities and creating a pool of highly trained professionals. The University has world class teaching infrastructure with an AV Studio to transmit lectures from campus to anywhere in the World. The University offers students a unique option of customizing their individual curriculum. This means that apart from a set of stipulated classroom inputs, the student has the freedom to choose a part of course from a variety of other subjects. This University is a member of National Entrepreneurship Network also. NEN provides support to start-ups and early-stage entrepreneurs through high -impact entrepreneurs?]ip education. The University has well equipped laboratories and library with latest equipments are available. The campus is wi-fi enabled and has one of the best Gymnasiums in the area and a big cafeteria for students. There's adequate hostel facility for both Girls and ; separately.

AnimPACTFeature
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ADVERTISING

India's Premier Communication Institute
edia careers are divided into two main parts - content creation and revenue generation. The student community at large is forever wondering about what to do and what programs to choose. Well, to put it in a nutshell - if you think you are creative and would like to write, direct, edit or otherwise work in creating news, programs, features or films - then you need to do a mass communication program - journalism or film based programs will prepare you for it. If you want to run the industry and the business side of it then you need to do an advertising program. Advertising is a mere term to describe a really huge activity that involves research, planning, writing, creating, releasing, promotions and eventually sales. This description is not quite accurate for it is ever evolving and thus ever changing. Prime career prerequisite is an ability to constantly change the self, de-learn, re-learn, re-invent, re- negotiate, to live in a constant state of flux. Such is the exciting, glamorous, effervescent and ever-changing world of

I

I Namrata Suri FOUNDER & CHAIRPERSON

'Advertising'. Most people land up in advertising by default. There are few that opt for it as their first option and then there is the social pressure to do traditional programs - however obscure or inconclusive. It is noteworthy that advertising welcomes people from all walks of life - street smarts are all that you need and will find success in an industry that is a total equalizer. It is far more interesting than banking, selling insurance, credit cards and all the mundane -1 think it is a better career than accounting and sales as well. An equal opportunity industry, salaries are good once you have spent a few years learning the ropes. Being well read however is a pre-requisite. For advertising students I recommend that they read not just the latest bestsellers - but to begin from classics and read up all the way to contemporary non-fiction, fiction, biographies, epics and writings in the vernacular. At the cost of offending some I also recommend viewing all genres of cinema, television shows, news, talk shows and reading of newspapers.

WORLD COLLEGE OF TECHNOLOGY & MANAGEMENT, GURGAON

PROMOTING EXCELLENCE
orld College of Technology and Management is promoted by a group of ex-HTians with profound international Technical & Management _ _ education exposure abroad. World College of Technology and Management is part of group of institutions which have about 12,000 students on their roils spread across Gurgaon, Jaipur & Bharatpur. World College of Technology and Management (WCTM) approved by AICTE, HRD Ministry, Government of India & Affiliated to MD University, Rontak, has been established with the sole motive of imparting quality technical and management education. The prime focus of the college is on in-depth education, continuous monitoring and evaluation through tutorial, regular lab classes and expert lectures. This is one of the rare private institutes, where Chairman besides being M.S., M.Tech and Ph.D from ill, Deihi & Post Doctorate from University of Leeds, UK an outstanding academician, has vast experience of Technical Education from Universities of America, Austria. Australia and.Engiand. The college offers MBA, MCA & B.Tech courses in Computer Science & Engineering (CSE), information Technology (IT), ~ Electronic & Communication Engineering (ECE); Civil-Engineering (CE), Mechanical Engineering (ME) & Electrical Engineering (E£) disciplines. The College also provides learning opportunities to students beyond the curriculum: SAR Java, Auto CAD, Embedded System, $ " "'-'"-' " ' "*' VLSI training students to enhance their technical skill, groomed in special personality .development programmes conducted by specialized faculty. The College has one of the finest infrastructure facilities in the area lush green backdrop spread over 18 acres. The Campus comprises o College of Technology & Management (MBA, MCA, M.Tech & B.Tech),. World Management College (PGDM) Post Graduate Management Programme and Oxford College of Education (B.Ed.) WCTM boasts of fully furnished labs and modern infrastructure, State-of-Art computational faculties with Pentium-lV personal computers & servers, 24 hours ir with 6 Mbps bandwidth and Wi-Fi Campus, Excellent i games, Summer training and staff development progn maintained canteens available in the campus, Excursion trip to various industries & institutes, Centrally Air-cooled separate girls' & Boy's hostel on 15 acre lush green campus with round the clock security and power backup, Fully air conditioned ail class -rooms/lecturer theatres, labs & library,State. okart library with over 20,000 books & Digital/DELNET & E-learning Connectivity and above all the college is proud to have 100% placement of outgoing catch of MBA & PGDM:

Utmost efforts are placed to provide world class teaching learning environment with modern .. pedagogy and most advanced technical;; :\ infrastructure. The campus community is a rich ;; DR. NARENDRA SINGH : ; CHAIRMAN

