GROUP OF
INSTITUTIONS J HHN 5 I

CREATING HISTORY IN THE WORLD OF TECHNICAL EDUCATION FROM THE HISTORIC CITY
constituent colleges namely: College of Science & Engineering, College of Engineering Management & Technology, College of Pharmacy, International Institute of Business Management and College of Professional Studies in order to cater to the needs of students in the fields of professional and technical education particularly for the students of Bundelkhand region. The group offers a wide range of courses at undergraduate & post-graduate levels B.Tech (CS, IT, EC, 1C, EN, ME & CE), B.Pharm, B.Sc. (Bio-Tech), BCA, BBA, Diploma In Polytechnic (CS, EC, ME, CE), M.Tech (CS, EC, ME, CE), PGDM, MBA& MCA. SRGI is an inspiring place to study, where students are encouraged and supported to reach their highest possible potential through the comprehensive curriculum designed to suit their aspirations and strengths. The group maintains a high standard of education and continuously strive to create a conducive environment for learning in order to promote a great career. SRGI believes in the process of reshaping the attitude of students and giving them the opportunity to explore and rediscover themselves.
houghf eomirsg to S86! is so and getting placed with ONGC has become greater achievement for MS,

"Advancement of a highly sophisticated society solely relies on curious professionals with profound knowledge, strong academics and dynamic individuality Surender Rai with much commitment" Chairman The challenge was bigger than SR Group of Institutions thought. The year 2002 witnessed the beginning of a technical institute of repute, with an engraved history of 10 successful years on the soil of Bundelkhand in Uttar Pradesh SR Group of Institutions stands supreme in the field of technical education in keeping with AICTE goals of excellence, the academic program supported by highly experienced faculty, who are committed to provide knowledge and skills to succeed in the present rapidly changing world. Approved by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), Pharmacy Council of India (PCI) and affiliated to GBTU, SRGI is promoted by entrepreneurs with a vision to bring out leaders for a technology-driven environment. The Institute imparts quality education for students to make them competent and highly motivated engineers and management professionals. The Institute not only celebrates freedom of thought, cultivates vision and encourages growth, but also inculcates human values and concern for the environment and the society. The institution under a strong flagship flourished well and resulted into five

fs Engineer Trainee, ONGC ltd.

INSPIRING LEADERS OF TOMORROW

AnimPACTreature
I appreciate the aptitude and interview sessions conducted by college which helped me in securing the right job." NEHAWASON Graduate Engineer Trainee, IBM

SRGI is dedicated to provide high quality of education that delivers real benefits for the students and their future. The group attempts to provide an imaginative and innovative ethos that combines sound business principles with instinctive commercial drive. The courses offer students a life changing experience, preparing them to succeed in the ever-changing global business arena. SRGI encourages a quest for knowledge that is rooted in an ethical understanding of the world that it inhabits. This enthusiasm for learning along with a desire to evolve into socially responsible beings is reflected not only in the academic atmosphere but also in the field of extra-curricular activities. The Group takes pride in having evolved excellent standards for the teaching and learning of science, technology and management. Over the years, this group has gathered vibrant faculty members with expertise in diverse areas. The members of faculty are highly qualified and motivated academicians from institutions of great repute who inspire, encourage and guide the students in all possible ways. As a bonafide member of Wipro Mission 10X SRGI used to constantly improvise, upgrade, enhance, uplift the levels of its faculty members and ensure quality deliverables in classrooms. The representatives of Indian society have recognized SRGI as the most promising institute of repute, the, news magazine India Today has placed the institution at the summit in the field of technical education in Uttar Pradesh, another journal Career 360
"My placement is entirely a consequence of the teaching and guidance of my teachers at SRGI." HARSHITSAXENA Graduate Engineer Trainee HCL Comnet

has awarded it with A+ Rank and the country's most venerated company Times Research Media has placed the group in the leading position in the field of technical education in Uttar Pradesh with excellent Industry Interface. Being strong at academics is not enough to fulfill one's drems, with that realization, state-of-the art Personality development program is part of the curriculum to inculcate behavioral skills in every student of SRGI to make them Industry ready, and learn the balance between IQ and EQ. SRGI made strong association with reputed industries, so as to boost students with excellent placements in reputed organizations like, Wipro, IBM, L&T, HP, TATA, HCL and so on... To bring out the true professional in every students quality driven seminars, workshops and conferences are conducted throughout the academic calendar to motivate and groom the personality of the students. The tradition of excellence in science, technology and management practical at SRGI only adds to the richness of the academic fabric of the college. People will come across the unique combination of social activism, creativity and learning in every discipline and every corner of this Group of Institutions.
Campus: 16 Km, Gwalior Road, Jhansi (U.R) NCR Office: C-244,1st Floor, Sector-63, Noida (U.P.) | Admission Helpline : +91-510-2331191, 2331192, 9889032643, 9889032634 Toll Free: 1800-180-7272 info@srgi.3C in

