Feature
BHARAT INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Inspiring Excellence through Education
IT was established in 2000 with the spirit of imparting technical, managerial and leadership qualities in its students right from its inception. Bharat Institute of Technology, Meerut (U.P) India & Beacon Institute of Technology were formulated with an idea to generate entrepreneurs who could lead from the front. BiT is backed up with a set of highly qualified and experienced faculty from academic & industry background. It also boast of a world class infrastructure with independent buildings for each department, fully furnished in campus hostels with round the clock wi-fi connectivity, AC Auditoriums, stateof-the-art research labs and equipments. In pursuit of continuing excellence, BIT has entered into academic tie up with California State University San Bernardino USA. The library prides itself with a rich collection of over 1,00,000 books and 350 national & international Journals of repute. E-library with Delnet facility is another feather in the cap. BIT has an excellent track record of placement with an strong alumni base and blue chip companies to their credit. The students are groomed with the in house training cell, in different spheres of personality development, interpersonal skills and mock interviews. They are further empowered in their skills by regular guest lectures, industrial visits and live projects being accorded to them. From ten to right: S.K. Jain, Trustee; Albert K. Karnig, President, California State University, San Bernardino, USA along with Sharad Jain, Trustee

B

YMCA Offers Holistic Edge

T

he New Delhi YMCA was established in 1927 with the aim to provideprofessional education and vocational Courses, sports and residential facilities, empowerment and social action towards an equitable society. The education activity is done under the banner of human potential development programme which comprise four institutes with a vision to enable students from all walk of life to access quality education at a very reasonable cost with no discrimination of caste, colour or creed. The institute provides various courses in many field of activity. There's a lot of impetus on tourism. A phenomenal amount has been ear marked and put at the states disposal to promote tourism. Tourism implies development of aviation industry and hotel industry as they are dependent on each other. Accordingly, the courses cover these aspects. A complete vocational package is available in the institute so as and when the student, after completion of the course, is looking for a job, he or she is fully equipped to meet the requirements of the industry. All courses have been planned in a similar manner: besides the above mentioned, there are also courses available for learning foreign languages. This is crucial for students to develop skills to interact in foreign multinational companies that are investing in the country in a big way. It has various allied courses like health management, lifestyle and weight management and sports

Cmde. L K Sharnia iation, a movement dedicated to meet human needs, is a result of the Industrial Revolution in England which forced thousands abandoning the countryside for better living in the city. Britain was plagued with the many ills and human suffering caused by sudden rise immigrants in London. It was the worst affected city, there being no agency to take care of the people.
nutrition. This enables students to specialize in various fields of activity. Students pursing the hotel management courses are sent to various hotel management courses are sent to various hotels for practical training to specialize in the field of their choice and have hands-on exposure. This exposure helps students in a big way as to what to expect and what is expected from them. YMCA has an active placement cell which maintains a good liaison with the corporate world and various MNC's who make a beeline for selecting candidates trained in YMCA. Various big companies recruit students by conducting campus recruitment programme.

AnimPACTreature

SANSKRIT1 GROUP OF INSTITUTIONS

Building Career. Building Life.
anskriti Group of institutions is one of the best muSti-professional research-led institutions today that provides professional and career ed education. The institute aims to provide an al, infer- disciplinary education in a unique intersection of theory and practice, passion and reason. The institution provides courses of study that are on the forefront of knowledge and connects the spiritual and practical dimensions of intellectual life in a stimulating environment that fosters rigorous scholarship and supportive community. The word 'Sanskrit! means refinement of culture. To achieve technical excellence in the rural areas, philanthropists . from different walks of life who realized the need for fical and managerial education for the regions ...iDmic strides, collectively formed a society called 'Sanskriti Society for Education Research and Development1 and they have tried to promote and develop equality of opportunity for the rich and poor. The campus also known as "Sanskriti Knowledge Park" is richly endowed with beautiful green land with its state of the art infrastructure, facilities, centrally air conditioned campus and with excellent academic records has earned a lot of laurels for its genuine efforts as one of the most reputed educational institutions today. The vision of the institute is to be a world class knowledge enterprise striving for academic and professional excellence in technical education, business education, research and development and service to the industry and society. The aim of the institute is to create and sustain an academic environment conducive to academic and professional excellence, to provide world class quality managerial and technical education to inspired youth who join the institute through touch competition, to create an environment that fosters technology incubation and relevant research and development, to foster enterprising spirit among the students, to create avenues for technical education and research in new and emerging technology areas, to create a technology savvy campus and to impart value based education, to create synergetic partnerships with industries and last but not the least to be a world class knowledge enterprise striving for academic and professional excellence in technical education, research and development and service to the industry and society.

CHAIRMAN

India's First Industrial Robotic Training Centre at AKGEC
Driven by its commitment to provide quality technical education, Ajay Kumar Garg Engineering College (AKGEC), Ghaziabad has established India's First Industrial Robotic Training Centre for educational institutions in collaboration with KUKA Robotics of Germany.

T

he primary objective of the centre is to encourage young professionals to take up this interdisciplinary field of Industrial Robotic as a choice career and to train them in state-of-art technologies to meet industry needs. The centre also promotes research in the field of applied robotics. The centre is equipped with standard training cell comprising KR-16 Industrial Robot and auxiliary equipment presently being used in many industries including TATA Motors. The centre also has a robotic computer simulation lab with software like SimPro and Sim Layout used to design, develop and simulate robotic operations for different manufacturing applications. The centre conducts Basic, Advanced and Expert level training programmes for engineering and polytechnic* students with internationally recognized and valid certification. Through the establishment of this centre and other similar collaborative ventures, the college intends not only to raise the overall academic standard but also bridge the gap between academic curriculum and industry needs to make its students globally competiti

AnimPACTFeature

Mewar University

PLATTER OF SUCCESS
ewar University is an autonomous body promulgated by the Government of I Rajasthan. The University is further approved by the UGC Act 1956, with the right to confer degree. Mewar's culture, ethos, tradition and values are so ingrained in its soil that it is bestowed with the magical powers to sprout prodigious talent and genius. Anyone groomed in this environment will undergo a steady transformation to blossom in life and imbibe the traits of greatness associated with this historical place. The University aims to inculcate among its students a spirit of universal brotherhood while laying utmost emphasis on age-old values of Indian culture and traditions. Mewar University is promoted by the Mewar Education Society (MES). It is controlled by a board of management, constituted by the MES, which is headed by Chairperson Shri Ashok Kumar Gadiya, a great visionary, educationist, and nationalist, who translated his ideas and dreams of promoting higher education into reality by '" institutes of learning in various subjects. The group, under the able leadership of Ashok Kumar Gadiya and the active support and association of renowned academicians, experienced professionals and technocrats, has established a chain of Institutes of higher education and learning as mentioned below: 1  Mewar Institute of Management  Mewar Law Institute  Mewar Girls Business School  Mewar Girls College  Me  Mewar Girls Industrial Training Centre  Mewar Girls College of Teachers Training These centres of learning exemplify the group's mission to promote quality technical education. As a result, the number of has gone up considerably, and now it has more than 5000 students in its campuses. The group, continuing with its mission to provide higher and technical education to a larger section of people, has touched a new height by promoting and sponsoring Mewar University. The p----*=-body, with their honest efforts and unsti dedication, has the conv partnership with the Government of Rajasthan for ensuring the spread of higher and technical education in the state.

GNIT College of Management

Nurturing Professionals since 2001
reater Noida Institute of Technology (GNIT), an enterprise of the Shri Ram Educational Trust, was initiated in 2001 by a group of enthusiastic and philanthropic individuals with a vision. It is approved by the All India Council for Technical Education (A1CTE) and Ministry of HRD for running the B.Tech course. Soon after, the institution added MBA and MCA courses to its academic offerings.In the year 2006, the Trust established the GNIT College of Management. Spread over four acres of land in Knowledge Park II, in Greater Noida, the college is situated in the educational hub of the region and is just a 25-minute ride from the capital city of New Delhi, adjoining the sixlane expressway. The focus of the institution is to bring about a holistic development of its students and to produce value-driven and versatile professionals who are able to respond effectively to the changing environment. The institution welcomes students from all over the country and abroad; and from multiple graduation streams, such as commerce, arts and science. GNIT group of

G

institution offers Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM), approved by AICTE and Ministry of HRD, and more career-specific management programmes, such as Banking and International Business. In addition, the college also lays out choices of dual specializations in HR, Marketing, IT, Finance and IB. The training module at GNIT group of institution has a well-designed pack of group discussions, mock interviews, extempore speeches, role plays, case studies and management games. GNIT group of institution has a well-equipped computer lab with the latest Pentium PCs, software and communication tools. It also provides it students with a 24/7online availability of net connection. The college has a credibly well-stocked library and also subscribes to various national and international magazines and periodicals. The classrooms at GNIT group of institution are spacious and well-equipped, with LCD monitors and air conditioners.. GNIT group of institution provides its students with hostel facility for Boys and Girls separately.

AnimPACTreatiire

PDM Educational Institutions, Bahadurgarh

TOTAL EDUCATION UNDER ONE RO
f India's leading educationists and economists were ?m Polytechnic in 1995-96, and then came up PDM asked to sit down to dinner and agree on a single idea College of Eflgmeeririgm 1999, PDM Public SchBol in 2003, without causing cutlery to fly, it would have to be this: PDM College of Management & POM College of Pharmacy that it is India's evolving education system which will feed ' in 2004, PDM institute of Engineering & Technology at; its growing economy. As urban India rises in prosperity and . Karsindhu, Safidon {Jim!} in 2005, PDM College of demand, its next two decades rest on the shoulders of Education, Ultra Modern PDM Dental College & Research those who are now beginning their higher education. In this Institute 4:General Hospital in 2006, PDWCoilege of new decade, India will have to raise its game to become an Engineering for Women in 2009 and PDM School of even stronger global competitor, the game changers are Technology & Management in 2011. A new Institute in the just getting into college. form, of PDM International School is coming shortly to add The country needs people with complete personalities, able more grace to the PDMTamily. Today, it is well established  institution spread over 45 acres of land ;absoiuteiy  to cope with the changing scenario and economic fluctuations to lead the country into prosperous era. so that pollution free surroundings. The Association success in the field of education in a short s the dream of india becoming a super power"comes to be and it plans to add new educational courses true. The Co- Chairman of PDM Educational Institutions that quality education in every field become; based at Bahadurgarh, an upcoming town of Haryana, Mr. under one roof for the convenience 01 the-.sU Joginder Singh Prabhu elaborates "The Institution was a dream of Shri Prabhu Oayai Ji, the not believes in being guided by a universal spirit, philanthropist, in whose memory POM Grotty operating in hitherto unserved areas like rural and in Educational institutions have been e disciplines where there is shortage of quality manpower. The PDM believes in combining what is test With 17 years of look back, PDM has in traditional education and what if latest and success of the past inspires confidence writs ability to appropriate in technology like web based learning, continue to produce those special skills ami attitude that open learning and Interactive learning." produces leaders capable of changing the world ef With this core goaf in mind, the Prabhy Dayal Memorial technology, management, pharmacy and dental sc Religious and Educational Association (PDMREA, popularly The world class faculty, state of the art technology referred as POM) came up with its first Institution named consistency high percentage 쬯 placements beattestimo,,.

J. S. Prabhu

The Savera Group of Institutions

Pioneering education with responsible teaching and inculcating humanistic values

T

he Savera Educational Trust was established in the year 2007. The Group of Institutions has come a long way since their inception. The Group aims to create future leaders out of today's young generation capable of playing strategic role in nation building and service to humanity and the mission of the Group is the achievement of excellent educational standards through quality teaching methods, modern and innovative procedures in order to attain global recognition at educational horizon.

I Dr. Ishpal Bhardwaj CHAIRMAN

Besides bestowing knowledge, this institution takes upon itself the responsibility of fostering & nurturing the student's dormant faculties and to convert the aspirants into universally acknowledged technocrats and managers. To embark on a journey of success one needs the tools of preparedness, foresight and strategy. These lead to the path of growth. Realizing the responsibility, Savera recruits only the best in their fields as faculty of the institutions. They are committed to sharpen the students' faculties with use of innovative and unique pedagogical tools and systematic and continuous evaluation. The pool of raw talent is meticulously groomed and rigorously trained in all aspects - be it academics, extracurricular activities, team dynamics or leadership skills. The curriculum is so framed that it not only focuses on providing technical expertise in theoretical aspects but also emphasizes on ensuring the right corporate and technical exposure. The state of the art infrastructure is uniquely designed to develop engineers/managers who are equipped to tackle the challenges of present and futuristic global environment. The Savera group has established alliances and academic collaborations with many renowned institutes in India as well as abroad for national/ international exposure for the students. The institute provides degrees in B.Tech, M.Tech, B.Architecture and MBA in a wide array of disciplines. The placement cell of the college lends full assistance to the students in their search for suitable placement. It provides help in resume writing, imparting training in interviews, identifying avenues for employability and other related activities. Placement cell organizes special classes in honing the communication skills of the students.

nnimPACTFeature

Innovative Education at EMPI
Delivering intense professional programmes crafted by leaders of Industry
TM MPI Group of Institutions, founded in 1995 with Mr. Gurnam Saran, former Director BHEL, Sr. Management Consultant Commonwealth (UK) & President IEEMA as its founder President, is a unique conglomeration of institutions/centres of excellence. EMPI has been continuously involved in job-market scan and developing befitting Post Graduate Industrial Training & Skills packaged professional programmes. The result of EMPI's endeavour has been very encouraging as AICTE has given approval for conducting the PGDM programme with an array of specializations in Advertising Communication, Business Analytics, Finance, Global Business, Human Resource and Organization Development, Innovation & Operations Management, Integrated Marketing Communication and Brand Management, Marketing and Media Marketing, Sales and Planning. The programme launched in October '95 after approval by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, has been granted recognition by the Association of Indian Universities (AIU) as equivalent to MBA Degree. Credit for creation of EMPI's rich learning environment in South Delhi's green pollution free setting, indeed goes to India's acknowledged icons - great achievers in Management, Academics, Bureaucracy, Judiciary and the like.

DEGREE v/s CAREER
BES Engineering College, an initiative of Society for Educational Excellence, SEE, has completed dedicated and focused TWELVE years in providing composite and quality training to the young minds in Engineering & Management education. The students, who are joining the forte of ABES Engineering College, are being taken through meticulously planned academic programs by a team of young & dynamic faculty under the guidance of highly qualified & experienced academicians drawn from HTs/NITs and other reputed organizations. With a clear conviction to 'prepare a student for beyond job, a career1, the institution has set up CENTER FOR CAREER PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT, CCPD, headed by Prof R N. Koul, as its Director. Prof Koul, with 45 years of teaching, administration & research has been in addition, associated with top industries under Industry-Academia Interface and Entrepreneurship awareness programs and has developed and implemented many innovative training modules for the students to make them corporate savvy. CCPD has adopted rigorous training modules which focus on industry exposure through industry-institution interface and entrepreneurship awareness. This is supplemented by rigorous training in personality development, Soft-Skills and Technical Training through collaborative learning to bring students & faculty on a common platform to help each other in teaching-learning process through internet technology and provides selfevaluation by the students of their performance. 'ABESEC IS DIFFERENT', as it lays special stress on motivation to engage in Live Projects of International standard and up gradation of Teaching Learning Process through "Train the Trainers" programs. There is Continuous focus on Live International Projects like UAV Project (USA), BAJA SAE INDIA, Micro Arial Vehicle (jointly by US & Indian Army), "ROBOCON 2012" (Hong Kong), UAV, . Robert Aircraft Competition (Korea), DRDO project and many more.

A

 The institution has partnered with TCS & WIPRO Technologies through Industry institution interface with the objective to plan, promote and execute effective teaching-learning processes and develop corporate culture amongst the young.  NASSCOM has selected ABES Engineering College under Industry Academia Partnership Program to partner with Cadence Design Systems.

"We train the young mind not to run for the degree, but meticulously plan & develop his/her career to face tough & compititive world and also be a better human being".
I Prof R N. Koul
Ph.D. (1IT, Mumbai), Director, Career Planning & Development

