Mail

IPL: The Dirty Picture
JUNE 4, 2012

Black money, white lies, bookies and glamour parties have turned a cricket carnival into a suspect circus.

``
Games Cricketers Play
IPL-5 has disgraced the very spirit of the gentleman's game this year ("IPL: The Dirty Picture", June 4). While stars like Shah Rukh Khan set bad examples in misbehaviour, players indulged in match-fixing and extreme boisterousness. It is surprising that even foreign players were involved in cases of molestation and assault. May be it is time to say that when in India, do as the Indians do.

A brilliant concept has been sullied due to overindulgence of black money, sleaze, unethical practices and glamour parties.
VEER MAMIK,
Delhi

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

UPA's Oil Slip
Reducing subsidy on petroleum products is right, but heavy excise duty and VAT have put the prices of these products beyond the reach of the common people ("Consumers Slip on UPA 2 Oil Slick", June 4). A steep rise in oil prices will lead to inflation and escalation in prices of all products and services. High taxes on petrol and diesel must be reduced forthwith to check further deterioration in an already tense scenario.
RATAN RATHORE, Jaipur

in IPL-5 has come across as a shock to many. IPL has become a breeding ground for bookies. The laws dealing with betting in our country are antiquated and outdated. They need to be given more teeth. The Board of Control for Cricket in India should ensure that IPL games remain clean on and off the field.
MANJU SRIVASTAVA, Ghaziabad

K. CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore
IPL

has undoubtedly been an entertaining event providing plenty of money to the players. But the conduct of a few players and team owners off the field has raised various controversies. The recent news about match-fixing

The Congress-led UPA has hurled another petrol bomb at the common man after the mockery of celebrating three years in power. Petrol is up by nearly Rs 8 and it is a sure burden on the people. It is perhaps the steepest hike since UPA 2 came to power. We appeal to the Government to withdraw the hike at once.
S. VENUGOPALAN, Chennai

Every cricketing knowledgeable will acknowledge the fact that IPL has honed skills and fitness of almost every cricketer. Indian players have benefited manifold by playing with and against acclaimed international players. What is, however, admittedly disturbing about IPL is the off-field activity with infiltration of glamour, sleaze and involvement of the betting

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

JUNE 18, 2012  INDIA TODAY

``
11

Mail
mafia, apart from the mindless partying which the players participate in. And when policy formation and administrative control is in the hands of the politico-corporate nexus, particularly with personal interests overlapping and therefore vested, the end result is bound to be what was evident in IPL-5. The T20 format, in all probability, is there to stay as it's fast and exciting and has caught the fancy of every cricket aficionado, but the apparent tamasha needs to be arrested.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

35
style diseases. Junk food can cause irreparable harm to our bodies. We should consume simple, non-oily, non-spicy and nutritious items with lots of green leafy salads or sprouts apart from drinking a lot of water. Daily exercise is a must.
GUNDEEP SINGH, Pune

many frivolous students asking how much money they would get! It shows that they do not have an interest in service to humankind but earn money and show their virility.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J U LY 1 6 - 3 1 , 1 9 7 7

Adding Grist to the Mill
The recent announcement by Mrs Kameshwari Mishra, wife of former railway minister L. N. Mishra, that the Anand Margis being held for her husband's murder are innocent and that she would name the real culprits before a new commission, is as mysterious as the events surrounding Mishra's death. The fact that she remained silent since her husband was slain two-and-a-half years ago, and only decided to speak out on the eve of the Assembly elections, lends an aura of political motivation to her startling statement. More grist has been added to the mill with Kameshwari and those accused of killing her husband demanding a fresh probe. They have rejected the CBI investigation as "politically motivated" and have dubbed the Mathew Commission report an "eyewash". Ranjan Dwivedi, a Supreme Court lawyer and one of the accused ,has sent appeals to the Prime Minister, the home minister and other top leaders for withdrawal of the case and has filed writ petitions in the high court for squashing the findings of the Mathew Commission. Ranjan's American wife, Patricia, told INDIA TODAY that her meetings with the Prime Minister and the home minister had evoked a favourable response. "If at all a new inquiry is made," she stated, "it must not be conducted by the CBI who are prosecuting the case at the present. There have been instances of the CBI taking excessive interest in the accused."
RANJAN DWIVEDI AND PATRICIA

`Pick Me' Campaign
P.A. Sangma may be a deserving candidate to enter the presidential race ("Pranab Too Intelligent. Try Me", June 4) but it is unprecedented for an aspirant to canvass for his own nomination and solicit support from political parties for the position of the country's first citizen. Sangma has further devalued the president's image by linking caste considerations with the post.
NITIN, Pune

Call of the Future
West Bengal has developed a laid-back attitude averse to industrialisation ("Kolkata Lost and Found", June 4). A culture of antientrepreneurship does not bode well for the financial well-being of the state and its people. Rabindranath Tagore, as a spiritual guide, is wonderful. Yet, it is doubtful that he was ever opposed to prosperity.
AMBAR MALLICK, Kolkata

Healthy Living
Every write-up in the health special ("The Way We Eat Now", June 4) is appreciable by virtue of its unique analytical and interpretative approach. One can follow a particular advice given in this issue if findings are similar to one's personality. Experiences shared by Vaidya Balendu Prakash are adaptable as home remedies. All contradictions (virudh) quoted in the transcript are worthy of being invoked in one's daily life.
NINA MURLI, Delhi

Setting the Trend
Apart from entertainment, a film might convey a powerful message, but not necessarily worthy of being followed literally ("Would You Like To Have My Baby?" June 4). India is a country of 1.2 billion people and it is surprising that people are still thinking of increasing its population by using artificial means. The technologies and techniques should be used sagaciously for the welfare and betterment of humanity instead. As doctors have revealed, there are queries from

Correction
The article, Bailout Breather, dated March 5, 2012, was not intended to undermine the image of the State Bank of India (SBI) or its chairman Pratap Chaudhari, the country's largest bank, in the eyes of its depositors and investors. We apologise if that is the impression generated. It was not the intention. It was subsequently denied by SBI and its chairman. In response to a parliamentary question, finance minister Pranab Mukherjee stated there was no question of extending any further loans by SBI to Kingfisher.

Indians are indulging in eating harmful stuff without sparing a thought for what damage it could do to their health. Therefore, our country is becoming the world capital of life-

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

12

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

NEW

