Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

BRING BACK THE

FAMILYDINNER
The old-fashioned dinner together is back in vogue as science champions the cause of family meals for better health TOGETHERNESS
Family mealtime has a wealth of health benefits
Research shows that children who eat more meals together with their parents tend to eat more fruits, vegetables, fibre, calcium-rich food, vitamins, and less of junk food. Children who eat meals with their families more frequently have a lower body mass index than those who don't.

HOMEMADE HEALTH
Over 20 per cent of the urban Indian food budget is spent on eating out.Public health experts have been pointing out how restaurant food tend to be fattier,saltier and more calorie-heavy than meals made at home. Now,growing scientific research shows that fewer family meals can lead to poor food choices and bad health.This month,researchers at Rutgers University,US,reviewed 68 studies that measured the frequency,atmosphere and quality of family meals.They found that the more a family ate together,the more meals tended to be rich in fruits,vegetables, fibre,calcium,vitamins and low on dietary components harmful to health.While family time together allows parents to teach children healthy habits,the increased focus on food and eating leads to improved diet.

Vanaspati contains 53% of harmful trans fats but accounts for 60% of the total cooking oil used in street food across India.
Studies show that the more frequently children eat at the family table, the less likely they are to smoke, drink, do drugs, get depressed, develop eating disorders and consider suicide, compared to those who dine less often at home.They are also more likely to do well in school, delay having sex, learn better vocabulary and socially acceptable behaviour.

TURN OFFTHE TV
Turn off the TV while eating family meals. The Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior reports that children in families that watched TV while eating meals together had a lower-quality diet. Boys watching TV during family meals consumed fewer vegSource: Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior; Archives of Family Medicine 2009-2012 I

etables and more soft drinks, while girls ate significantly more fried food. TV may be influencing the type of food adolescents choose because of the advertisements they see. Alternatively, meal situations and food served in homes where the TV is switched off during meals may be quite different. Compiled by Damayanti Datta
JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

73

