UP FRONT

SANAT KAUL

CAN ANYONE SAVE AIR INDIA?
onsidered by many middle class Indians as a jewel costs. However, its present debt is huge at $10 billion in the crown of democratic India, Air India evoked (Rs 50,000 crore) or more (mainly under sovereign guarstrong nationalist passions as a symbol of our antee). The fall started in 2005 when a huge order of 111 heritage and culture in the world when there was glam- aircraft was placed for Air India (67 long range) and 44 for our in air travel and governments owned and prided over Indian Airlines, and culminated in 2007 when it was detheir `national' carrier. No more. That era has gone. Many cided, with due deliberation of the GoM and Cabinet, to airline companies have mushroomed and the concept of merge the two entities into National Aviation Company Ltd. national carrier is no longer relevant in the western The merger process was never followed up properly and world. Still a few countries like Singapore, and UAE have there were frequent and sudden changes in top management. The cadres of the two airlines, especially the pilots, strong airlines which lend an identity to the country. Then why this fuss over Air India? This is quite were not integrated properly and it was left to Justice incomprehensible when the Government swears it is work- Dharmadhikari in 2011 to give his findings. Japan Airlines (JAL) is a recent example of how an airing for the "aam admi". What was the relevance of the Prime Minister making a point about not letting Air India line can reverse its falling fortunes by adopting and implego down in his speech to the nation on Independence Day, menting policy prescriptions. When Chairman Kazuo 2009? What was so sacrosanct about Air India as a public Inamori, 78, took over JAL nine months ago, the airline was sector undertaking that it was singled out in his speech? a declared sick company, having filed for one of the biggest The previous government had, in 2001, decided to priva- bankruptcies with $25.6 billion (Rs 1,28,000 crore) in debt, tise Air India through a strategic sale (with full support of unprofitable routes and a bloated workforce. Inamori, all the unions) which went through all the motions of Japan's most celebrated entrepreneur, turned it around due process but failed at the last instance. Had the sale and it has started making profits. Similarly, Satyam gone through, we would have had a top-class Air India to- Computers System faced one of the biggest frauds in India's day without the baggage of government mismanagement history. Tech Mahindra took over the company (now called Mahindra Satyam). From $2 billion (Rs 10,000 crore) which took place subsequently. The UPA Government's decision not to privatise Air losses in 2008-09, it is already showing a profit of nearly India is still not clear, when the general policy to divest Rs 2,500 crore in the first half of 2009-10 and the income for the whole year is likely to touch Rs in the public sector continues. A forSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com 5,500 crore. In contrast, the governmer civil aviation minister in UPA, considered by many to be the brightment's feeble attempt at revamping est so far, claimed that he had no role the Air India board with some industo play in either placing the huge ortrialists and a retired air chief marder for aircraft (which was increased shal of the Indian Air Force has made from its original proposal) or the little difference. Expat professionals merger of the two airlines, as these employed from outside were shown proposals came from the bottom up the door within six months. and not top down and were duly apWhy did the Government not proved by the Cabinet. Not many acallow private management even if it cept this hypothesis. The present didn't want to sell/divest in Air India? minister has already denounced the The case of our neighbour Sri Lanka merger as a mistake. is a fine example. In an effort to imAir India's past history is quite prove the performance of Sri Lankan credible. Until the recent equity Airlines--a 100 per cent Government infusion (and more coming), Air India, airline--the Government sold 40 per in its 60-odd years of existence, never cent equity/ stake to Emirates Airlines got equity or debt support from the in 1998 after the devastating terrorGovernment except for the original The fall started in 2005 when a ist attack on its fleet in Colombo in huge order of 111 aircraft was 2001. It has got the equity back and equity of Rs 154 crore. It made a profit in good years, built/bought its properplaced for Air India and 44 for the airline is now running well. If ties in Mumbai and abroad, built a there is a will, there is a way. Indian Airlines. It culminated chain of hotels, constructed hangars in 2007 when it was decided to and staff quarters from its own funds. Sanat Kaul is Chairman of the International merge the two entities into Over the past many years, these propFoundation of Aviation, Aerospace and erties have been liquidated to meet National Aviation Company Ltd. Development (India Chapter)

C

10

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

