Na tion BIHAR

BIHAR ENTERS THE INDUSTRIALAGE
With stable law and order and inexpensive labour, big business houses queue up to establish
By Amitabh Srivastava

KARNATAKA

industries in the state

Godman is Grounded
Nithyananda surrenders in court, sent to custody

ntil a decade ago, big business ignored Bihar when it came to new initiatives. Safety was an issue. Now, though, it's on the verge of a belated industrial revolution. Stable law and order and a proactive government have done an image makeover for the state. The government claims a double digit growth rate while admitting that it has been possible because of a lower base of the state's economy. Bihar's agricultural fertility and inexpensive labour have renewed its appeal for industrialists. The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) President Adi Godrej attested as much on his maiden visit to Bihar on May 20. Godrej, who is also the chairman of the Godrej Group, said his company would invest Rs 60 crore to set up an animal feed plant in Hajipur town. Godrej also praised Bihar for being the fastest growing state in 2011-12 fiscal. "Bihar is moving in the right direction," he said. The textile industry, which according to apex trade association Assocham will touch a turnover of Rs 5.75 lakh crore by year end with a growth projection of 16 per cent, is clearly eyeing Bihar as an emerging market. "Of the 755 business proposals approved by the State Investment Promotion Board (SIPB), 59 are already functional with an investment of over Rs 3,712 crore," Bihar Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi told INDIA TODAY. Though Modi admits Bihar is yet to receive mega investments, some big names have already arrived. In February, Kumar Mangalam Birla, chairman of the Aditya Birla Group, announced his plans to set up a cement factory. Beer giant Molson Coors Cobra India has also started production from its Bihar-based brewery in February. Vijay Mallya's United Breweries is just a few months away from setting up a brewery. Raymond Ltd Chairman

U

O

K M KISHAN

CHIEF MINISTER NITISH KUMAR (RIGHT) WITH GODREJ GROUP CHAIRMAN ADI GODREJ IN PATNA

The Road Ahead
Government incentive is face to face with power deficiency

ADVANTAGE
Stable law and order, improved infrastructure, huge consumer base, rise in buying power. Incentives include 35 per cent reimbursement of project cost and 80 per cent reimbursement of VAT.

DISADVANTAGE
Unavailability of land. Bihar finds it difficult to vacate land for setting up industrial units. The state is starved of power. It depends heavily on Central allocation and the open market. Government's hands-off policy. It does not confront protesters opposing a particular industry.

Gautam Hari Singhania, who visited Patna on May 15, has also spoken about his "step-by-step" business extension plan. Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has offered Singhania land for setting up a garment factory in Bihar. "We have already earmarked a place in Patna for setting up the textile, garment and IT industry," Nitish said. The emerging consumption market and easy availability of wheat has seen the arrival of major biscuit makers in the state since 2010. Britannia Industries invested Rs 58.62 crore to set up a biscuitmaking unit at Hajipur in 2011. With an investment of Rs 48.70 crore, Bansal Biscuit, the maker of the Anmol brand, has also begun production in Bihar. Parle G, the Mumbai-based Rs 5,000crore company, has formed a partnership with Bihar's Lavanya Finvest to set up another unit in Muzaffarpur. These units have provided employment to 1,581 persons so far. Inspired by the growing interest, the state government updated its in-

dustrial policy in 2011. The new blue book on investments has provisions for 35 per cent reimbursement of project cost, besides 80 per cent reimbursement of VAT with a ceiling of 300 per cent of the capital invested for 10 years. But more than incentives, a secure environment and the state's emergence as a big consumption market is the reason behind investors eyeing Bihar, says Modi. Land unavailability has emerged as one of the biggest bottlenecks for Bihar's proposed industrialisation. With a population density of 1,102 persons per sq km, Bihar finds it difficult to vacate land for setting up industrial units. Being a power-deficient state is another problem that confronts the expansion plan. Modi says the fact that the Patna airport is one of the fastestgrowing airports in the country is an indication of the growing interest in Bihar. The number of domestic passengers travelling to and from Patna has jumped from 3.44 lakh in 2008-09 to 10.21 lakh 2011-12. With the arrival of India Inc, Bihar may fly even higher. I

n June 11, Karnataka Chief cost for a children's programme is minister D.V. Sadananda US$ 2,000 (Rs 11,000). Gowda, who is personally Things sold on the website range monitoring the investigation against from cosmetic products to sermons controversial godman Nithyananda, and songs in the form of books, videos 35, ordered the locking up of his and audios in multiple languages. sprawling 29-acre ashram at Bidadi There are deals for the day in books, near Bangalore. Nithyananda has ornaments, idols and best-selling 12 cases pending against him in var- products . The website also accepts ious courts in Karnataka of cheating, donations and payments in five differrape, unnatural ent currencies-- KM KISHAN sexual acts and Indian rupee, US land grabbing. and Canadian dolNithyananda lars, British pound surrendered on and Euro, along June 13 to a court with credit card in Ramanagaram, and PayPal opwhere yet another tions. The selfcase has been filed styled swami against him, of asreportedly also sault and abuse heads 20 foreign against media pertrusts and nine sons. He was reIndian trusts that manded to one-day call themselves police custody. charitable instituGowda told the tions and pay no media on June 11: taxes. "I have directed NITHYANANDA BEING APPOINTED PONTIFF It was in 2010 the investigators to OF MADURAI ADHEENAM ON APRIL 27 that Nithyananda's frame a perfect doings first came chargesheet against Nithyananda to light, when a tape showing him and I will ensure that this is so. We do having sex with a Tamil actress was not encourage such immoral people broadcast by a Tamil TV channel. He in Karnataka and I am going to make was arrested by the Karnataka Police in Himachal Pradesh but soon an example out of Nithyananda." Neither the Karnataka Police got bail. In June this year, a woman devonor the district administration is willing to put a figure to Nithya- tee from the US went on air on a nanda's wealth yet. But his website, Kannada TV channel, outlining in www.nithyananda.org, active on graphic details the sexual exploitaTwitter, Facebook, and YouTube, as tion that Nithyananda allegedly subwell as a live streaming TV in Slova- jected her to, leading to protests by kian, Croatian, Russian, French, local activists at his ashram. With Spanish, English, Marathi, Hindi, fresh new stories coming out about Telugu and Tamil, is a full-fledged his misdeeds, the Karnataka governe-commerce site. Packages for ment has finally sprung into action. beginners' "inner awakening" cost His devotees, though, still swear by US$ 6,000 (Rs 33,500), while the his innocence. by Sowmya Aji

48

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

49

