Na tion

UTTAR PRADESH

AKHILESH YADAV AT MASTER CHANDGIRAM SPORTS COMPLEX IN SAIFAI

BACKYARD BENEFITS
Happy days are here again for Saifai, the stronghold of the Yadavs, with Samajwadi Party back in power
here is a whirr in Saifai not heard in years. Five hundred men of the Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam are working with a sense of urgency bordering on panic to finish construction of a paramedical institute. "Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav has issued instructions to start courses from the July session," says P. Guruprasad, district magistrate of Etawah. The Prince of Saifai is repaying his debt to voters in the Samajwadi Party stronghold, the Yadav family oasis in the backward district, for keeping the faith--and how. The Rs 184-crore Saifai Paramedical Institute is not the only project, temporarily abandoned during former chief minister Mayawati's rule, that has been restarted. Akhilesh has committed Rs 600 crore to bankroll the resurrection of his father Mulayam's dreams. In the pipeline is a lion safari, while two hospitals, five stadiums including an Olympicsize swimming pool, a modern airstrip as well as postgraduate and medical colleges are on the verge of completion. "Until the late 1980s, Saifai was no

T

more than a small village flanked by barren wetlands," says Sugar Singh, a loyalist of the Yadav clan. "That's when Mulayam made it the tehsil headquarters." Today, the township's 24-hour electricity supply is the envy of the rest of Uttar Pradesh. While many of his projects remained unfinished, Mulayam did inaugurate the Master Chandgiram Sports Complex and Grameen Aur Vigyan evam Anusandhan Sansthan, a medical institute fashioned after Delhi's All India

FRESH LEASE OFLIFE
A flurry of projects is slated to change the face of Saifai
Project Paramedical institute Medical college Cost* Rs 184 crore Rs 114 crore

International sports complex Rs 78 crore Airstrip Lion safari Rs 50 crore Rs 20 crore
* 2006 estimates

Institute of Medical Sciences, before Mayawati ousted him in 2007. On May 12, a day after he ordered the scrapping of nearly two-dozen projects initiated by the Mayawati regime, Akhilesh touched down in Saifai. With Chief Secretary Javed Usmani in tow, the Chief Minister inspected all pending work. One of Akhilesh's first stops was the international sports complex. He ordered a facelift for the complex, in addition to two new sports colleges, one for women and the other for men. Saifai's lifeline is Lucknow. Tejpal Yadav, 23, the block pramukh, is Akhilesh's cousin and is overseeing political affairs here. "The Chief Minister is committed to the development of Saifai. He has more projects in mind," he says. Akhilesh's decision to fasttrack the institute is aimed at sourcing paramedical staff--with a state-wide shortfall of 29,000 nurses, 2,000 pharmacists, 17,500 X-ray technicians and 16,300 laboratory technicians--from the Yadav pocket borough. Akhilesh is also keen on a natural sanctuary for Asiatic lions in Etawah. In his Budget speech in the Uttar Pradesh Assembly in end-May, Akhilesh announced an additional Rs 5 crore for the Rs 20-crore `Lion safari' project initiated in 2006. `Yadavland' may soon hear the big cats roar. by Piyush Babele

50

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

ANUP YADAV

