Na tion PUNJAB
MAHARASHTRA

PUNJAB'S POWER GIRLS
WOMEN COMMANDOS TRAIN AT BAHADURGARH FORT NEAR PATIALA

Revival of an Idol
The first-ever portrait of Shivaji's queen Saibai will be unveiled soon in Phaltan by her descendant

T
RAJESH SACHAR

Female troopers have been recruited into the Special Security Group for the first time to counter terrorism and protect VIPs
By Asit Jolly

S

"I gave up the chance to study architecture or marry and settle abroad to be part of this. It gives me an unbelievable sense of empowerment.
BALWINDER KAUR Commando recruit

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

he is having the time of her life. Up at the crack of dawn for a punishing six-kilometre run, countless push-ups, chinups and a complex obstacle course. The rest of the day, under the blistering summer sun, is spent handling state-of-the-art weaponry, counterterrorism manoeuvres and imbibing unarmed combat skills. Kamaljit Kaur, 21, is among 20 recruits selected as the first female troopers in the Punjab Police's elite Special Security Group (SSG). They are being prepped for deployment in Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal and Deputy Chief Minister Sukhbir Badal's innermost security ring, besides anti-terrorism operations. "This is what I have always dreamt of doing," says the farmer's daughter from Mudki near Ferozepur, armed with an assault rifle and smartly turned out in combat fatigues. Her eyes light up at the prospect of being

part of an armed and uniformed force, not a particularly desirable vocation among young Punjabi women until recently. But things are changing across the hinterland. And this is evident from the enthusiasm of the `lady cadets' as they happily take on their final month at Bahadurgarh, a historic 500-year-old fort that houses the state police Commando Training Centre outside Patiala. "The girls are highly motivated, much more than the average male trainees," admits Kulwant Singh, 49, a battle-hardened explosives expert who instructs the cadets on tackling improvised explosive devices (IED) and reading maps. "Once fully trained these commandos would be a definite asset to any security setup." Navneet Kaur Sandhu, 21, also a farmer's daughter and an arts graduate from Bathinda, could probably shame the fastest male cadet at Bahadurgarh in a sprint. Just a week into the commando course and she was using automatic weapons like a

veteran. "The SIG is my favourite," she declares, deftly handling the newest polymer frame automatic pistol from Sig Sauer, US. Seated beside her, 22-year-old Balwinder Kaur says she gave up the chance to study architecture or marry and settle abroad, opting instead to be a police commando. "This gives me an unbelievable sense of accomplishment and empowerment," she says. Women commandos are being trained to use a wide array of weapons acquired for the SSG set up in 2010 by the then director general of police (DGP) Paramdip Singh Gill. These include the Swiss-made SG-553 assault rifle and MP-9 tactical machine pistol, the SIG SP-2022 pistol and the trusted and hardy AK-47 from Kalashnikov. SSG's arsenal rivals that of any other non-military special protection force in the country, including the National Security Guard, Special Protection Group and National Investigation Agency. The Punjab force will, however, have the edge. Once deployed, its women commandos will be the first to be included in Close Protection Teams (CPT) for VVIP security anywhere in the country. Sukhbir Badal is delighted with incumbent DGP S.S. Saini's decision to

induct women into the SSG. "Women tend to be more focused and less susceptible to corruption. Don't any of you try to take a panga (mess) with them," he laughingly told journalists at a May 29 news conference. Sound advice, agrees Inspector General (Security) Sanjiv Kalra: "In addition to firearms, our women commandos equal their male counterparts in unarmed combat." Once posted with the Punjab Police's 4th Commando Battalion, which is responsible for VVIP security, they will also be trained in Krav Maga, a highly effective and often brutal Israeli martial art. As with any untried venture there are some within the state police who are questioning the wisdom of inducting women for jobs that would involve unpredictable hours and situations. "The Punjab Police is an indisciplined force and we will have to post guards to protect the women who are all essentially in their early 20s," says a senior officer. The success of Punjab's women commandos can only be measured once they have been deployed on active duty. But in a state with an abysmal male-female sex ratio and a continuing social tradition of female foeticide, employing young women to protect the top leadership can only be an encouraging sign. I

hree hundred seventy nine years after her birth in 1633, Chhatrapati Shivaji's first wife has finally got her due. A 14th generation successor of Saibai's parental dynasty of Phaltan in Satara, Raghunathraje Naik-Nimbalkar, has succeeded in making her first ever portrait with the help of a local artist, Sunil Ghadge. The 52-year-old NaikNimbalkar, the president of Phaltan municipality, is all set to unveil the portrait in his ancestral palace. "Saibai is our idol. Now that I am confident of her appearance, her pictures will get a prominent place along with Maharaj (Shivaji)," he told INDIA TODAY. Saibai's marriage with Shivaji in 1640 marked the beginning of
GHADGE (LEFT) AND NAIK-NIMBALKAR WITH SAIBAI'S PORTRAIT

the expansion of his empire. She gave birth to three daughters, Sakhubai, Ranubai and Ambikabai followed by a son Sambhaji, who took over the reins after Shivaji's death in 1680. However, unlike Shivaji, her sketch is not available anywhere. Naik-Nimbalkar, who has made portraits of all of his ancestors with the help of Ghadge, gathered sketches and photographs of 26 women from the dynasty. "Saibai's portrait is a combination of these facial similarities. I do not claim the portrait is 100 per cent accurate but I can definitely say it is pretty close. I have heard that Saibai was a little dark but we have shown her to be fair in the portrait," he said. Pune-based historian Pandurang Balkawade welcomes the initiative. "Naik-Nimbalkar has done the right thing by combining the facial features of the women of the dynasty. Though the portrait does not have support from history it will be accepted as official, just like the portrait of Jijabai," he says. Shivaji's mother Jijabai's sketch is also not available. However, historians re- imagined what she looked like. Saibai died at 26, but she remained Shivaji's favourite till he died. A great source of inspiration to him, legend has it that Sai was the last word he uttered on the deathbed. Naik-Nimbalkar's initiative with infuse new life into yet another myth.
by Kiran Tare

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

45

