Bus iness 4G

THE BIG BATTLE IN 4G
AMBANI
GETTYIMAGES

Competition between Mukesh Ambani and Sunil Mittal is good. It could deliver Internet and video services to hundreds of millions of Indians.
future of the telecom industry lies in providing data services in 4G. Says Mahesh Uppal, an independent telecom consultant, "In a country like India which has only limited fixed line connectivity, Internet can only penetrate through wireless broadband." There is a latent demand for highspeed data services, particularly video. Says former telecom entrepreneur and Member of Parliament, Rajeev Chandrasekhar, "Cable and satellite penetration in India is much lower than mobile connectivity. 4G is a play for this untapped market." India has over 800 million mobile users, but just 450 million have access to television. 4G services will eliminate the irritation of buffering and slow uploading of video files. Other experts are less optimistic about the revenue potential of 4G. "In India, 85 per cent of revenues for telecom companies comes from voice services. Only 15 per cent comes from data services and that includes SMS," says Ravi

MITTAL
AP

By Dhiraj Nayyar

en years after they first clashed in the telecom space, two of India's most aggressive and exciting entrepreneurs, Mukesh Ambani and Sunil Mittal are ready to go to battle once again, in 4G. Airtel launched India's first 4G services in May 2012 in Kolkata and Bangalore. 4G services are restricted to broadband and wireless data services--voice telephony is not permitted at the moment. 4G offers data transmission at approximately four times the speed of 3G or 16 times the speed of 2G. Mukesh Ambani's Reliance Industries is expected to roll its 4G services across India in the second half of 2012. Ambani is the only operator to own a licence in each of the 22 4G circles in India. Bharti Airtel has a presence in eight major circles, including Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore and Kolkata. Many experts believe that the

T

Visvesvaraya Prasad, an independent telecom consultant. Prasad believes that Ambani and Mittal's foray into 4G is a high-risk business strategy precisely because the revenue stream isn't deep enough. "But there is always an advantage being the first mover," he says about Ambani's ambitions. Neither Ambani nor Mittal made a serious play for 4G spectrum in the auctions conducted by the Government in June 2010. Ambani entered the 4G space by buying a 95 per cent stake in Infotel, a company owned by Mahendra Nahata, the promoter of Himachal Futuristics, soon after the auctions. Infotel was the only company to acquire a pan-India licence for just under Rs 13,000 crore. Ambani paid Infotel Rs 4,800 crore for the stake. He is also reported to have paid for the licences. Mittal's Airtel paid around Rs 3,500 crore for spectrum in four circles. In May 2012, Airtel acquired a 49 per cent stake in Qualcomm for just

Rs 4,800 crore

is the amount Mukesh Ambani paid to buy Infotel which had pan-Indian licence for 4G.

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

61

Bus iness 4G
Rs 3,500 crore
is the amount Sunil Mittal paid for 4G spectrum in Delhi, Mumbai, Haryana and Kerala.
will almost certainly use a similar strategy to promote his 4G services. There are reports that Reliance may manufacture devices itself. It has also tied up with Ericsson for 4G devices. The battle for 4G may well be won by the provider who offers the cheapest ecosystem. The battle will also be defined by the content that service providers promise. Mukesh Ambani's investment of Rs 1,700 crore into Raghav Bahl's TV18 and Network 18 were a conscious step in acquiring a presence in the content providing space. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) added a fresh twist to the 4G space in the recommendations it issued in April just before its former chairman J. S. Sarma left office on May 13. TRAI has suggested that spectrum usage be liberalised so that 4G can also be used for voice telephony. The recommendation has not yet been accepted by the Government. It is controversial because 4G spectrum sold much cheaper than 3G precisely because it could not be used for voice telephony. Critics argue that liberalising spectrum in this fashion provides a backdoor entry to new players in the telecom space. If the recommendations are accepted, Mukesh Ambani could compete with Mittal in providing voice telephony as well. Both Mittal and Mukesh Ambani need 4G to deliver. Mittal's bottomlines are under pressure given the brutal competition in the voice telephony space and the fact that he will have to pay up to Rs 40,000 crore if TRAI's recommendations on the refarming of spectrum are accepted. Ambani's oil and gas business is under unprecedented pressure from the Union Ministry of Petroleum. Ambani may still have the financial edge. Reliance Industries is sitting on huge cash reserves of around Rs 1 lakh crore. But the dogged Mittal, who continues to profit despite tough conditions, will compete hard. Consumers will be the beneficiaries of cheaper, faster and better quality services. I under Rs 1,000 crore which had spectrum in the four lucrative circles of Delhi, Mumbai, Haryana and Kerala. That signalled Mittal's intentions to make a serious play in 4G. Mittal battled Mukesh Ambani for a brief period between December 2002 and June 2005. In December 2002, Mukesh Ambani launched Reliance InfoCom, his first business venture after his father's death. A press release at that time said that Reliance Infocomm under Mukesh Ambani's leadership "will usher a digital revolution in India". Ambani's foray using CDMA technology rattled the GSM operators, including Mittal. Mukesh Ambani dropped out of the telecom space in 2005 when Reliance Infocomm was handed to brother Anil Ambani as part of the division of their business. It was left to Anil to battle Mittal in 2G and then 3G. The digital revolution is still unfolding seven years later. And Mukesh Ambani is once again at the forefront. It may, of course, be a while before 4G gets a mass consumer base. For now, the ecosystem--defined in terms of the devices that can deliver 4G services--is limited. Says Uppal, "The 4G ecosystem is fragmented across several frequencies. The availability and affordability of devices is still a challenge." Globally, 4G is used in the 2,500 MhZ band. In India, 2,300 MhZ is the frequency in use. That could be a challenge in terms of adapting imported devices to Indian conditions. Chandrasekhar is less concerned about the ecosystem. "Once 4G is rolled out, the ecosystem will follow," he says. Bharti Airtel is already distributing reasonably priced 4G compatible tablets in places where it has rolled out 4G. Uppal expects there to be strong linkages between hardware manufacturers and service providers. 4G services can be delivered through tablets, dongles (devices that plug into laptops) and computers. In 2002, Reliance Infocomm sold CDMA handsets cheaply to consumers to lure them to use their services. Mukesh Ambani

2G Second Generation
Wireless Telephone Technology
Launched in Finland in 1991, came to India in 1995. Phone conversations were digitally encrypted for the first time. Built for voice but allowed slow data services like SMS on the telephone. Existing analogue technology for wireless phones first launched in 1981 retrospectively termed 1G.

3G Third Generation Wireless
Telephone Technology
First launched in Japan in 2001, came to India in 2011. Built for voice and provided data transfer services superior to 2G. Approximately three-four times faster than 2G.

4G Fourth Generation Wireless Telephone Technology
Launched in Mobile WiMax technology in South Korea in 2006 and in Long Term Evolution (LTE) technology in Scandinavia in 2009, came to India in 2012. Primary use in transferring data at very high speed, particularly useful for Internet and video downloads. Approximately four-five times faster than 3G.

62

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

