HEALTH special 2012

THE WAYWE EATNOW
BHASKAR PAUL/ www.indiatodayimages.com

APPS THAT

WOW
Stay on top of your health with these mobile applications

Calorie Counter
All about what you eat and how you burn your calories, if you have a BlackBerry that can access the BlackBerry App World.

EAT FOR SUCCESS
By Nishat Bari & Rewati Rau

RUJUTA DIWEKAR

Mumbai

Star dieticians share insights and more to give you a healthy edge

The dietician behind Kareena Kapoor's size-zero figure, Diwekar was born into a family where health was seen as an heirloom. In school, she was into sprinting and in college developed an interest in aerobics. She signed up for postgraduation in sport science and nutrition from SNDT University, Mumbai. She goes to Rishikesh regularly to study yoga and vedanta.

FOOD PHILOSOPHY


"I encourage my Punjabi clients to eat aloo parantha and South Indian clients to eat dahi sadam. I don't force people to eat sukha bhel, salads and juices."
weight loss industry tell you otherwise.


ISHI KHOSLA

Delhi

What'S On My Food?
This free smartphone app tells you what pesticides are there in your food, along with a list of foods and chemicals analysed.

A Delhi girl, she started counting calories at a very FOOD PHILOSOPHY young age. Tired of being obese, she started applyIndia, no dinner  Result is not the ing self-devised weight-loss techniques on herself starts before end-point.You as a student of Modern School, Barakhamba Road. 10 p.m. should know exThat set off her journey as a nutritionist. She reactly what you are  Indian meals refused to sit for MBBS entrance exams and took adeating and why. volve round carbovanced degrees in food and nutrition from Lady  Eat according to hydrates. All meals Irwin College instead. Despite a productive career your body type, include too much as a nutritionist in the preventive cardiology unit of your family history rice and too many Escorts Heart Institute, Delhi, she decided to go and your personal chapattis. beyond hospital diet charts. In 2001, medical issues: powered by research and clinical  Although primaUSP Obesity, diaexperience, she set up Whole Foods, rily vegetarians, betes, heart No fad diets, no a one-stop shop for nutrition needs. Indians don't diseases or
charts.Just long-term, sustainable diet plans that can be integrated into one's daily life. any other disorder. eat enough vegetables.


Eat right and on time. Don't count your chapattis. Treat food as a blessing, work out regularly, lead a disciplined

lifestyle, sleep and rise at a fixed time.


USP : Don't obsess over the weighing scale. Eat fresh, local and simple. Be conscious of food nutrients. Stay fit with vigorous workouts.

Celebrate Indian uniqueness and diversity. I don't standardise and force every person to eat same type of food to lose weight. herent wisdom of the body to make the best possible

use of nutrients. Our body does all the work and the dietician walks away with the credit.


 Believe in the in-

There is no `ideal' food chart. For me the ideal food comes from local produce, fresh ingredients and are homemade. Don't let the

Biggest problem with Indians: Attitude of blindly aping the West, preferring western `research' and standards of wellbeing to India's age-old knowledge and oral traditions of eating right.

Cook ITAllergy Free
With 200 recipes, just tell this app everything you're allergic to. It will adjust recipes to your need. For smartphones.

WaterWorks
Plug in your desired daily water intake and an onscreen water jug graphic will let you know how much water you are drinking. Compatible with iPhone and iPod Touch.

 Both Body Mass Index or measuring height and weight to estimate body fat, as well as Waist Hip Ratio, or waist girth by hip girth that also predicts heart disease risk, are crucial. Indians tend to store fat on the abdomen, which is much more dangerous than fat anywhere else. 

Food availability and economic affluence have altered Indian eating habits adversely. There is too much food available all around us. Indians are socially insensitive and tend to force people to eat. We don't address the need for good health and focus merely on cosmetic changes.





Don't eat large and late meals. In

MUNCH 5-a-DAY
Encourages you to eat fruits and veggies. A fun game where you can earn points and create graphs to monitor your progress. For iPhone and iPads 13, 2008  OCTOBER 00 INDIA TODAY

VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

"I am not a menu writer. Nor do I hold hands. I want you to change your lifestyle. Hence, I plan diets for a lifetime."
OCTOBER 13, 2008  INDIA TODAY

00

HEALTH special 2012
SHIKHA SHARMA
Delhi

THE WAYWE EATNOW

Though everyone calls her a nutritionist, she is an allopathic doctor first. The Delhi girl studied at Modern School, Vasant Vihar, did her MBBS degree from Maulana Azad Medical College. But a lifelong interest in a natural and healthy way of life made her realise her true calling: Preventive medicine. It drove her to study ayurveda and to float her own clinics, where the first session with a patient lasts for over an hour as she diagnoses clinically the medical needs of patients and analyses their body constitution. The diet prescription is devised along with her team of nutritionists later.

"Healthy weight is not just about nutrition. It is about anatomy, constitution, your medical history, behavioural patterns and psychology."
menopause. Folic acid and Vitamin B12 deficiency are common.


FOOD PHILOSOPHY


Make your diet fibre-rich, with whole and unrefined grains, fruits with skin. Vegetables should comprise at least 10 per cent of your daily intake. against salt. Our consumption is

way beyond the healthy limit of 8-10 gm.


 Be on guard

The basic problem with Indians is that we are not health conscious, but only beauty and weight conscious.. In Tier 2 cities,

there's always a namkeen platter for evening tea, and aloo puri on Sundays. In the metros, many refined and processed foods clog up the diet.




Women need extra calcium after pregnancy and

After age 35, both men and women must get regular check-ups and modify their eating patterns.

USP
Integrates modern medicine with ayurvedic principles. Guides team of nutritionists to plan customised strategies.
HEMANT CHAWLA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

ANJALI MUKERJEE

Mumbai

The "official nutritionist" to Miss India contestants, Mukerjee started her clinical practice in 1984. An alumnus of the The Institute of Hotel Management, Catering Technology & Applied Nutrition, Mumbai, with specialisation in dietetics and nutrition, she studied clinical nutrition at the American Academy of Nutrition, followed by a PhD in alternative medicine. When she started work, she did not have an "overwhelming desire" to be a nutritionist. But as patients streamed in for weight loss and left not just trimmer but also without many lifestyle problems, she developed crucial insights that turned her into a committed professional. She started her own company, Health Total, in 1997.

FOOD PHILOSOPHY
 Food has tremendous healing power. When used correctly and when adapted to body chemistry, it not only brings down body weight, but also corrects a host of other conditions. 

signing customised food formulae. This is important because you can't have a single, mono-diet for all.


tion causes a lot of confusion.
 It is important to seek professional help to match foods to one's body type.



USP
Not focused solely on weight loss but on a holistic health management. Solves other disorders created by nutritional problems.
52
INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

Understanding body chemistry is important for de-

People tend to follow wrong diets and suffer diseases that are preventable. Readily available but conflicting informa-

As a nation, we are overfed and undernourished. Somewhere, we lose balance and get carried away with selfindulgence.

"If you are eating well, then it's all right to occasionally indulge yourself with food that may not be very healthy."

