BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE NAKED AND THE DEAD
T
he British, damn them, confused us so thoroughly that predatory as those of the old feudal aristocracy". Gandhi got we still cannot find an economic policy. They gave us on pretty well with kings and princes, contemporary or old. both Queen Victoria and Karl Marx; and then Lord Jamshetji Tata sent him donations for his heroic South Africa campaigns; G.D. Birla and Jamnalal Bajaj picked up Curzon and the Fabian Society. It was merciless. Their own vision was clear. Ideology was appropriately Congress bills through the freedom movement. Nehru's dressed: Top hats for silks, caps for toilers. Lenin knew bet- critics were convinced he wore foreign underwear under ter than to challenge the British identity template; he wore khadi, but could never be certain whether it was purchased a cap. A hat is not revolutionary. We will never know what from Harrods or the socialist cooperative down the road. Lenin, who died at the age of 53, probably of syphilis, would Gandhi was tart in his response to Jawaharlal: "He likes to have been wearing if he was still in the Kremlin at 73. His fly. I don't. I have kept a place for the princes and the zaminsuccessor in the 1970s, Leonid Brezhnev, proudly took his dars in the India that I envisage." The inevitable compromise followed: Co-existence, withmother for a tour of his office and chandeliered dacha. The old lady asked, worriedly, "But Leonid, what will we do when out any sharp lines. But it was uneasy private-public relathe Bolshies return?" The story may be apocryphal but the tionship. The private sector hit below its weight; the public sector added weight without muscle. Stagnant or desultory metaphor is true. Corruption is not an Indian monopoly. The British were unimpressed by Marx. They buried him economic growth encouraged exploitation in one and waste in the 19th century and exported him in the 20th. Among in the other. The state paid for its mistakes with tax cash, and changed the rules arbitrarily to curb its competition. Marx's destinations was India, where he met Gandhi. Gandhi had a radical approach to clothes. He abandoned The private sector howled when leashed, and cut every corthem. This did not make Gandhi naked. He was always ner when it thought no one was looking. Indian Marxists, from their cubby hole in Bengal, spewrapped in poverty. Marx's proletariat may have driven out the Romanovs from Russia, but mendicant Gandhi's starv- cialised in ambivalence, arguing that since socialism was ing Indians dismantled the mightiest empire known in his- impossible in a bourgeois democracy pseudo-socialism tory. How could Gandhi, who smashed the chains of fear that would have to do. Cross-dressing is a peculiarly Indian pohad shackled India into so many prisons, who was caustic litical alibi. Those who understood the deception shrugged about greed and egalitarian about need, who owned very off their dilemma. Jyoti Basu was once asked why he flew first class. Because, he answered, he was a first-class little himself, be ever considered right-wing? The Indian left scorned Gandhi with unforgiving ardour Communist. Wit is a formidable defence mechanism. A crisis was inevitable. In 1991, the government finally because Gandhi subsumed economics into nationalism. Gandhi's horse was Hindustan; the cart, its economy, came stepped back, but liberalisation was soon to encounter a far later. His model for governance, developed at Tolstoy Farm in more dexterous and dangerous rival than weedy socialism: Populism. This anarchic demon South Africa and published in 1910 as SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com swallows money that doesn't exist in Hind Swaraj, was a potpourri of shiban insatiable desire for votes. boleths linked by the rigidity of an Ideology cowered briefly, and then ashram. The only economy it exhibdisappeared. Both right and left ited, frankly, was an economy of now survive on a wing and a prayer, words; its length was no bigger than bereft of serious or even comical a preliminary chapter in any Marxian ideas. The UPA Government is hontreatise. And yet the workers of Britain, whose cloth he had burned in est when it says it has no clue why 1920, cheered him to the rafters the rupee is shrinking; the citizen when, flashing his toothless smile, he has no clue as to why UPA wants to visited them in Lancashire in 1931. be in power for two more years. In 1945, as Gandhi and his heirs An ideological vacuum inprepared for self-rule, Jawaharlal evitably makes politics personal, Nehru dismissed Hind Swaraj as and decisions become whimsical. "completely unreal". Nehru had The emperor, as in the familiar `confessed', as early as in December fable with a moral, believes he has The UPA Government is honest 1929, that "I am a socialist and a appeared before the people with when it says it has no clue why republican and am no believer in new robes. He bows to the applause. the rupee is shrinking; the citizen kings and princes, or in the order Only a child knows what he does has no clue as to why UPA wants which produces the modern kings of not; that he has none. That child industry... whose methods are as  to be in power for two more years. has a vote.

NEW

JUNE 4, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

