HEALTH special 2012

THE WAYWE EATNOW

FOLLOW THE DOCTOR
Five top doctors talk about their personal strategies to stay flab-free and healthy

Load Up On Omega-3
Dr Andrew Weil
Professor of Internal Medicine and director of Integrative Medicine, University of Arizona, US I think I am very good about my diet. I enjoy food; I grow a lot of my own food and I like to cook for myself and for others. I grew up eating a quite mainstream American diet. But around 1970, I became a vegetarian, even a lacto vegetarian. Then for a variety of reasons I began eating fish. I am very convinced that one of the most serious nutritional deficiencies in the world is Omega-3 and it is absolutely essential to optimum health. I don't eat meat, poultry and eggs. I eat some diary products and love yoghurt. Lassi in India is terrific. I eat fish and also take a supplement of fish oil. I think the greatest problem in the modern diet is the extent to which manufactured processed refined fast food has displaced natural home food.

"Whenever we take a food from nature and tinker with it, the overwhelming probability is that we reduce its nutritional value and increase its dangerous content. "
BANDEEP SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Eat Less,Work Hard and Stay Positive
Dr Arvind Kumar
Director, Institute of Robotic Surgery & chairman, Centre for Thoracic Surgery and Lung Transplant, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Delhi Eat less and eat proper. For me, that means avoiding butter, ghee, eggs and sugar. At my workplace, everybody knows that I never touch samosas and vadas that are invariably served during meetings. It's the same with ice creams, chocolates or pastries. My main meals consist of two chapattis, lots of dal, lots of salad and homemade curd. Milk is always skimmed for me. At parties, I take a round to check out what's on offer. If I like something, say, some sweets, I would cut down on everything else. Finally, it's not just the food. I stay fit and active by working hard and through positive thinking. The best way to get happiness is to give happiness.

BANDEEP SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

"At parties, I check what's on offer first. If I like something, say, some sweets, I would cut down on everything else."

54

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

RESTAURANT FOOD DOCTORS WOULDN'T SAYNO TO
Mediterranean cuisine
Fish, vegetables, fruits, nuts, beans, crusty whole-grain bread with lots of monounsaturated olive oil can bring your weight down, lower BP and cholesterol, reduce diabetes, heart disease and cancer risk. Doctors say go for it.
VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

HEALTH special 2012

THE WAYWE EATNOW

Be Choosy about Carbs
Dr Ambrish Mithal
Chairman and head of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Medanta-The Medicity, Gurgaon I follow the basic rules: Avoid deep-fried food and simple carbohydrates. Refined wheat flour or maida, for instance, is a huge culprit. I don't have biscuits, cookies or samosas more than once a month. And I absolutely don't have soft drinks. To increase my fibre-intake, I eat rotis made of a mix of jawar, bajra and atta. Breakfast means two boiled eggs (just the whites), soaked almonds, muesli, milk and fruits. For lunch and dinner I eat chapatti, dal, sabzi, salad, paneer or grilled chicken and yoghurt. Snacking is restricted to tea, coffee, fruits, whole wheat toasts with tomatoes or a half a whole wheat bagel. Yoga three times a week keeps me fit.

Salmon
Expensive but worth every morsel. The Omega-3 fatty acids keep your heart healthy, shrink your belly and build muscles.

"Maida is a huge culprit. I don't eat biscuits, cookies or samosas more than once a month."

Moderation is My Mantra
Dr Rajesh M. Parikh
Director, Psychiatry Research & consulting neuropsychiatrist, Jaslok Hospital & Research Centre, Mumbai I believe in moderation. I start the day with a cup of herbal tea, followed by a light breakfast of cereals or a few idlis or dosas. A couple of hours later, I have a bowl of fruits. For lunch, I usually have soup with a couple of chapattis and some vegetables. In the evening, I take a 20minute break from work to have a protein shake with fruits. At night, I have a regular dinner. And once a week I eat as much as I want to. Along with regular exercise, I feel energised, look and feel healthier. My children joke that someday I will be on the cover of Men's Health.

Quinoa
Say keen-wah. It's the new buzzword in five-stars hotels. The tasteless little seed from Mexico works like rice or couscous. The steep price tag is justified by its protein content, as well as amino acids, antioxidants and minerals. It's free of cholesterol and trans fats.

"I look and feel healthier now. My children joke that someday I will be on the cover of Men's Health."

Avoid Sugar Like Poison
Dr V. Mohan
Chairman and chief of Diabetology at Dr Mohan's Diabetes Specialities Centre and director of the Madras Diabetes Research Foundation, Chennai
HK RAJASHEKAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Umeboshi
Japanese pickled red fruit with a tangy sour taste. A type of apricot, can heal about 100 different disorders. Especially good for digestive disorders and infections. The Japanese say: An umeboshi a day keeps away.  OCTOBER 13, 2008 00doctors INDIA TODAY

"I would urge you to replace sweets and desserts with fruits whenever you snack or eat out."

I start my day with fruits and sometimes oatmeal. Lunch is a vegetarian fare, with boiled rice and curry. Salad, whole wheat chapatti, pulses, vegetables and fish or chicken suffice for dinner. I would urge you to replace sweets and desserts with fruits whenever you snack or eat out. I am so paranoid about sugary sweets that at every meeting or gathering I host, I flag the food like traffic signals: Green, orange and red. Green for "no problem food" and red for "harmful to diabetics".

