HEALTH special 2012

THE WAYWE EATNOW

BIG ISN'T BEAUTIFUL
From a cosmetic problem, obesity is now a bonafide disease. And the desperation to lose weight is opening up new medical frontiers across the world.
DR PRADEEP K. CHOWBEY
Vice-chairman, chief of Surgery and director of Minimal Access, Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery, Max Healthcare, he has been surgeon to several Presidents of India and to the Dalai Lama. He was the first to introduce an obesity surgery facility in Asia.

WHAT MAKES OBESITY DANGEROUS FOR INDIANS IS THATWE GETTHE WORSTVARIETY: ABDOMINAL OBESITY. IT PLAYS HAVOC WITH THE HEART, BLOOD SUGAR AND CHOLESTEROL.
diabetes, heart disease, hypertension and stroke, infertility and certain types of cancer. What makes it dangerous for us is that unlike Caucasians, we get the most dangerous variety: Abdominal obesity, that plays havoc with the heart, blood sugar and cholesterol. The fat tsunami soon got reflected in the kind of patients I started getting: People who were so heavy that they couldn't breathe, couldn't stand up, were wheelchairbound, could barely walk or tie their shoelaces themselves. They were beyond drugs, diets and exercise. With weight-loss (or bariatric) surgeries in vogue in the US and new technology coming in, some of us pioneered the surgery in India, often performing it as a last resort and life-saver for patients who have tried innumerable supervised and/or unsupervised efforts at weight loss. There are various types of such surgeries: Gastric banding, bypass or stapling the stomach into a pouch, or sleeve gastrectomy, or removing most of the stomach and turning what is left into a thin tube. Over time, the risks of the operations have declined. With an average weight loss of 6-8 kg per month, the transformation in these patients cannot be overstated. The results are impressive and life-changing. With a multidisciplinary approach that includes dieticians, counsellors, psychologists and obesity support groups, today it's an overwhelming experience for a surgeon to see the a patient's journey from fat to fit. 

T

he year was 2000. I was invited to a conference in Singapore, a confluence of some of the top clinical minds from around the world. The obesity epidemic was at its peak in the US then and some eminent American surgeons discussed how it was opening up new medical frontiers, for instance, weight-loss surgeries. It got me thinking. I came back and took out all the data I could find on obesity in India. They showed a steep rise from 1989-1999. But more alarmingly, the jump was exactly the same during the three years, 1999-2001. It was clear to me that obesity was stealthily and relentlessly invading India. Something was seriously going wrong somewhere: Indian food habits were changing. In 1990, the Indian government had opened its doors to the world in a landmark policy reform. The first foreign fast food chain in India opened its restaurant in Connaught Place, Delhi, that very year. That first flush of excite-

ment with new and convenient food made us forget how we always ate. While genes determine a person's susceptibility to weight gain, energy balance is the key to maintaining a healthy weight. Energy-dense diets-- high in complex carbohydrates, sugars and saturated fats, coupled with reduced physical activity--contributed to this rising epidemic. It was a tide that had to be turned. Until then, we were used to looking at obesity tolerantly, as a sort of cosmetic problem. But obesity is a very difficult and expensive disease. In fact, it's the mother of all diseases. I spoke to my friend, Shyama Chona, the then principal of DPS, R. K. Puram, in Delhi, and started awareness campaigns, first in her school. A survey of schoolchildren in affluent Delhi schools showed an obesity rate of 12-13 per cent in 2002. By 2006, the rate had gone up to 30 per cent. Now it stands at around 40 per cent. In 2004, I set up the Obesity & Metabolic Surgery Society of India,

made presentations to the movers and shakers of the country and ultimately to presidents K.R. Narayanan and APJ Abul Kalam. By then the rapidly rising global prevalence of obesity, or `globesity', was no longer a problem of the developed world. In India, the condition coexisting paradoxically with undernutrition, created a dual medical and economic burden. Obesity is a complex condition with serious social and psychological dimensions affecting virtually all age groups. Obesity increases the risk of developing Type II

HEAVYWEIGHTS They went under the knife to handle their weight
DIEGO MARADONA
The former football star's drool-worthy muscular physique bloated up after retirement. In 2005, he needed to go through a gastric bypass surgery to handle his weight. Slim and trim now.

NITIN GADKARI
BJP President Nitin Gadkari, a self-proclaimed foodie who weighed over 100kg, underwent a gastric bypass surgery in Mumbai for treatment of Type II diabetes.

46

HEMANT CHAWLA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

OCTOBER 13, 2008  INDIA TODAY

00

New

