Soc iety

SPERM DONATION

Bollywood hit Vicky Donor provokes a flood of inquiries on sperm donation and busts a few myths along the way
By Uday Mahurkar and Asit Jolly

Dr HIMANSHU BAVISHI, Fertility specialist, Ahmedabad

A STILL FROM VICKY DONOR

Dr G.K. BEDI, Assisted reproduc tive technology expert, Chandigarh matter, is like playing football without goalposts," says R.K. Sehgal, 46, managing director of Infertech Fertile Solutions, a Delhi-based human gamete bank. Collecting and storing semen samples is expensive for companies like Infertech which adhere to American Fertility Society guidelines. These stipulate extensive medical testing of the donor besides the mandatory quarantining of semen samples in liquid nitrogen tanks at -196° Celsius for a minimum of six months before use. "All this involves considerable expenditure," says Sehgal. The absence of regulation has also attracted many unscrupulous players who cut costs by routinely forgoing even basic medical testing of donors or the obligatory quarantining of samples. "You cannot be careful enough," says Bedi, recalling instances where patients had procured semen samples from local diagnostic laboratories that possess no facilities to wash or cryopreserve (freeze) sperm cells. Sehgal insists that human gamete donation cannot be a casual affair: "Samples from untested or inadequately tested donors could end up inGraphic by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Harkirat Ahluwalia, 38, who runs Citrus County, a rural homestay off Hoshiarpur's Chauni village. His wife Biya has since been blessed with two healthy boys and Ahluwalia says after Vicky Donor, he is "wide open" to the idea of sperm donation. "I have hardcore Punjabi cells and my boys are proof," he proudly declares. However, while the film has drawn enthusiastic donors, the absence of a regulatory mechanism is queering the pitch for many serious players in the business. "The business of sperm and egg donation, or surrogacy for that

BORN IN A LAB
1 Males donating sperm must be between the ages of 21 and 45. Women donating eggs should be between the ages of 21 and 35.

Semen samples, and even the donor, have to 2 Sperm sample is collected in a sterile container. Ejaculate is clinically examined for sperm count and motility.

undergo extensive medical tests before getting the nod 3 The cells are kept in liquid nitrogen tanks at -196º Celsius, and tested after six months for quality. 4 Sperm samples are used to fertilise eggs by two methods: In vitro fertilisation and intrauterine insemination.

60

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

NEW

NEW

``

ohn Abraham's rib-tickling blockbuster Vicky Donor, besides packing multiplexes, may soon be prompting `house full' signs outside sperm banks and fertility clinics across the country. The film, made on a budget of Rs 5 crore, has grossed Rs 35.50 crore to date, and provoked a rush of inquiries about sperm donation inspired by the fictional Vicky Arora's spectacular success at marketing his `little cells' and the joy he eventually brings to dozens of childless couples. "It's unbelievable," says Dr G.K. Bedi, 50, a Chandigarh-based assisted reproductive technology expert who has primarily had to rely on semen samples from established sperm banks in Delhi for her patients. Like Bedi, Dr Nainaben Patel's telephone has also been ringing constantly. "After the film released, I have received nearly a dozen calls from youngsters of affluent families," says the fertility specialist from Anand, Gujarat. Says Dr Himanshu Bavishi of the Ahmedabad-based Bavishi Fertility Institute, a leading in vitro fertilisation (IVF) expert who has helped set up two semen banks in Mumbai and Delhi: "The film's social message is significant because it is spurring people from many families to donate sperm. In genetic terms, it is an important development because this would lead to good progeny." Experts see Vicky Donor as milestone cinema whose impact has gone far beyond anything Abraham, the film's producer or its director Shoojit Sircar could have ever envisioned. It has provoked surprisingly enthusiastic conversations on a little-spoken-about

J

subject like voluntary sperm donation. This, at a time when lifestyle diseases and stress are causing diminished sperm counts and motility amid many men in their reproductive age. Bedi says at least one half of the infertility cases referred to her clinic are a consequence of the "male factor". She says "50 per cent of infertile men are not producing any sperm cells at all. And the other half suffers from lowered sperm counts and low motility". Ahmedabad engineering student Ashish Lodhani, 21, says the final scene of the film depicting the dramatic faceto-face between Vicky and the scores of couples he had made happy parents out of, motivated him to call a local fertility clinic. "I want to be the man who removes the tears of childless couples," he says. Similarly moved, Chandigarh hotelier Brijeshwar Singh Guron, 38, who is still looking for his dream bride, sees sperm donation as akin to blood donation. "Donating blood helps save a precious life. Sperm donation would help create new life," he says. "I know just how difficult things were when my wife and I were trying unsuccessfully to have a baby," recalls

The first thing college students interested in sperm donation want to know is how much they would be paid.

``

``

WOULD YOU LIKE TO HAVE MYBABY?

The film's social message is significant because it is spurring people from many families to donate sperm.

``

troducing life threatening diseases and genetic abnormalities in society." Also, the repeated use of semen from a single donor to impregnate a large number of women in a specific area and social group, experts say, could significantly mess up the gene pool. Vicky Donor's depiction of 53 happy mothers thanks to the super virile protagonist, Sehgal says, "would attract serious penalties, even jail, in some countries if it were so in real life". Most new callers to Chandigarhbased fertility clinics have been young students from the city's colleges and Panjab University's sprawling campus. "The first thing they all want to know is how much they would be paid," says Bedi. She is, however, wary of taking on students as donors. "I prefer young married men with at least one offspring as direct sperm donors," she says. Sehgal's gamete bank in Delhi, too, has been flooded with student queries. "It is mostly young guys who want to get their hands on a 32-inch TV-- like Vicky," he laughs. Though Indian Council of Medical Research guidelines stipulate the age bracket of 21 to 45 years for male donors, Sehgal says it is rare to find a man above 35 willing to donate semen: "It becomes a bit of a taboo after people marry." The fact that most IVF clinics insist on the spouse's consent also acts as a deterrent. Sehgal sources sperm mostly from students. Unlike in the Bollywood film where the protagonist makes a career out of selling his spermatozoa, it is not all that lucrative in the real world. Donors at Bedi's clinic receive Rs 400 each time they are called in for a sample. Sehgal, however, refuses to pay anything but out-of-pocket expenses. "No one seems to remember that it is sperm donation," he points out. Despite the inherent misinformation in its narrative, Vicky Donor has its biggest champion in India's most celebrated sexologist. Dr Prakash Kothari, who watched the film along with his daughter in Mumbai, was amazed at the ease with which it shattered longheld myths. "It is a good thing and will help in reducing societal anxiety regarding sex," Kothari told INDIA TODAY.
with Rajesh Sharma

JUNE 4, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

