Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

BIKINI ECONOMICS
rust the wayward to get even its metaphors wrong. Jaswant Singh's attempt T to compare the Government's white paper on
BJP

black money with a bikini was bold for the conservative BJP. Perhaps the party's prudishness got the better of the liberal Singh when he said that what the bikini reveals is non-essential, what it hides is essential, instead of the more accurate `what it reveals is interesting, what it conceals is vital'. Used properly, the bikini metaphor is actually flattering for the Government's black money white paper. That's because unlike a bikini, it doesn't reveal anything even remotely interesting while concealing everything vital. The BJP may continue to miss its target, metaphorically and otherwise, but on its third anniversary, the UPA 2 Government continues to prove beyond reasonable doubt that it intends to govern by obfuscation. The black money white paper, presented to Parliament a day before UPA's anniversary party--most likely to be a funereal affair--is vintage UPA. The paper is vague on the amount of black money stashed away by Indians in foreign bank accounts--no figure is given--but is very precise on the amount of Indian money in Swiss bank accounts, apparently down from around Rs 23,000 crore in 2006 to around Rs 9,000 crore in 2010. There is, of course, no explanation on where this money has gone-- probably to another, safer, tax haven. The mandarins of the finance ministry's revenue department, the authors of the useless white paper--and other unimaginative ideas like retrospective tax amendments--have used 108 pages of text to explain how complicated it is to get back black money stashed abroad.

The only solution, if you can read between the lines, is to offer an amnesty to offenders. Why not then say it upfront, in 10 pages, rather than wasting sheets of paper saying nothing. Plain speak is not the UPA's style. Consider the finance minister's recent announcement that the Government intends to resort to austerity measures to rein in the runaway fiscal deficit--a commendable goal. The modus operandi: A cutback on foreign trips by government officials, no government conferences in five-star hotels and no new vehicles to be purchased by babus and ministers. The fact is that not one of these measures will make even a dent on a fiscal deficit of 5.9 per cent. What would make a dent is genuine austerity--a cutback of wasteful subsidies on petrol, diesel, fertilisers and food which could slash the fiscal deficit by up to a third in quick time. The Government is not keen on reform of subsidies. It is in fact not keen on reform of any kind which could boost India's sagging growth rate, which in turn could boost government revenues and ensure that ministers and babus don't have to suffer the fate of faux austerity. Reducing some superficial comforts of government servants doesn't make the ordinary citizen feel better. Nobody wants socialism which redistributes poverty whether to babus or to ordinary citizens. Unfortunately, eight years into Government, false rhetoric aside, that is all the UPA is offering. In its first term in office, the high tide of a global boom hid the inadequacies of the UPA. In its second term, the tide died out, and the UPA was swimming naked. Even a bikini cannot obfuscate the ugly reality.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

USED PROPERLY, THE BIKINI METAPHOR IS ACTUALLY FLATTERING FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S BLACK MONEY WHITE PAPER. THAT'S BECAUSE UNLIKE A BIKINI, IT DOESN'T REVEAL ANYTHING EVEN REMOTELY INTERESTING WHILE CONCEALING EVERYTHING VITAL.

S I G N P O STS
WON Champions League, by Chelsea after defeating Bayern Munich in a penalty shootout in Munich. DROGBA Striker Didier Drogba played a leading role in his team's victory.
16
INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

MARRIED Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, to long-time girlfriend Priscilla Chan on May 19 in a low-key ceremony in his backyard in Palo Alto, California. LAUNCHED All India Trinamool Congress Leads, a monthly English news magazine by the Trinamool Congress. Party MP Derek O' Brien

has been appointed editor of the magazine. COMPLETED Three years by the UPA Government, on May 22, amid coalition concerns. DIED Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, the only person convicted of the 1988 Lockerbie bombing which killed 270 people. He died of cancer

on May 20. He was 60. DIED Robin Gibb, co-founder and singer of the British band Bee Gees on GIBB May 20, following a long battle with cancer. Gibb was 62.

