Cin ema
SALTN'PEPPER
USP The heroine (Shweta Menon) drinks in public and mingles with male friends freely, yet is depicted not as a vamp but an affectionate character. BUDGET Rs 2.15 crore. COLLECTIONS Rs 4.50 crore in four weeks.

22 FEMALE KOTTAYAM
USP Heroine (Rima Kallingal) cuts off hero's (Fahadh Faasil) penis in the climax to avenge his betrayal. BUDGET Rs 1.75 crore. COLLECTIONS Rs 4 crore in four weeks.

EE ADUTHAKALATH
USP The chief male protagonist suffers from impotency. Murali Gopy took the role which was rejected by most top Malayalam actors. BUDGET Rs 2.20 crore. COLLECTIONS Rs 2.75 crore in four weeks.

The Bawdy and the B eautiful
Kissing onscreen, female leads who liberally mouth the F-word and an impotent hero. Malayalam cinema pushes the envelope.
By M.G. Radhakrishnan

O

nce known for its arthouse movies at one end of the spectrum and semi-porn fare on the other, Malayalam cinema is now experiencing a brave new wave that is challenging established social mores. And it is being lapped up by the people--especially the youth-- even as conventional films with big budgets and superstars sink without a trace one after the other. The new Malayalam cinema, like its Bollywood counterpart, is characterised by fresh and unusual themes; plots which are urban-centric and middle-class oriented; they are modestly

budgeted, shun superstars and some are entirely shot with DSLR still cameras; and they heavily use social networking sites for online marketing. Traffic (2011), by Rajesh Pillai, provides a multiple narrative of different persons from different walks of lives crossing each other's paths by strange coincidences. Ashiq Abu's Salt N' Pepper (2011) dwells on human nature through the hilarious narrative of an unmarried, food-obsessed middle-age couple. Sameer Thahir's Chappa Kurish (2011) is a dark thriller of two protagonists from two different backgrounds whose lives get dramatically turned upside down by a mobile phone. It became better known as the first Malayalam movie to feature a kissing scene. Abu's 22 Female Kottayam (2012) is a story of love, betrayal and revenge ending in the enraged heroine Tessa (Rima Kallingal) `Bobbitting' her cheating lover. "Women are no longer pushovers. My films only reflect this change," says Abu, 33. Arun Kumar

Aravind's Ee Adutha Kalath (2012) is about six persons from diverse backgrounds whose lives get intertwined. "This is the post-liberalisation generation whose films are the products of the changes Kerala underwent through the 1990s," says director B. Unnikrishnan, general secretary of the Film Employees Federation of Kerala. "Their films have brought back audiences to the theatres," he adds. Most of the new-wave films are modestly budgeted between Rs 1 and3 crore each (compared to the average commercial film budget of Rs 5-6 crore) and have more than recovered their investment. "I had to move heaven and earth to get Salt N' Pepper released in 22 centres. 22 Female Kottayam has released in 55 centres and there is a demand for more," says Abu. While Salt N' Pepper grossed twice its budget of Rs 2.10 crore, 22 Female Kottayam, with a budget of Rs 1.25 crore, is expected to rake in thrice the amount. The heroes are no more Mr Perfects

or supermen. Nor do they carry even the signs of conventional masculinity. If the protagonist of Beautiful is a quadriplegic, the one in Ee Adutha Kalath is impotent, in Akam his face is charred with acid burns, in Nidra he is a paranoid. If Salt N' Pepper's hesitant hero's only obsession is food, the one in Hey Tadiyaa is a bumbling fatso and those in Chappa Kurish and Cocktail are hopelessly unfaithful lovers. The heroine, too, has changed beyond recognition. She is no more the long-suffering Bharatiya Nari who finds her moksha in their husband's embrace. She flirts openly, drinks in public, passes lewd comments ("what a bum", at a hunk passing by) and she even cuts off the hero's penis to wreak vengeance for his betrayal!

Malayalis also get to see kissing for the first time onscreen and listen to not just candid lines like "I want to make love with you" but F-words liberally mouthed even by women. The new generation of actors featuring in these movies has no hang-ups about the bold scenes. "Why should we have any problem with such a beautiful act like kissing? Isn't it far better than murder on screen?" asks Fahadh Faasil, 29, Chappa Kurish's hero. Says Nambisan, the heroine, "The kissing scene perfects what we try to say through the film." Says Kallingal, 28, about castrating her lover in 22 Female Kottayam, "I couldn't think of any other punishment than that for the cheat!" While admirers of the new wave of Malayalam cinema call it the "Jasmine

The heroes of the new wave of Malayalam cinema are no more Mr Perfects or supermen. Nor do they carry even the signs of conventional masculinity.

revolution", to critics it is nothing more than a "multiplex revolution". "It is not right to call it a new wave. The movies have no social, cultural or political layers to them. These multiplex films are intended only for the consumerist urban middle class," says film critic B. Abubaker. "There is a fetish for the visuals and form than content," says Unnikrishnan. The more serious complaint is that most films are "inspired" by non-Malayalam movies. If Cocktail and Chappa Kurish are unacknowledged adaptations of the Canadian flick Butterfly on a Wheel and the Korean film Handphone, Abu has acknowledged Quentin Tarantino's Kill Bill and Sriram Raghavan's Ek Hasina Thi as inspirational to 22 Female Kottayam. But as director Amal Neerad, 36, who debuted with the stunningly stylish Big B in 2007, says, "What is original? Haven't we heard that even Romeo and Juliet was hardly an original from Shakespeare? Does it anyway lessen the value of the great bard's work?" 

60

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

