BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

NO KINGDOM FOR KILLERS
S
The Pak-Saudi relationship found its true historic moment traws don't float in the winds of international diplomacy because a sudden gust has risen on a lazy afternoon. during the 10-year Afghan war against the Soviet Union, They are sent up there to check the weather at funded by Saudis, armed by America, and conducted by various levels of a turbulent atmosphere. If a straw does President Zia-ul-Haq, who might have been put into power encounter too much friction and gets burnt out, no great from a Riyadh casting couch. When the Soviets were driven deal: It was only a straw. But if it floats and finds a destina- out in 1989, there was still the future of Afghanistan to worry tion then it becomes an asset in the construction of a bridge, about. In 1994 Pakistan launched the Taliban; by 1996 the sometimes between nations divided by a sea of differences, Taliban had taken Kabul. Pakistan had not only extended its strategic space to the rear, the perennial dream of its military rather than merely a gulf of irritations. In 1947, the Arab world watched the emergence of establishment, it had also turned this into "Islamic space". Pakistan and India with wary interest. Its more vibrant parts, Pakistan, UAE and Saudi Arabia were the only three nations like Egypt, were weighed by their own dilemmas; not least of to recognise the Taliban government. The Saudi ship of state turns at a glacial pace, but the them being imposed monarchs who gave orders to Cairo and took orders from London. India's first prime minister straws began to float with greater frequency after 9/11 zeroed Jawaharlal Nehru took an active dislike to Egypt's King the war against terrorism into the AfPak region. Riyadh began Farouk, which may explain his disproportionate fondness for to praise the rising economies of China and India. I recall a Gamal Nasser, who overthrew the royals in what must surely startling statement by a Saudi minister made in Islamabad: be among the more polite coups in history. A defining moment Indian Muslims, he argued, were not a minority, but equal came in 1956 when secular Nehru supported Nasser during citizens of their nation. This would have tweaked an ear or two the Anglo-French-Israeli invasion of Suez and Islamic in the land created of the two-nation theory. In 2006 King Pakistan stood by Britain. As one Arab commentator tartly Abdullah raised the profile with his state visit to India. And yet there was a long step to the point where Saudis noted, "The Pakistanis think that Islam was born in 1947." But Saudi Arabia, deeply enmeshed in the Western would hand over Syed Zabiuddin Ansari, alias Abu Jundal, embrace, had little time for left radicalism, whether genuine wanted by India for his crucial role in the planning and or pseudo. It was drawn to Pakistan by both religion and pol- operations of the Mumbai terror carnage. Ansari had gone itics, not to mention geopolitics. Pakistan positioned itself as to Saudi Arabia, with help from his Pakistani mentors, for a frontline state against Soviet communism (though not safety; he discovered that Saudi interrogators wanted to China), long before the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan did know what he knew. Only when Saudis were convinced that his Pakistani passport was fake, and indeed make it a borderline case. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com that he was an Indian, did they send Saudi kings are also, as rulers of him back to face trial in his own counMecca and Medina, Custodian of the try. They knew Ansari would severely Two Holy Mosques. They were atdamage Pakistan's game of deflect tracted as well by Pakistan's claim to and deceive over Mumbai. They chose be a fortress of the faith between to cooperate with India at the expense "Hindu-dominated South Asia" and of Pakistan. This is not an individual "Atheist-Communist Central Asia". decision. This is policy; and therefore Few nations have been as skilful the start of a process. as Pakistan in exploiting the uses of It is facile to suggest that they did so adversity. It turned the period beunder American pressure. Riyadh is not tween two wars, of Bangladesh in a cardboard government. King Abdullah 1971 and Afghanistan in 1979, into a is convinced that such demons are as indecade of resurrection. The strategic jurious to the stability of Saudi Arabia as relationship between Saudi Arabia they are to India. He has also ripped and Pakistan was cemented to seemapart one of the great falsehoods propaingly unbreakable levels. Saudi supKing Abdullah is convinced such gated by many Muslim terrorists: That port financed the Pakistani nuclear they had the sanction of faith. They never programme, advertised then as an demons are as injurious to the "Islamic bomb". Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto's stability of Saudi Arabia as they are did. They do not now. They never will. Saudi Arabia and Pakistan will Lahore Islamic conference in 1974 to India. He has also ripped apart remain the closest of friends, and the was a phenomenal success, and lives the great falsehood propagated by best of allies. But the Saudis have on both in the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and in symbols scattered many Muslim terrorists: That they ensured that it will not live outside the had the sanction of faith. parameters of law and world order.  across Pakistani cities.

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

