MAKE THE SUN MELT...

AnimPACTpresentation

It is the peak of summers. Mercury is soaring and the body and the spirits are sinking because of the unbearable heat. All we can think about is how to have a cool and chilled out end to a sizzling hot day. But fret not as we bring to you the best options there are to fizz out the heat and chill you out. Be it peachy fashion wears for the scorching heat or the coolest food joints or the in vogue jewellery styles, we have it all. We offer you the secrets to having that ultra-cool look with the best jewellery and trendy outfits and the best joints to keep the heart contented with terrific refreshing cuisines. So just sit back, relax and let us guide you to a blissful and wholesome experience this summer tide where you will experience the best of every facet to be explored to beat the heat.

nnllTIPACTFeature

MYSTIC FASHIONS- INSPIRED
by Krishna, created for you...
unil Mehra's work is inspired by Lord Krishna and his many avatars; the stories, symbols, and the places which have become spots of worship dedicated to him particularly Vrindavan. The designs intend to strike a chord with the minds of the viewers and connect them with the supreme Lord Krishna, the creator of all creations. Whether it is the special jacquard weaves with spiritual motifs, Sanskrit lettering in miniature embroideries, the colors turmeric and saffron or the scenic hand paintings on the attires, each ensemble possesses a unique connection to the divine. A spiritual and fashion guru, Sunil Mehra joined his ancestral business of garments at the early age of 20. The label "Sunil Mehra" by Sunil's Study beautifully blends the distinct spheres of high fashion and divinity. Being the only designer to have showcased a Krishna inspired collection at the Iskcon temple, New Delhi; he was well applauded and appreciated for his individualistic expression. The exclusive creations are woven with natural threads and each garment is a humble tribute to the supreme Lord. "All I wish for humanity is for them to be Krishna conscious. Clothes are just a medium of ^presentation, it is the thought

S

behind them which is of utmost importance", he says. According to him, he is not the one who creates the designs, but Krishna illustrates his mysticism through him. RAAS OF COLORS Inspired by the eternal bond that transcends the boundaries of space and time Sunil Mehra presents a collection that evokes the divine connect of Lord Krishna & Radha and paints every creation with the flavors of their love. The vivacious hues of ambers, lavenders & lilacs, raspberries & crimsons, the sapphire blues and apple greens balanced by the untainted whites, earthy tones of flaxes, gingers and pale golds come from the summer gardens of Krishna's abode from where are seen the infinite tones in the sky. The collection features playful summer suits including double breasted jackets, vibrant separates; jackets, trousers, polos and an array of stylized silhouettes in electric colors, stripes and checks. The bandhgalas come with their own twists, the waiscoats and jawahar jackets in a multitude of patterns. Hand painted details and gorgeous serene embroideries in ethnic and fusion wear ensembles including traditional jackets, kurtas and the angrakhapalazzo silhouette for a buoyant summer. Luxurious Jinens, cottons, silks and jacquards play up the airy lightness of the season. Accentuating the pieces are flamboyant bags, scarves and stoles. The eclectic colors, fabrics, silhouettes and accessories unify to adorn the ideation of Krishna in summer.

FASHION HAVEN- CRIMSOUNE CLUB
ashion in summers is a tricky business. The bodies wander to outdoor mode and the fashion trends tend to disagree with the scorching sun. Keeping up with fashion requires a creative ingenuity blending Style, Comfort and fashion in perfect proportions and still keeping it lucrative and in vogue; a very intricate and knotty engagement. Crimsoune Club offers a one stop destination for comparing and shopping unisex "Smart Casuals", everything a die-hard fashion fanatic can ask for. Be it the uber cool fad garbs or that comfy trend, find it all with us. We have a team of dedicated fashion creators that looks out for the latest "in" elements and strives to incorporate it into your wardrobe. Our product line incorporates 100% cotton attire with fashion statements from world-over to give you the best summer clothing experience in a wide array of cool colours enabling you to have the upper hand this summer by giving you that vibrant hue; combining your blush with your intensity; your undertones with your glow. Fashion with Quality is the cornerstone of each collection introduced by Crimsoune Club, providing you the best quality garbs with a strong style statement that make you scorch the streets, making you the uncontested harbinger of the fashion fads. Step into one of our stores let us dress you up in that vibrant look that showcases your passion for fashion and brings out the win all attitude in you.

F

