HEALTH

by DAMAYANTI DATTA

YOUR BRAIN AND HOWYOU USE IT
Use it or lose it, is how the brain functions. Keep your mind supple and lifestyle active if you don't want your brain to become old before its time or lose its spark.

IS DAYDREAMING GOOD FOR YOU?
Yes, it is a critical brain process that allows us to manage ourselves in the social world, reveals an article in the July issue of Perspectives on Psychological Science. Daydreaming activates the `default mode' network of the brain. While some may view it as a wasted opportunity for productivity, constructive internal reflection is critical for learning from past experiences and appreciating their value for future choices. It allows us to navigate the world we live in better.

THINK AND TELL
Japanese scientists have uncovered how we predict other people's thoughts. Using Magnetic Resonance Imaging and mathematical models, they show how we simulate the thoughts of others by using two signals encoded in the frontal lobes of the brain.The `reward signal'estimates the value of an interaction to the other person, while the `action signal'simulates what the other person can do about it.The research came out in a paper published in the June 21 issue of Neuron.

WORKOUTS
Make Your Brain Smarter
Here's some good news for gym rats.Workouts don't just lift your mood, vitality, alertness and well-being, they also make your brain more agile

Increases production of neurochemicals that promote brain cell repair. Helps in boosting decision-making skills. Lengthens the attention span of an individual.

Prompts growth of new nerve cells as well as blood vessels. Improves multi-tasking abilities and helps you plan out things better. Improves memory.

20:80 RULE
We use 100% of our brain, but not all at the same time. Check out the rule of thumb for the brain

20%
54

of grey matter works on conscious thoughts. of the energy produced by the body is used by the brain.

80%

of the brain is devoted to processing visual information. of the brain is made of fats, especially rich in Omega-3.

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

