Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE REGALGAZE
By Kaveree Bamzai

Royals at their bejewelled best in a collection of classic photographs

J
POSING FOR POSTERITY: ROYAL INDIAN PORTRAITS
byPramod Kumar KG Roli Books Price: RS 1,975 Pages: 255 BETWEEN THE COVERS One of the most unusual things about the bookis howuniversallyuglythe male royals were.And what gorgeous women theywere married to,and invariablygave birth to.

another picture which shows his substantial hand clasped around the narrow waist of his ames Waterhouse, a British Army officer corset-clad wife, Rani Kanari. We see Rani commissioned by then governor general Kanari in another photograph in an elaborate Lord Canning to photograph the "more gown and hat, holding her child who is attired remarkable tribes in India", was a hunter-pho- in what looks like a white christening gown. tographer long before Federico Fellini invented One of the most unusual things about the book the term paparazzo. He knew the value of a tro- is how universally ugly the male royals were. phy photograph, and like the British press who And what gorgeous women they were married made a career of chasing Princess Diana, to, and invariably gave birth to. There's the obligatory photograph of a young the royals were his favourite subject. In particular, the striking Sikander Begum and her Gayatri Devi in 1945--which self-respecting cofdaughter Sultan Shah Jahan Begum of Bhopal. fee table book on royals is without it?--but His images are sprinkled all over Posing there's also a young Vijayaraje Scindia with husfor Posterity: Royal Indian Portraits, but my band Jivajirao in 1945. She is in a French favourite photo is by a nameless photographer, chiffon with a brocade border and he is in a of the very large and the very unsightly smart suit. Padma Raje, their daughter, is Maharaja Jagatjit Singh of Kapurthala. One dressed in a pretty frock. There's Princess shows him precariously balanced on his latest Khadija Hayriya Aisha Durr-I-Shahvar of Berar, acquisition, a cycle, in 1890. The caption help- in her youth as well as much older, shot at her fully informs us that he later became trim home Belle Vista in Hyderabad, by the intrepid and dapper. But there's no evidence of it in American Margaret Bourke-White. But it's her 1945 picture as a young (LEFT) PRINCESS DURR-I-SHAHVAR OF BERAR, 1945; MAHARAJA JAGATJIT bride of Azam Jah, heir SINGH AND RANI KANARI OF KAPURTHALA, 1890 apparent to the seventh Nizam of Hyderabad, that is arresting. There are more such stunning women in the pages of the book: A young Sushila Kumari, of Bikaner, in riding gear in 1930; Maharani Chimnabai of Baroda in 1908 in a nine-yard sari with her kill, a nine-foot tiger; and Rani Sita Devi, the youngest daughter-inlaw of Jagatjit Singh, at what is said to be Elsie de Wolfe's last great party at Villa Trianon at Versailles, in the summer of 1939. She's dressed in a glittering gown, with a long train. Down with the men, I say. Let's have a book devoted entirely to the royal women. 

56

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

