ANimPACTFEATURE

or an earlier generation, buying a house meant, pooling in all their financial resources, cutting corners and getting into their own house at a later stage in life. Today, Indians buy a home to live in very early, and are increasingly opting for a second home as an investment as well as a pad for retirement. What has resulted in this shift of stance? Home loan availability, simple procedures to secure a loan and customer friendly practices by banks and lenders have resulted in this shift in home purchase. Of course, rise in income levels among Indians and several organisations turning to building homes has been an additional factor. All this has resulted in average home owner age to be about 30 now, compared to mid 40s in the early 1990s. A home loan helps you achieve peace of mind by providing you with one of the basic necessities of life--a roof over your head. Today all banks and home lending institutions provide home loans at both fixed and variable interest rate of interest with several formats of repayment and prepayment. There are tax benefits to be had on home loans, which is yet another factor for the spurt in the home loan takers.

F

reduced to Rs 30,000 in case of loans taken prior to March 1, 1999. Moreover, the interest payable for the pre-acquisltion or pre-construction period would be deductible in five equal annual installments commencing from the year in which the house has been acquired or constructed. In case of self occupied property, this deduction is allowed only for one such self occupied property, which is to discourage people from owning property as investments. Further, the interest towards home loan taken for purchase, construction, repairs, renewal or reconstruction of house property is eligible for deduction under section 24(b). The tax doles do not end here, according to Sections 80C of the income tax, the principal repayment up to Rs 100,000 on your home loan is allowed as a deduction from the gross total income subject to fulfillment of prescribed conditions. For instance, on a taxable income of Rs 5,50,000, the principal repayment for the same year is Rs 1,10,000 and interest payable for that year is Rs 1,60,000; the total deduction allowed will be Rs 2,50,000, which is Rs 1,50,000 towards interest payable and Rs 1,00,000 for principal repayment of the loan, which reduces the taxable income to Rs 3,00,000.

The Tax Advantage
If you plan well, you can save significant part of your tax liability if you have taken a home loan. For instance, according to Section 24(b) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 a deduction uptoRs 150,000 towards the total interest payable on the home loan towards purchase or construction of house properly can be claimed while computing the income from house property. The deduction stands

When to buy?
The purpose of a home loan is best served when it is bought to live and not as an investment. So, if one does not own a house and is looking for one, the timing is always right to go in for a loan considering the fact that not only is it an asset building venture, it also provides tax benefits. There are a few things that

ANimPACTFEATURE

you should keep in mind. First, you should have the necessary budget for the purchase, especially now that one has to make a down payment of 20 per cent of the value, which means for Rs 50 lakh loan, one has to make Rs 10 lakh down payment. Do not get swayed by your income to decide on how much loan you can avail, because availing a loan is one thing, servicing it is another. In an environment of floating interest rate, a fluctuation in rates can offset your budgets completely, especially if the swing is upwards. There are two types of loans on offer--based on fixed interest rate and the other on floating interest rate which is linked to base rate of the lending bank. So, decide on the budget that you can spare for the purchase of the house and also ensure that all the EMIs that you would be paying should in no way be more than 40-50 per cent of your net monthly income.Lenders also consider the age of the borrower, for instance Union Bank, Central Bank and Bank of India state that the maximum loan term is 20 years or the retirement age of the borrower, whichever is earlier. This is important a factor to consider, especially if one is planning for a second home loan for a retirement house or simply as an investment. One may also wish to move to a bigger house than what they have, which could work well through a step-up loan instead of looking for a second home loan. The biggest challenge that many borrowers face these days is to repay the home loan in time. Bankers have structured flexible repayments of installments through both step up and step down payments. Some banks now offer the facility of a variable monthly installment scheme for repayment of home loans. The idea being that the salary of a person is bound to increase in the future and therefore a greater portion of the loan can repaid in the later part of one's life. The borrower is therefore able to take a larger loan than would be possible with his current income based on an EMI repayment. This enables young people to quickly own a home at an early age. However, there is a catch; the total interest paid over the tenure of the loan would be much higher compared to an EMI plan . This is due to a larger portion of the loan being outstanding at any point in time though the tenure of the loan is the same. Likewise, there are benefits of a step down plan. For instance, those who are likely to retire in the next few years, flexible loan repayment can still be used. In this case a greater portion of the loan is repaid in the early part of the loan tenure before the person retires as his monthly salary will support this. This is not only convenient, but also is a much cheaper option compared to a EMI plan. This is because; the loan outstanding at any point in time is a lower. For borrowers, the news on the RBI's decision to abolish home loan prepayment penalty is added bonus. The. RBI has asked banks to immediately stop charging penalty on prepayment of home loans taken on floating interest rates. The removal of the charges or penalty, will lead to reduction in the discrimination between existing and new borrowers and competition among banks will result in finer pricing of the floating rate home loans. Make sure that you build your dream home on a strong loan foundation by using the benefits extended by Union Bank, Bank of India and the Central Bank of India through the various conveniences that these institutions provide to home loan seekers.

The home loan application to sanction involves loads of documentation and paperwork. Here is a checklist of what you need when applying for a loan. Income

For salaried individuals, employment X, verification certified by the \r is a must. Self\d individuals req jjjjf\s of income tax returns _;, и for the past two years, j * *" i computation of income и statements, P&L account, balance sheets duly certified or original may required to / be produced for verification and the profile of the business they are in.

General Documents
Copy of annual income statement or Form 1 6 as specified under the income tax Act for the preceding financial year, including copy of past three month's salary slips. Copy of bank statements or passbook, copy of credit card statement, a profile of the borrower with employment details with copies of educational qualifications are all necessary to draw up a profile of the borrower. Copy of ration card or passport, PAN card, voter l-Card, telephone bill or any other acceptable identification proof is necessary, original of which may be required at some stage. The guarantor's s proof of income with latest salary slip, photo, l-card for proof of identity besides details of family members residing with the applicant and co-applicant may be necessary along with the relationship to establish dependents.

Property Documents
The documents vary depending on the type of the property, which could be new, purchase from an existing owner as in resale, a housing board property or a land where a house has to be constructed. Copy of agreement of sale, copy of registration receipt and stamp duty receipt, copies of legal documents if the project is not approved by the lender, title deed of the land, link deeds, mutation certificate, municipal tax receipts, development agreement, power of attorney, approved building plan and title certificate, copy of occupancy certificate, copy of share certificate (housing society), any NOC from respective authorities, allotment letter, land ownership documents and construction cost estimate ***-<!Б!ии in case of a plot being developed are all necessary at the time of borrowing for a home loan.

;: igm

