GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

AMAR SINGH'S SUMMER HOLIDAY
hile Mulayam Singh Yadav was somersaulting in full view of television cameras, along with cousin Ram Gopal Yadav, his bête noire Amar Singh was holidaying in Venice. Did Amar Singh miss the limelight? "Not at all. In fact, I am relieved that I am not forced to give flip-flop statements any more. Now these are being given by Mulayam's family," he said on the

BROTHER OFFICER

BACK TO SCHOOL
hen the Himachal Pradesh Police dramatically reported the capture of eight "Chinese" spies in Mandi district on June 12, Chief Minister Prem Kumar Dhumal was quick to criticise the Central Government. "We have warned the Centre many times about suspicious activities by the Chinese but no action has been taken," he said. But things took a decidedly awkward turn two days later, when police officials admitted they had made a mistake. The arrested men were Taiwanese, and had been mistakenly identified as "Chinese" on the basis of their Republic of China passports. The infuriated Chief Minister wants geography lessons for the police with a special focus on the People's Republic of China.

T

W

phone. Insisting he was on a "hassle-free holiday" , he added, "It's far from the maddening crowd of opportunistic industrialists and weathercock politicians." Ah. He may have lost his place in the sun for now, but he hasn't lost his ability to singe with his tongue.
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

he post of India's ambassador to Belgium and the European Union in Brussels has been lying vacant since Jaimini Bhagwati moved to London as high commissioner in February. Former commerce secretary Rahul Khullar was headed there, but joined the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India instead. The Ministry of External Affairs

W

DINKAR

has now opted for another Khullar: Rahul's younger brother Dinkar, a 1978-batch IFS officer, who is currently ambassador in Vienna.

"I challenge any chief, serving or retired, to fix the line of succession three chiefs down. These allegations are not only preposterous, but also malicious."
GEN J.J. SINGH, Former Chief of Army Staff

OF THE

WEEK

The $10 bn that India has pledged to IMF to bail out the Eurozone will be called the Rajiv Gandhi European Employment Guarantee Scheme.

ROLE OF HONOUR

MONUMENTAL VISION
hen attacked for one memorial, make two more. That's Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal's motto. Following the minor political storm over construction of the Bhindranwale Memorial at Amritsar's Golden Temple, Badal has sought to appease ally BJP by suggesting a "world-class Freedom Martyrs Memorial" in Kartarpur. He also promised a cow `memorial' to appease Hindu organisations following reports of cow slaughter in a private factory in Joga village. Wonder what it will look like.

M

A PRABHAKAR RAO

BANERJEE

SMS
SHEKHAR YADAV

MODI ENVY

RITESH SHARMA

O F T H E W E E K

It's a little known secret that the finance minister's favourite number is 13.Yet again. Pranab Mukherjee is all set to become India's 13th President. His office in Parliament is Room No. 13 and his home address is 13 Talkatora Road. He has been living here for over a decade now, even though this is a Type VII house and as Cabinet minister he is entitled to a Type VIII bungalow.

India's best suited candidate for president is in the PMO and the best for prime minister is headed to President's House.

M

aharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan has long been envious of Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi's record in attracting private investment. Now he's gone public with his disaffection. At a function to mark 50 years of a Marathi daily in Mumbai on June 17, he said Modi's loan model was "unsustainable". Modi gave Tata Motors a loan of Rs 9,750 crore at an annual interest rate of 0.1 per cent. Too high a price for Chavan to pay, but then no one's asking him.

HAZARE

with DHIRAJ NAYYAR, ASIT JOLLY, KIRAN TARE, PRIYA SAHGAL, BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA, AMARNATH K. MENON

YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

IT economist Abhijit Banerjee, an early front-runner to succeed Kaushik Basu as chief economic adviser, may now be joining the Government in a different role. Banerjee has been offered a job to head a new Independent Evaluation Office, which will oversee all Government welfare programmes. Banerjee will get the status of minister of state, and will be based at the Planning Commission's office at New Delhi's Parliament Street. Will he be allowed to use the Rs 35-lakh loos? We'll check and let you know.

W

GOVERNOR IN COURT
ROSAIAH

BADAL
AFP

CHIEF DISTRACTION
f BJP chief Nitin Gadkari has been somewhat silent while NDA looks for a presidential candidate, there is a reason. His son Sarang is getting married in Nagpur on June 24. Gadkari had to fly back home on June 19 after his wife Kanchan lost her patience and temper with him."We have time till June 30 to announce the candidate. If there is something important, adhyakshji is just a phone call away," says an aide. Gadkari couldn't have asked for a better face-saver.

LUCKY NUMBER 13
MUKHERJEE

I

amil Nadu Governor Konijeti Rosaiah,79, will soon be returning to Hyderabad after being summoned by Principal Special Judge S. Jagannadham of the Anti-Corruption Bureau court. The court has asked him to appear before it on August 2 for alleged favours he granted to some individuals as chief minister in 2010. He had allegedly ordered denotifying 9.14 acres of prime land in the heart of the city, valued at over Rs 200 crore. It enabled 17 original owners to get back the land. Rosaiah has to answer the charges under Section 409 of IPC (criminal breach of trust).

T

"Mulayam Singh Yadav is known for changing his head. The whole nation was watching what Yadav said, what he was doing."
MAYAWATI, BSP Chief

SHIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

"If the government says I am a traitor, they have the power to investigate. Why don't they send me to jail?."
ANNA HAZARE, Social Activist

DHUMAL

JOKE
O F T H E W E E K

As a gesture of thanks, the UPA Government is going to replace all U-turn signs with Mulayam Singh Yadav's picture.

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

15

