Signature
R O U G H

KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

THREE MODELS FOR MADAM S
amajwadi Party leader Mulayam Singh Yadav has done what Sonia Gandhi couldn't do. Effected a telegenic change, passed on power to the next generation, while retaining actual control. His son rules in the state while Mulayam, fresh from a recently brokered deal with the Congress, plays kingmaker at the Centre. As Sonia Gandhi waits for Rahul Gandhi to grow up, the socialist leader has already installed both his son and daughter-in-law in public life. The young couple has the perfect credentials: They have what in India is still quaintly described as a "love" marriage, they are dutiful enough to listen to the older Yadavjis, they have three picture perfect children who are adept at iPads, and they are as at home in Saifai among the natives as they are in big city felicitations. Yet nothing changes. Akhilesh runs Uttar Pradesh in much the way Mulayam did, with his father's advisers, transferring police officers at will and scrapping Mayawati's pet projects in the name of social justice. Yet he brings a veneer of modernity to a state increasingly being regarded as a failed notion: Suggesting mandatory computer literacy for government jobs or even reducing his official cavalcade from Mayawati's 40 to eight cars. It's enough for people to forget the reality--that Uttar Pradesh is a state where a bizarre diktat like forcing shops to close at 7 p.m. can be a solution to the power crisis or raising the age limit for Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission examinations from 35 to 40 years can be considered a sound executive decision. Nothing could be more galling for Mrs Gandhi. Her family is, after all, the nation's premier political firm, and the law of succession is clear. The next generation shall inherit first and then show itself worthy. The logic so far has been that the country is a vast apprenticeship and can afford to bide its time while the amateur becomes a professional. To be fair, Rahul tried to change that unspoken rule. He thought he could earn his spurs, showing the nation he was capable of its trust, not by running a ministry handed to him on a platter, but by winning over the hearts and minds of the Great Unwashed. It didn't work. And, perhaps, it won't work. India seems to have lost its patience for royalty and its appetite for unelected grandeur. So in addition to the Mulayam Singh Yadav model of political regeneration, the Congress president could consider the Pranab Mukherjee model of self-imposed retirement. When leaders feel they have outlived their utility, they should identify their own golden handshake. Pranab Mukherjee found his salvation in what looks like his home for the next five years--Rashtrapati Bhavan. The Gandhis already have their palace, 10 Janpath. They also have mixed blood. They couldn't be better placed to become our version of British royalty. There is a Queen who commands awe and respect, there is a prince forever in waiting, there is even a princess who is far more competent but never given her due. They have a heritage and a history of sacrifice. What's more, they don't need to be elected, certainly not by pesky states which seem to have forgotten their history of servitude to the Congress. It is infinitely preferable to the Manmohan Singh model of governance where you outstrip your abilities and overstay your welcome.
SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

THE GANDHIS COULDN'T BE BETTER PLACED TO BECOME OUR VERSION OF BRITISH ROYALTY. THERE IS A QUEEN WHO COMMANDS AWE AND RESPECT, THERE IS A PRINCE FOREVER IN WAITING, THERE IS EVEN A PRINCESS WHO IS FAR MORE COMPETENT BUT NEVER GIVEN HER DUE.

S I G N P O STS
WON by Saina Nehwal, her third Indonesian Open title in four years in Jakarta. Saina defeated the higher ranked Li Xuerui of China despite being a set down in a keenly contested final.
PTI

NEHWAL

APPOINTED Former Dutch international, Wim Koevermans, as the coach of the Indian football team coach for a twoyear term. Currently the high performance director of Ireland's football team, Koevermans was part of the Dutch system that produced world-class players like Wesley Sneijder and Arjen Robben.

ACCUSED of rape, athlete Pinki Pramanik, a former Commonwealth and Asian games medallist. The woman who levelled rape charges against her claims Pramanik is allegedly a man. The athlete defended herself saying she took part in major international events where medical tests to determine her

gender had provided conclusive evidence. NAMED after Bollywood starlet Madhuri Dixit Nene, a star located in the Orion constellation, MADHURI by the US-based World Star Foundation.

16

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

NEW

