Na tion RAJASTHAN

DIKSHA COLLEGE OF NURSING IN BHANKROTA IS A HALF-CONSTRUCTED BUILDING

ONLYAN EMPTY PLOT EXISTS AT THE ADDRESS GIVEN BYAMBROSIA COLLEGE OF NURSING, JAGATPURA

A TEXTILE UNIT OPERATES IN WHAT ON PAPER IS THE LOCATION OF THE RAJ COLLEGE OF NURSING, SANGANER
Photographs by PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Fake colleges grant degrees in crucial disciplines. State government has just woken up.
By Rohit Parihar

DEGREES OFGUILT
lack of equipment to inadequate faculty," says C.K. Mathew, chief secretary of the Rajasthan government. The raids revealed how regulatory bodies such as Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (RUHS), Indian Nursing Council (INC) and RNC failed to ensure regulations are complied with. This was exposed after ACB began investigating a scam in nursing and BTech/MTech courses, while CBI began looking into the mess of BEd colleges. The role of RNC teams, which include senior doctors and faculty members of prominent medical and nursing colleges, and of teams sent by RUHS, is under the scanner. There are 330 private nursing colleges in the state churning out 50,000 graduates annually, 1,000-plus BEd colleges with more than 1,00,000 students and 150 private engineering colleges with 3,000-odd students on their rolls in MTech and 80,000 in BTech. The biggest scam is in nursing colleges. In March, ACB raided 82 of the state's 330 recognised colleges and found that only 10 had the mandatory infrastructure and facilities. ACB lodged FIRs against 21 colleges and initiated a preliminary inquiry against nine others. Startling facts emerged during the March raids. Raj College of Nursing is

n July 9, the first day of school after the summer vacation, students of Anuradha Public School in Sanganer, just outside Jaipur, were surprised to find their school closed. A signboard that read Ganpati Keshao Rao College of Nursing, instead of their school's name, welcomed them. The management had shut down the school because the AntiCorruption Bureau (ACB) had registered a case against them in June for running the school in a building meant for a nursing college. The management had even obtained a `no objection certificate' from the Rajasthan Nursing Council (RNC) to start admitting students. The future of over 2,00,000 students pursuing courses in nursing, BEd, BTech and MTech in Rajasthan is in jeopardy with questions being raised over the credibility of colleges and the authenticity of the degrees they award. The Rajasthan government has been flooded with complaints against private professional educational institutions which have seen a boom over the past decade. "Some are illegal while some have obtained permission without fulfilling conditions. These range from

O

officially registered as being located in Mahavir Nagar, Sanganer. But when the ACB officials landed at the given address, they found a textile printing unit operating. On paper, Ambrosia College of Nursing is situated in Jagatpura, Jaipur. But the ACB team found a vacant plot there. "A different building was shown when an RNC team came for inspection," says Ajit Singh Shekhawat, additional director general, ACB. In case of Diksha College of Nursing in Bhankrota, Jaipur, there was no building or lease deed for the proposed site there. "A commercial building under construction was shown as belonging to the college," says Shekhawat. These colleges were given `no objection certificates' by RNC in February. ACB is investigating a nexus between the Jaipur-based RUHS, which is also entrusted with the task of conducting examinations for nursing students, and college managements. On May 17, an ACB team caught Surendra Mishra, principal of Upchaar College of Nursing, Rajkumari, the warden of the college's hostel and Ramraj Gujjar, an RUHS clerk, accepting Rs 20,000 from a thirdyear student. The student alleged that Mishra demanded Rs 40,000 from her to pass an exam she had failed and

threatened to get her failed again if she didn't pay. A cellphone seized from Gujjar had names of nursing students with their roll numbers and names of papers in which marks were to be raised. "When there is no infrastructure and few faculty members, there is no question of students getting a good education. So exam papers are leaked at a price. If some fail, they pay money to be passed," says Shekhawat. The same month, RUHS had to cancel the BSc (Nursing) exam after a candidate sent an ACB officer an SMS revealing the exam paper questions beforehand. Shekhawat says the role of INC and some nurses employed with state government hospitals, who act as touts to get colleges recognition from INC, is being investigated. India's apex nursing body is already mired in controversy, with CBI prosecuting its president T. Dileep Kumar and seven others in October 2009 for alleged malpractices while issuing certificates to six nursing colleges in Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka. "Our reputation has taken a big hit. INC has refused to give affiliation to new nursing colleges from the state," says Jitendra Godara, secretary, Rajasthan Private Nursing Schools Federation. He says besides the 330 recognised nurs-

ing colleges, there are 1,000 other nursing schools which operate on the sly and arrange graduation certificates for students from other states. ACB is also investigating the functioning of private engineering colleges after RTI activists and CBI uncovered serious malpractices. In 2011, Sandeep Kumar, a final-year MTech student at Jaipur's Malviya National Institute of Technology, found through an RTI application that 90 MTech students were being paid a paltry salary to teach BTech courses in five private colleges. "This is a violation of regulations which say only an MTech degree holder with a certain level of marks can teach BTech students," says Kumar. His persistent queries forced Rajasthan Technical University, Kota (RTU), the affiliating body for most engineering colleges, to seek assurance from MTech students that they would not teach BTech courses. "So many new engineering colleges have come up over such a short period of time that finding qualified faculty is difficult," says an RTU source. A sting operation by leading TV channel AajTak in October 2011 showed a student, who had a two-year gap in his academic career, being offered enrolment in PhD by a college run by a private university which promised to adjust

"Our reputation has taken a big hit. Indian Nursing Council has refused to give affiliation to new nursing colleges."
JITENDRA GODARA, Secretary, Rajasthan Private Nursing Schools Federation

his gap years by showing him as having completed an MTech at that college during the period. Another university promised the same student an MTech degree without attending classes. The story in medical and BEd colleges is no better. CBI is likely to file a chargesheet against Subodh Shiksha Samiti, an educational society. It found that the documents the society submitted to obtain permission for a BEd college in Budhsinhpura were fake. In November 2011, CBI had also raided the Tagore BEd College in Jaipur and discovered that the facilities were far less than what was claimed while getting approval certificate from the National Council for Teacher Education. In June 2010, CBI raided Rajputana Unani Medical College Hospital and Research Centre in Jaipur and found it operating from a building which had less than half the space that is mandatory for establishing a medical college. A sting operation by a regional channel in June exposed fake patients being admitted in medical colleges to mislead visiting teams of the Medical Council of India (MCI). In 2009, Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot had admitted that the same faculty was rotated in different medical colleges to get MCI's affiliation. Chief Secretary Mathew says the state government will set up a body within the next few weeks to bring discipline in private education. Only time will tell whether this body will become just an authority that indulges in corruption, like the existing ones. 

44

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

