Mail

Who Will Fill the Vacuum?
J U LY 9, 2 0 1 2

As the most seasoned politician in UPA is all set to become president, the struggle for replacement begins.

Mukherjee may have "embarked on a new journey", but it has left his party groping in the dark, for someone suitable to replace him.
AMBAR MALLIK,
Kolkata

Big Loss for UPA
The Government will be hardpressed to find suitable replacements for the various functions Pranab Mukherjee performed with elan ("A Hole in the Heart of Government", July 9). While his absence will be a profound loss to UPA administration, his ascension to presidency will assuage the disappointment that most of the country felt at Pratibha Patil's lacklustre performance in the same office. Mukherjee was equally at ease in the company of leaders from his own party as with those in the Opposition, like L.K. Advani, Sushma Swaraj, Arun Jaitley and A.B. Bardhan. While these people may have severe differences with the policies of the ruling party, all were one in their

Fall from Grace

UPA 2 and the Congress, in particular, might fail in its efforts at damage control following corruption charges levelled against Virbhadra Singh by a court ("The Tape Trap", July 9). The five-time chief minister of Himachal Pradesh complicated matters for himself by issuing threats to investigating police officers. His efforts to project himself as political martyr have been a futile exercise, causing great humiliation to Congress.

REWATI RATHORE, Delhi

With cases of corruption rampant within the UPA Government, it comes as no surprise that another of its ministers is facing corruption charge. However, with Assembly elections due in October this year, the incident has proved to be another worry for the Congress. The party can only keep its fingers crossed till then.
KIRAN KUMAR, Chandigarh

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

``

``

praise for Mukherjee's administrative acumen.
S.VENUGOPALAN, Chennai

PTI PHOTO

The Congress and UPA had put all their eggs in one basket called Pranab Mukherjee. His eventual election as president will not only create a void in the Government but also weaken the cohesiveness only a seasoned politician like him could have brought. Losing Mukherjee for the Congress and UPA is akin to losing the head of a family.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore

With Pranab Mukherjee quitting the Government and Congress, an era of party old-timers comes to an end. It is also probably the end of one of the last associates of Indira

Mail
Gandhi in the Government. He was the Congress's man for all seasons, and invariably steered the party out of any potential crisis situation. It is a tribute to his administrative acumen that he was head of as many as 80 Group of Ministers. He could always be counted on to bail the party out of a sticky situation. His excellent relations with leaders of other political parties further enhanced his usefulness for the Congress party.
RANJIT SINHA, Kolkata

35
male counterparts, she remains committed to fly the flag at the Olympics, but did not back off from exposing AITA and potential partners for treating her with contempt.
MEGHANA. A, UK

`Incorrect Facts'
I wish to bring to your notice the factual errors in the article that appeared in INDIA TODAY ("Utterly Butterly Politicious", July 2). It is written by Bharat Dabholkar, a writer who worked at my agency, da Cunha Communications, 21 years ago. Dabholkar mentions that "the little girl was created by Sylvester da Cunha", my father, but deliberately fails to mention who created the legendary 50-year campaign. The byline that states `Bharat Dabholkar is the adman behind the Amul Butter advertisements' is incorrect. The adman who created the advertisements is Sylvester da Cunha, and the adman behind the ads now is me.
RAHUL DA CUNHA, Managing Director, da Cunha Communications

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
AUGUST 16-31, 197 7

The Haunted Screen
The recent statement by the Information and Broadcasting Minister, L.K. Advani, that the government is determined to revitalise the Children's Film Society of India has drawn attention to the one area of film-making that successive I&B ministers have routinely ignored. The making of films, specially for children, has never been seriously considered by the Bombay film industry which has been content to churn out one potboiler after another. The Children's Film Society, set up in 1955 with the intention of filling this void, has been a case of chronic mismanagement; it has a long history of corruption, nepotism and governmental neglect. Although at least two attempts have been made to rejuvenate the society, both have ultimately failed because the government has never cared enough to interfere when things have started to go wrong. A study team appointed in 1967 to examine the society's workings made several constructive suggestions and the resulting publicity succeeded in securing the resignation of Mahendranath, the society's secretary since its inception. Despite the departure of Mahendranath amid allegations of mismanagement and CBI inquiries, no follow-up action was taken. A civil servant from the ministry of agriculture was transferred to take over and the wasteful extravagance that has characterised the society continued.
by Vir Sanghvi
`URANCHOO' , A CHILDREN'S FILM SOCIETY FILM DIRECTED BY S. SINHA

Equal Rights
In India, divorced and widowed wives live at the mercy of divorced husbands ("Separate but Equal", July 9). They are also subjected to social wrath whereas the divorced husband enjoys life disregarding his moral duty to look after his divorced wife and even child. It will be in the fitness of things to give half of the assets acquired after marriage to the woman on divorce. The bill, when passed, might arrest the frequency of divorces.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Igniting Minds
APJ Abdul Kalam has not only brought to the office of presidency dignity and decorum but also added grace to the highest executive post by conducting himself with utmost restraint and austere discipline ("Nitish told me I did not have the numbers to win", July 9). He retained his unobtrusive honesty and openness all through his years in the Rashtrapati Bhavan. The interview serves as a contrast to the present-day politics.
KARANAM RAO, Hyderabad

CORRIGENDUM
CHAUDHURI MALLYA

Off-court Battle
On court, Sania Mirza has ranged from brilliant to disappointing, yet when her character was tested, she served aces aplenty ("Why Should I Be Bait?", July 9). Unlike her doubledealing, arm-twisting

The story, Bailout Breather, dated March 5, 2012, stated that SBI was contemplating funding or extension of repayment of loans to Vijay Mallya's Kingfisher Airlines.The information was subsequently found to be incorrect. SBI had no intention of extending any favour to Vijay Mallya.We were wrong and stand corrected.The magazine had no intention whatsoever to sully the reputation of either SBI or its Chairman Pratip Chaudhuri.The error is regretted.

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

NEW

