UP FRONT

ANIL RAZDAN

THE POWER VACUUM
ill there be power to drive business in India is as cost of supply and the average revenue realised which legitimate a question as will there be fuel to run rose to Rs 0.73 per unit of power sold in 2009-10. This transport in India, or, will it be sustainable to has been compounded by rising cost of fuel. We must generate or distribute power in the country. A rational find the following four solutions. The first is fuel. The requirement of coal in 2016-17 is answer to the first would necessitate a presumption that the business of generation, transmission and distribution 842 metric tonne (MT). In a business-as-usual scenario, of electricity requires to run on the same principles as Coal India will produce only 415 MT. This, along with other any other economic activity. domestic and other sources, gives a total availability of 604 It will also require a certain degree of statesmanship MT, leaving a shortfall of 238 MT. This will mean importing from our political leadership not to interfere in the 213 MT of better but expensive coal. In the optimistic scebusiness of electricity beyond determination of state- nario Coal India can produce 461 MT. We must ensure that financed subsidy for the vulnerable sections. This this happens, leaving us to import about 182 MT. withdrawal of political space must be compensated by Secondly, we must develop peaking power stations and an accountable regulatory apparatus. tariffs in the system. Storage hydro stations should be deCitizens and business are understandably agitated at veloped and gas-based peaking stations made mandatory load shedding and rising tariffs. But we do not have the for heavy load centres. This should be backed with high luxury of a vast spinning reserve to meet an almost 25 per peaking tariffs to enforce Demand Response Management cent surge in demand owing to extreme climatic factors, by consumers who have to be made intelligent partners and also that almost all state electricity regulators have through a smart metering communication system. failed in timely and periodic tariff adjustments, leaving the Thirdly, we must improve efficiency to minimise condistribution companies deep in debt. sumption at the consumer end, particularly in industry and Electricity supply indicates a shortage in May 2012 agriculture. Under the Prime Minister's Action Plan for between 7.5 per cent and 11.2 per cent across the coun- Climate Change, the Perform Achieve and Trade (PAT) try. Do we have the capacity to meet these shortages in scheme mandates 478 most energy intensive industrial the coming years? Yes, provided we treat it as a national units in the country to reduce their specific energy conpriority. If we could raise the level of capacity addition sumption. These consumers used 166 million tonnes of oil from 22,000 MW in the Tenth Plan to almost 66,000 MW in equivalent (MTOE) in 2009-10, 35 per cent of India's total the Eleventh, we can certainly add 80,000 MW in commercial energy consumption. The mandate is to reduce their energy consumption by 6.6 the Twelfth Plan. This is possible beSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com cause we added almost 20,000 MW in MTOE in 2014-15, bringing about an 2011-12 and can add 20, 000 MW in annual saving of Rs 7, 000 crore. The underachievers would be penalised 2012-13, and around 22,000 MW and the overachievers can trade their each in the following two years, Energy Saving Certificates. though almost entirely coal thermal. The fourth and most important There is a shelf of over 1,00,000 thing is to plug the leaking bucket of MW projects under construction. The the distribution companies whose preparations in the Eleventh Plan can cumulative losses are nearing Rs 2 keep this engine rolling as it takes lakh crore and short-term loans are four to six years for thermal projects of an equal value. These are essento fructify. Our present installed catially public sector companies. State pacity is 2,05,000 MW, predominantly electricity regulators must enforce coal thermal, and we have met a peak Universal Service Obligation on the daily demand of almost 1,20,000 MW. distributors to ensure round-theThe 18th Electric Power Survey, just clock power and introduce prepaid completed, reveals that the peak demeters and remote switch off for mand in 2016-17, assuming a high 9 errant consumers, as in telecom. If per cent GDP growth in the Twelfth A large number of distribution we want our lights to be on with no Plan, would be 2,00, 000 MW. companies are haemorrhaging The problem today is not capac- cash owing to the vast gap between power shedding, we have to be prepared to pay the price for such power. ity addition, but fuel availability. A the cost of supply and the average very large number of distribution revenue realised. This has been companies are haemorrhaging cash Anil Razdan is a former secretary in the owing to the vast gap between the compounded by rising cost of fuel. Union Ministry of Power

W

10

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

