Obituary
By Rachel Dwyer

RAJESH KHANNA

1942-2012
He was the quintessential middle class hero, good-looking, with well-rehearsed mannerisms that made women weak at the knees

R

COURTESY INDIAN EXPRESS

ajesh Khanna, India's first superstar, was adored by his fans for decades, but has never been given any academic recognition. Although he was the major star of the early 1970s, he was so eclipsed by Amitabh Bachchan's hip and brooding persona that his role in the film industry has been neglected. Rajesh Khanna was not cool. He was the nice middle-class boy who really did look as though he lived next door. He was good-looking rather than classically handsome, always slightly awkward in his tight safari suits, his hair a little stiff. But when Rajesh Khanna tilted his head, smiled and winked directly to the camera, his charm was overwhelming and women swooned. These well-rehearsed gestures seemed private rather than part of the public, nice boy persona, and seemed to speak directly and intimately to his fans. The combination of ordinariness and innocence with this knowing charm, was absolutely lethal. Who else could have made the audience convinced it was perfectly normal to live happily ever after with two wives, as he did at the end of Daag (Director: Yash Chopra, 1973)? His characters were usually middle- or upper-middle class, but he often lacked the support of his family and seemed hurt and lost, in need of mothering. His despair was often angry, sometimes expressed through drunkenness and wonderful songs like `Yeh jo mohabbat' in Kati Patang (Director: Shakti Samanta, 1970). Rajesh Khanna had some of the best songs of all time picturised on him, especially those of R.D. Burman sung by Kishore Kumar. Yet one of his finest performances as an actor was in Ittefaq (Director: Yash Chopra, 1969), a rare songless film where he plays a suspected murderer on the loose. Aradhana (Director: Shakti Samanta, 1969), his first big Hindi film, had Rajesh Khanna in a double role with Sharmila Tagore as the heroine. It had one of the sexiest songs in Hindi cinema, `Roop tera mastana' where the

The Original Superstar

THANKS FOR THE MEMORIES
The actor in his best lines
Main marne se pehle marna nahin chahta. Safar, 1970
NN

Babumoshai, hum toh rangmanch ki kathputliyan hain jiski dor uss uparwale ke haathon mein hai. Kab, kaun, kaise uthega ye koi nahin jaanta. Anand, 1971
NN

Pushpa, mujhse ye aansu nahi dekhe jaate, I hate tears. Amar Prem, 1972
NN

Kisi badi khushi ke intezaar mein hum yeh chhote chhote khushiyoon ke mauke kho detey hain. Bawarchi, 1972
NN

Iss ek glass mein ek majdoor ki ek mahiney ki roti hai aur parivar ki saans. Kabhi socha hai ki iss ek glass ko peetay hi hum ek parivar ko bhooka maar dete hai. Namak Haraam, 1973
NN

Insaan ko dil de, jism de, dimaage de, lekin yeh kambakhht pet mat de, jab pet deta hai, toh usse bhookh mat de... Roti, 1974
RAJESH KHANNA IN ARADHANA (1969)

NN

`bhool' was inevitable, the song and the camera building up the tension as the couple looked at each other with boundless desire. In the same movie, they played mother and son when Rajesh Khanna came back with his second role in the film. The tensions during the making of this classic must have been noteworthy, as Tagore went off to work with her mentor Satyajit Ray, while her scenes in `Mere sapnon ki rani' were shot on another occasion to Rajesh Khanna's, though none of it shows in the finished product. Anand (Director: Hrishikesh Mukherjee, 1971), in which he plays a cancer patient, is more a celebration of life than death, with its great songs and its motto: `Zindagi badi honi chahiye, lambi nahin' (Life should be big, not long). This was the first ever pairing of Rajesh Khanna and Amitabh Bachchan, which was followed by Namak Haraam, another Hrishikesh Mukherjee film that was released in 1973. Amar Prem (Director: Shakti Samanta, 1972) was based on the Bengali story Nishipadma by Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay, whose Pather Panchali was adapted by Satyajit Ray. A girl sold to a brothel by her family finds love and family with those whose own family lives are unhappy. Along with the song `Chingari koi bhadke', Rajesh Khanna's line: `Pushpa, I hate tears', before he cries himself, is one of its best moments. In many of his greatest roles, Rajesh Khanna is more than a romantic hero, as the films often focus on love in the context of wider family relationships while raising issues such as illness, trade unionism, prostitution, insanity, animal welfare, etc. Perhaps it is part of the lack of a serious critical assessment of his work and a vague recollection of his eclipse by Amitabh Bachchan that he is remembered almost exclusively as a romantic hero. His songs are some of the most romantic in Hindi film history but need to be contextualised within his wider work. I first recall coming across Rajesh Khanna in the Man Alive documentary made in 1973. Jack Pizzey, in this relatively early documentary on the

Hindi film industry, wants to interview Rajesh Khanna. Endless deferrals are followed by meaningless interviews, then clips of the numerous retakes of `Suno kaho kaha suna' from Aap Ki Kasam (Director: Kamal Bhatnagar, 1974). The gossip queen, Devyani Chaubal, tries to interpret Rajesh Khanna to the baffled Pizzey. Then, suddenly, the wedding of Rajesh Khanna and Dimple Kapadia is announced and Pizzey is invited and allowed to film, transforming his documentary, which begins somewhat patronisingly, into a gem for screen fans. I often walked past Rajesh Khanna's bungalow Aashirwad on Carter Road in Bandra, noting that it looked quite neglected, and wondered about him and the nature of Hindi film stardom. I admire him and his family for their dignified silence about personal matters, though was glad to learn they all came together at the end. Rajesh Khanna deserves critical assessment in the context of the late 1960s and early 1970s, especially with regard to the image of the non-metropolitan male and the creation of stardom. No one who writes about Hindi films can ignore him. Just recently, I presented a paper at Stanford University which contained much about my favourite film of his, Haathi Mere Saathi (Director: M.A. Thirumugham, 1971). The film queries boundaries between humans and animals, as Rajesh Khanna is the only person who respects and understands the devotion and love of animals. Raju and his elephants are touched by the divine, as Ganesh himself guides them, responds to them and finally the loyal Ramu is worshipped by the family. Rajesh Khanna plays a victim of human cruelty and mistrust wonderfully in this film, which is not really a children's movie but one which continues to inspire government action for the endangered animal. Yet another part of the legacy of this superstar. RIP Rajesh Khanna: Pyaar ki duniya mein, khush rehna mere yaar.
Dwyer is professor of Indian Cultures and Cinema, SOAS, University of London

38

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

39

