Na tion

UTTAR PRADESH

IN ASARA,LIFE STOPS BEFORE 40
A village tells its young women to give up cellphones, not to visit the weekly market without a male escort and to cover their head when they step out of home
Photographs by ANIL DAYAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

out alone. Asara's women tend to the fields and scores of young girls attend college or work in nearby towns. Begum says life would come to a standstill if women needed escorts every time they stepped out of home. Some of the old woman's feisty spirit in their veins, Begum's granddaughters seem upset by the orders. A student of Class XI at the Muslim Inter College, Sabira Parveen, 16, scores better than most boys and is not shy of showing her prized possession--a Nokia cellphone. "It gives me a sense of security," she says, morose at the prospect of having it snatched from her. At the far end of another bricklined lane, Mokham's daughter tells you he is not home. Ishrat Jahan, 18, an undergraduate student of political
(LEFT) A GIRLWALKS PAST SHOPS IN ASARA; THE MENFOLK GATHER FOR A CHAT AT TEACHER SHAKEELAHMAD'S HOME

with family back home. Shakeel Ahmad, 48, who teaches economics at the Muslim Inter College, endorsed Mokham's July 6 diktats. "These are for the good of the village. Even the womenfolk concur," he says. He points to Asara's long tradition of educating its girls--Muslim Inter College's 1,400 students at the inter college include an even mix of boys and girls, and the village received the state award for women's education in 2010. "This village is like our family, we must protect it," he says. But not everyone in the village supports the view. "There can be no zor-zabardasti (coercion)," declares Musharraf Chaudhary, 50, the incumbent panchayat pradhan (head) who refused to be a part of the unofficial collective of menfolk that pronounced the controversial diktats. Admitting that social ills have been on the rise in

By Asit Jolly

ohammad Mokham, 50, pushed the calendar several decades back in Asara when he sought to deny basic freedoms to young women of the bustling western Uttar Pradesh village on July 6. Nearly 2,000 men, belonging to both Hindu and Muslim communities, endorsed the action. The panchayat leader's diktats were bizarre: Women under 40 must not carry mobile phones, must never leave home with uncovered heads and should never be seen at the saptahik peeth (weekly farmers' market) without male company. Ironically, he addressed the crowd from a stage adjacent to Asara's pride, the co-educational Muslim Inter College, founded in 1924. He also imposed a ban on love marriages and young men listening to music on earphones while riding their motorcycles. The village, a sprawling township of 25,000, predominantly Muley Jat (Jats who have converted to Islam) residents, is tucked well away behind sugarcane fields and mango groves along National Highway 57 to Delhi. One sees the first melancholy signs of the newly foisted patriarchy

M

on glum-faced women riding home on slow-moving bullock carts from harvesting fodder for the day. Inside Asara, it's like any other day. Along the concrete road that sinuously circles the village, there's the usual Saturday morning rush at two side-by-side barbershops. But none of the wary men will say where Mokham is: "I saw him near the Unani dispensary", or, "He was walking towards the Inter College". But no one knows where the man, who set off alarm bells from Lucknow to New Delhi, could be. Responses are evidently tutored. "There was no firman or fatwa here," says Haji Israel, 72, insisting it was nothing more than a few "mashware (suggestions)" that emerged during a discussion between the menfolk after the Friday prayers. Qayyum Ali, 61, parrots the version, as do most others. Mokham and his associate Mujahid went `underground' on July 11 shortly after a 250-strong crowd of angry sup-

porters `rescued' the duo from the subdivisional magistrate's office where they were called for questioning. Mokham's supporters attacked SubInspector Prahlad Singh and Constable Gulab Singh and set their motorcycle on fire when they visited Asara to verify reports regarding the diktats. But despite the nationwide furore, the Baghpat district administration is helpless in acting against the unlawful diktats. "There is nothing we can do unless somebody complains," says District Magistrate Amrita Soni, 36. She is under obvious political pressure after state Minority Affairs Minister Azam Khan and Union Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh's son, Jayant Chaudhary, publicly supported the decision to restrain Asara's women. Raeesa Begum, 70, is bemused by the need for fresh fatwas. "Women here have always covered their head and no man needs to remind us of this," she says. She is perplexed with the order restraining women from venturing

"My father only means to instil better values in the village. I don't think there is anything wrong with that.
ISHRAT JAHAN, Mohammad Mokham's 18-year-old daughter who uses a mobile phone

science and history at Gayatri Devi College in Baraut, about 17 km from Asara, stoutly defends her father. "He only means to instil better values in the village. I don't think there is anything wrong with that," she says, adding that discouraging young girls from visiting the weekly market made sense because "the place is frequented by hundreds of unknown outsiders". The ban on mobile phones is only meant to "discourage misuse", though she doesn't explain what the "misuse" is. Incidentally, both Ishrat and her older cousin Raqeeba, 22, carry cellphones to college to keep in touch

the village, Musharraf believes the only way to tackle this is to equip young men and women with a good education. "Padh-likh kar bachche khud ache-bure ki pehchaan kar sakte hain (educated youngsters can tell the difference between good and bad)," he says, adding that couples would not need to elope if parents marry young people who fall in love. For the time being, women face the brunt of patriarchal traditions. It's a double whammy in Asara, where women must live with the vestiges of Jat customs as well as the newer impositions of Islam. 

32

INDIA TODAY  JULY 30, 2012

new

