Cover Story MULAYAM SINGH YADAV

THE STORMS

OFAUGUST
Mulayam Singh Yadav has repeatedly told his cadre to prepare for general elections in 2013: When will he strike?
By Devesh Kumar, Dhiraj Nayyar and Priya Sahgal

MULAYAM SINGH YADAV

hat is the point in joining a Government that is on its way out?" Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav told INDIA TODAY with a smile when asked if the Samajwadi Party (SP) would join the Congress-led Government at the Centre. This was on the evening of July 18, merely a few hours after his father Mulayam Singh Yadav sat on Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's table at a celebratory UPA lunch on the eve of the presidential election. For those who thought the lunch was a prelude to partnership in Government, the quote was a dampener. It also indicated what the political class knows: Mulayam holds the aces, and he will play them at his discretion. Akhilesh's remarks are part of a pattern visible from March this year. While speaking to his party workers on March 18, soon after SP swept back to power in the state after a gap of five years, Mulayam offered early insights: "There seems to be no certainty when general elections (due in 2014) will take place. It could happen any day now." It was a theme he would repeat five days later while addressing a function in Lucknow. Again, on June 11, while addressing his party's central parliamentary board in the Capital, Mulayam appealed to them to don battle fatigues and gear up for early polls. A month later, on July 10, Mulayam once again set political circles aflutter with his poll talk. "We should remain prepared for elections. It can happen before time, possibly next year. It is, therefore, important that party leaders work seriously and visit the constituencies," he told SP workers in the party office at 19, Vikramaditya Marg, in Lucknow. Speaking from the same platform minutes later, his cousin Ram Gopal Yadav stepped up the heat, naming observers for all the 58 constituencies from where SP candidates had lost in the 2009 general elections. Explains Akhilesh, "The polls are anyway due in early 2014. So if we ask

W

SUBIR HALDER/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Cover Story MULAYAM SINGH YADAV
our people to get ready by 2013, there is nothing alarming in it. After all, I began my rath yatra seven months before the Uttar Pradesh polls took place." Mulayam is too seasoned to play wolf, or threaten to huff and puff and blow the UPA house down ceaselessly. His projected calculations are based on a hard analysis of ground reality. He understands that slippage from the high of his Assembly polls victory in March is inevitable, and he cannot afford to wait too long if he wants to maximise his presence in the next Lok Sabha, so that he can be in power in both Lucknow and Delhi. A March 2013 election could yet fetch him around 40 seats; a 2014 election could slice that by half. But if Mulayam wants to force a poll by toppling the Government, he has to act soon. The moment could come during the monsoon session, which begins on August 8. A combination of factors, from the pressure of a growing drought to ambitions of allies, will make August an exceptionally turbulent month for the Congress. Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief Mamata Banerjee is driven by the same logic as Mulayam. sabotaged the Chandra Shekhar government in 1991; Sitaram Kesri dumped H.D. Deve Gowda in 1997 and Inder Kumar Gujral in 1998. But only Indira Gandhi benefited, because she had carefully thought through what she was going to do next. Mulayam knows that with a mere 21 MPs in the Lok Sabha, he alone cannot precipitate early elections. He needs to build an anti-Congress coalition within UPA. Can he get the allies, or at least a section of them, on board? UPA has the backing of 272 members in the Lok Sabha, barely above the halfway mark in the 543-member House. This includes the 19-member TMC. Bahujan Samaj Party (20) and Rashtriya Janata Dal (4) extend outside support. The narrative to bring down the Government cannot be built on partisan reasons. The voter must be persuaded that a government has been broken in his interest. The best argument for Mulayam is the sinking farmers' economy. The politics of discontent has been sharpened by the prospect of a drought in large parts of India. The dismal story of falling economic growth and steady inflation is now well-known. An errant monsoon is going to further hit Mulayam's core constituents, the farmers. According to the Government-run India Meteorological Department (IMD), the cumulative rainfall in the first three weeks of June was just 76 per cent of its long period average. Any amount below 94 per cent is termed as deficient. IMD's forecast for July is ambivalent. For August, the probability of below normal rainfall is 42 per cent, compared to 36 per cent probability of normal rainfall. By IMD's own estimate things are likely to get worse, not better. Economist and former Union minister Yoginder K. Alagh believes that the damage has already been done to the forthcoming kharif crop. "It hasn't rained in June and in the first week of July. That has reduced sowing substantially. Deficient early rainfall also means lower yields," he told INDIA TODAY. The deficient monsoon will thus have a serious impact on agricultural production. The impact on GDP growth may be small, since agriculture contributes only 14 per cent of GDP. But the impact on people will be large, with agriculture employing 52 per cent of India's workforce. "Employment will fall, there will be serious drinking water problems and people will be more dependent on NREGA," says Alagh. Prices of key agricultural commodities will also rise, affecting the entire population. In June, inflation measured by the wholesale price index declined to 7.25 per cent from 7.55 per cent in May,
MAMATA BANERJEE AT A TRINAMOOL CONGRESS MEETING IN KOLKATA

Banerjee, who has been denied a special package for Bengal worth Rs 22,000 crore,
SUBIR HALDER/ www.indiatodayimages.com

is unlikely to sit quiet if other states get doles.
ment, due to begin on August 8, will see renewed pressure on the Government. On the one hand, the Government is under severe criticism for policy paralysis from Indian industry and foreign leaders--US President Barack Obama and Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Leung have been vocal in recent weeks. It needs to respond. That is why talk of new FDI measures is back on the table. The last time the Government tried to introduce FDI in retail in November 2011, it faced a revolt from within. The Congress believes things are different now. It may be wrong. On July 18, Union Commerce Minister Anand Sharma told a business daily that he saw little opposition from states to FDI in retail other than from West Bengal. The same day, Akhilesh told a Hindi paper that FDI in retail was anti-common man. A showdown with Mulayam

Engineer Elections
Finding the right narrative
But the eye of this hurricane will move in the direction Mulayam takes it. He controls the balance of the Lok Sabha, not just with numbers, but also with the momentum of his swing. Mulayam has expressed his desire, but not clarified how he plans to achieve his purpose. The game is not without its risks. When you force an early election, you must have a convincing narrative for the people. The Government is drawing comfort from the fact that the path to destabilisation is fuzzy, and could easily become counter-productive. The Congress track record in destabilisation has a moral which politicians are loath to forget. It has brought down four governments at the Centre, but benefited from only one such exercise. Mrs Indira Gandhi engineered the collapse of the Charan Singh government in 1979; Rajiv Gandhi

but food inflation rose to 10.81 per cent, much higher than the 7.6 per cent recorded in June 2011, a normal monsoon month. If food prices continue to rise, there is every chance of doubledigit inflation by Diwali. A deficient rainfall situation will inevitably lead to calls for additional financial packages. Karnataka's new Chief Minister Jagadish Shettar, for one, has asked for a Rs 2,000-crore package from the Centre on July 18. Mulayam has persuaded the Centre to release Rs 45,000 crore in grants that were held up because of perceived inaction on the part of the state government on key projects, but he will ask for much more if there is a drought. Banerjee, who has been denied a special package for Bengal worth Rs 22,000 crore, is unlikely to sit quiet if other states get doles. The demand for drought-related assistance will put

huge pressure on the Centre's already out-of-control fiscal deficit. A drought relief package of say Rs 50,000 crore would increase the deficit by a significant 0.5 per cent.

RenewPressure
Monsoon session will see rough weather
A deficient monsoon is not the only pressure point on UPA. With the Manmohan Singh Government battling a series of corruption charges, Congress is already badly bruised. Popular disaffection against it reared its head during the municipal polls in Uttar Pradesh, the results for which were declared on July 7. BJP swept 12 of the 14 mayoral polls, with independents backed by BSP and SP winning in the two others. The monsoon session of Parlia-

BLOWING THE POLL BUGLE EARLY

Since March, the Yadavs have been indicating their eagerness for early general elections

"There seems to be no certainty when the general elections will take place. It could happen any day now."
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV to party activists in Lucknow, March 18

"We should remain prepared for elections. It can happen before time, possibly next year. It is, therefore, important that party leaders work seriously and visit the constituencies."
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV to party workers in Lucknow, July 10

"Changes must be visible in six months and the manifesto must be implemented within a year as there's no guarantee when Lok Sabha polls are announced MULAYAM SINGH YADAV to senior party colleagues in Lucknow, March 23 after that."
"We must gear up for early polls."
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV addressing the SP central parliamentary board in Delhi, June 11. SP then sends observers to all 58 parliamentary constituencies represented by opposition MPs to zero in on winning candidates
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

AKHILESH YADAV to INDIA TODAY, July 18

20

INDIA TODAY  JULY 30, 2012

NEW

NEW

``

``

What's the point in joining a Government that is on its way out? Polls are anyway due in early 2014. So, if we ask our people to get ready by 2013, there is nothing alarming in it.

JULY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

Cover Story MULAYAM SINGH YADAV
and Banerjee is inevitable if the Government goes ahead with its FDI agenda. The Government may also face the ire of its allies in Parliament should it decide to liberalise the price of diesel, which could raise prices by up to Rs 13 per litre in one go. Mulayam could forge common cause on the issue with Banerjee, while raising the larger issue of economic mismanagement by the Congress. The Congress has the added challenge--during a critical session--of floor management in the House, now that Pranab Mukherjee is on his way to Rashtrapati Bhavan. Perhaps the toughest immediate decision for the Congress is to finalise the name of Leader of the Lok Sabha. Only Mukherjee had the stature and clout to make four senior BJP leaders--Murli Manohar Joshi, Rajnath Singh, Yashwant Sinha and Jaswant Singh-- sit down in the Lok Sabha on March 15 by chiding them for "behaving like petulant children". No one else has the stature to pull off such a rebuke. No wonder Sonia whispered to Mukherjee soon after his admonishment, "This is why we need you."

Fill Power Void
Doctor is out, prince not yet in
What may embolden Mulayam, Banerjee and other allies to pull the plug on the UPA Government is the terribly weak state of Congress leadership. Five years ago, the election of a president created not a ripple. This year, there were waves. Even normal events tend to acquire aspects of a crisis. Congress strategy, under such circumstances, has been to spread the word that another crisis has been averted, and that all is well. On July 18, a day before the presidential polls, Sonia hosted a lunch for UPA and its allies at the Ashoka Hotel in Delhi. The menu was Indian and Chinese and the agenda was to thank allies for their support in the presidential and vice-presidential polls. Since Janata Dal (United) and Shiv Sena are not UPA allies they were not invited even though both parties have extended support to Mukherjee. The Prime Minister's table had Rahul Gandhi, Mulayam, Farooq Abdullah and Praful Patel while Sonia's table hosted Sharad Pawar, Lalu Yadav, Ram Vilas Paswan and T.R. Baalu. Mayawati did not attend but she sent her MPs. Barely had the lunch been digested when Akhilesh's remarks induced new acidity into the body politic. Allies as much as opponents are watching the vacuum at the top in the Congress with a glee restrained by discipline. Manmohan will not lead the party in the next general elections. An ailing Sonia is out of the race. So is Mukherjee. And Congress General Sec-

The monsoon session of Parliament, due to begin on August 8,
will see renewed pressure on the Manmohan Government if it attempts to push its reforms agenda.

retary Rahul Gandhi is not yet in. In the vacuum, an apprehensive Congress feeds on theories. According to one Cabinet minister, "From what I have heard, Rahul has told his mother that he will only become prime minister if the Congress gets a majority. And that is not likely to happen for a long, long time." Bereft of options, Congressmen have upped the pressure on Rahul to step out of his cameo appearances and take on a larger responsibility. On the July 14-15 weekend, Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh told the media that Rahul would be playing a larger role within the Congress organisation by September. As Congressmen began to speculate about Rahul being promoted to either party vice-president or working president, Digvijaya told INDIA TODAY that he was not privy to his leader's plans but was merely voicing an expectation of the party. "This is what the people are expecting. The reason I said September is that by then the presidential and vice-presidential polls will be over. That would maybe be the right time." Sonia soon put a stop to all speculation on July 18 outside Parliament after she accompanied VicePresident Hamid Ansari to file his nomination papers: "No one can answer on Rahul's behalf." The very next day, Rahul told reporters in Parliament that he was ready to play a larger role in the party and Government. But, he added, the final decision on his exact role would be taken by the Congress president.
UPA LEADERS AT A FUNCTION TO CELEBRATE THREE YEARS OF GOVERNMENT, ON MAY 22
YASHBANT NEGI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Sonia has been egging on her son to don the leadership mantle. She made that clear in August 2011 when she went abroad for a surgery. She left him in charge of party affairs along with a three-member core committee of Ahmed Patel, Janardan Dwivedi and A.K. Antony. That was a time when Anna Hazare had held Parliament to ransom by holding a fast at Ramlila Maidan and demanding the Government pass the Jan Lokpal Bill. It was an ideal opportunity for Rahul to take charge but he remained invisible except for an intervention in Parliament that caught the rest of his party off-guard. Since then, he has steered clear of national politics. Says a party MP, "He could easily have taken charge during the presidential polls. Pranab Mukherjee's ticket is a winning one." But instead of taking the lead, Rahul is content to play the role of a supporting chorus, whether it is FDI in retail, or even his pet Land Acquisition Bill. For now, Congressmen are preoccupied lobbying in anticipation of an organisational and Cabinet reshuffle. Governance has taken a back seat.

SONIA (LEFT) WITH RAHUL

SHEKHAR YADAV

Bolster the Base
Mulayam consolidates M-Y combine
Mulayam is focused. The SP supremo is on an overdrive to consolidate his M-Y (Muslim-Yadav) base. The minority community reposed its faith in him in the Assembly polls. As a goodwill gesture, he took Jama Masjid Shahi Imam Maulana Syed Ahmed Bukhari's sonin-law to the Vidhan Parishad, and Shia Wakf Board President Waseem Rizwi was sacked at the instance of cleric Maulana Kalbe Jawwad. Akhilesh also appointed Babri Masjid Action Committee convener Zafaryab Jilani as the state's additional solicitor general. The government also announced a series of sops, including Rs 30,000 to every Muslim girl who passes the high school examination. SP, party leaders say, wants to conclude the process of selecting candidates early so as to gain a headstart in preparing for snap polls. There is, as the number of applications received so far

Sonia has been egging Rahul to don the leadership mantle. But
instead of taking the lead, he is content playing the role of a supporting chorus.
by the party office in Lucknow indicates, a mad scramble for SP tickets. It has got nearly three dozen applications for the Ambedkar Nagar constituency. Even for Sonia's constituency Rae Bareli and Rahul's constituency Amethi, SP has received six applications each. Mulayam has also been revving up his party's organisational machinery. Frontal outfits such as Lohia Vahini, Chhatra Sabha, Samajwadi Yuvjan Sabha, and Mulayam Singh Youth Brigade, which played a key role in the Assembly elections, have now been asked to gear up for parliamentary polls. The state administration has always played a vital role in Mulayam's scheme

of things. Akhilesh and he have undertaken a shake-up of the administrative machinery. Akhilesh revived the post of an all-power chief secretary, anointing his father's trusted IAS officer Javed Usmani to the post. The state government has transferred more than 2,000 senior and junior officers in the past three months. All 75 districts have new district magistrates. All these districts also have new superintendents of police or senior superintendents of police. "We are ready for elections," says SP Rajya Sabha member and former spokesperson Mohan Singh. When asked whether his party was inching closer to the UPA in the run-up to the presidential elections, he replied: "Accidents do happen when vehicles ply on the roads. We've opened a trauma centre. The Morarji Desai government collapsed in two years. The Vishwanath Pratap Singh government fell in 10 months. The first two Atal Bihari Vajpayee governments ran for just 13 days and 13 months. You cannot predict anything in Indian politics."
with Bhavna Vij-Aurora and Ashish Misra

JULY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

23

NEW

