the Romantics

special issue

They Have a Dream
rain drain is passe. Twenty-first century India is witnessing a reverse migration of its talent pool that is eager to tap into the entrepreneurial energy liberalisation brought in its wake. Not everyone is returning only for a slice of the India growth story. There's a bunch of dreamers who would rather be change agents here than earn six-figure salaries in the West. Some of them opt to join the Government to bring about the change they want. Take Balasaheb Darade, 28. In 2005, Darade was part of the design team of NASA's Mars Rover Mission. In 2010, he founded an IT company that notched up a turnover of Rs 25 crore in its first year. Today, he is a zilha parishad member in Buldhana district, Maharashtra, taking on local politicians who swindled money from the local cooperative bank. Others, such as Gaurav Chiplunkar, 26, steer clear of the Government's bureaucratic steel frame and choose to work with independent NGOs. Then there are mavericks like the Udaipur-based Manish Jain, 42, who only takes failed students under his wing. Different routes, same destination. We profile 15 diehard romantics who believe an `India Shining' can still be a reality.

PRANJUL BHANDARI 30
Economist, Planning Commission, Delhi
Why would an economics graduate from the University of Cambridge working for Goldman Sachs in Hong Kong give up her six-figure salary to work for the Government at half the amount? Pranjul Bhandari wanted to live and breathe the Indian growth story. Her desire to bridge the gap between economics and development led her to apply for a role at the Planning Commission. She got the job of special assistant to Montek Singh Ahluwalia, deputy chairman of the commission. Twenty months into her job, Bhandari is part of a team that is writing the 12th Five-Year Plan, to be unveiled soon. Looking at a broad range of development issues--from tribal welfare to infrastructure financing, and discussing, debating and thrashing out these guidelines has been a fantastic learning experience, she says. Working in Government is neither glamorous nor profitable. Bhandari says it's all about working with the right person; she was lucky to have Ahluwalia as her boss--regardless of the recent controversies swirling around him. "Working with the Government is as much about EQ (emotional quotient) as IQ, as you have to learn how to create consensus and take people on board while making decisions," she says. What next? She is in a happy space right now, learning the ropes, observing, debating and challenging the system in more ways than one. So she intends to sit tight and make the most of her time at the Planning Commission.

B

GURUSPEAK "Pranjul came to us from a
background in investment banking, motivated by the desire to work in public policy. She has brought high quality, quantitative skills and a fresh perspective to the commission. We need many more such inductions in Government."
MONTEK SINGH AHLUWALIA,
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission
by Prachi Bhuchar

"Working with the Government is as much about EQ as IQ, as you have to learn how to create consensus and take people on board while making decisions."
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

52

INDIA TODAY  JULY 30, 2012

JULY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

53

the Romantics
BALASAHEB DARADE 28 Zilha

special issue SHANKAR KRISHNAN 44, DIVYA BHALLA 43 Advisers, National Institute of Speech and Hearing,Thiruvananthapuram
Shankar Krishnan and Divya Bhalla met at IIM-Ahmedabad back in 1990. Shankar was from Thiruvananthapuram, while Bhalla, a Punjabi, was brought up in Kolkata. They decided to tie the knot soon after completing their course in 1992. Shankar joined McKinsey, while Bhalla joined the State Bank of India (SBI) in Mumbai. Their career graphs were anyone's envy. By 2000, Shankar had become McKinsey India's partner, and headed its healthcare division, while Bhalla became SBI Mutual Fund's chief investment officer. The arrival of daughter Nayanika, however, changed things. "I could not spend even 10 minutes a day with my daughter. I had to sometimes wake her up to talk to her," recalls Shankar. The only The couple started looking around for options to utilise their capabilities. That was when they heard about the National Institute of Speech and Hearing (NISH), an autonomous institution under the Kerala government for the hearing and speech-impaired children. Today, they are its honorary management advisers, executing special degree courses for the speech and hearing impaired to find jobs in the corporate world. Their work has already borne fruit. Wipro recruited six graduates from NISH in 2011. Shankar and Bhalla are also consultants for Elon, a university in North Carolina, US, and design social work projects in India for its students. The consultancy takes care of their exC SHANKAR

parishad member, Buldhana, Maharashtra
In 2005, he was part of the design team of NASA's Mars Rover Mission. In 2010, his IT company Relations Bridge Innovators registered a turnover of $5 million (Rs 25 crore) in its first year. Today, Balasaheb Darade is a zilha parishad member in Buldhana district of Maharashtra, representing 22 villages. "Until we have good people in politics, the system cannot be changed," he says. Life's come full circle for the man from Lonar village, who studied at the government-funded Jawahar Navoday Vidyalaya at Vasmat in Parbhani district, and went on to complete a master's in organic solar energy from the University of Cincinnati, US. Three things drew Darade back to Lonar in August 2011. First, the tragic death of his parents in an accident in 2008. Second, a chance meeting in 2010 with APJ Abdul Kalam at a seminar in Chicago, US, when the former president urged him to join politics. And last but not the least, advice from his spiritual guru, Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. On his return, Darade connected with Arvind Kejriwal's India Against Corruption movement. Intent on creating a model of development in Lonar which can be replicated by other villages, Darade contested the zilha parishad election in February as an independent with the slogan `Now The Change Is Certain' and won with 51 per cent of the votes. Besides the regular health-hygiene-development issues, Darade has taken on powerful local politicians in Buldhana to recover loans they had secured illegally from the district cooperative bank. The change Darade wanted is slowly happening, and it's to his credit that he himself is an instrument of that change.

"Shankar's boss asked me to warn him not to quit the job. He said Shankar was a hopeless dreamer." -- Divya Bhalla
option was to explore other alternatives. In 2001, Bhalla resigned from SBI to spend more time with their daughter. She took up work with Akanksha, an NGO working for streetchildren in Mumbai. Shankar, too, was mulling over a career shift when McKinsey China offered him a chance in 2004 to take charge of its public health division in Hong Kong. They moved but the work was hectic. Shankar realised that taking a transfer to India would not solve the problem. He put in his papers and the family moved to Thiruvananthapuram in 2006. penses and enables them not only to spend time with their daughter, but also help scores of less fortunate children.

GURUSPEAK "Balasaheb is a committed public representative. He comes to me with various ideas on development and is vocal about implenting various schemes."
BHASKAR MUNDE,
Divisional Commissioner, Aurangabad
by Kiran Tare

GURUSPEAK "Many corporate
groups had wanted to hire people with disabilities, but could not find appropriate candidates. Shankar and Divya provided critical management prowess to fill this gap."
G. VIJAYARAGHAVAN,
Director, National Institute of Speech and Hearing
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

"Until we have good people in politics, the system cannot be changed."
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

54

INDIA TODAY  JULY 30, 2012

JULY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

55

the Romantics

special issue

"I realised how a business can be `tweezed'to have a social

MANISH JAIN 42 Owner of Shikshantar School, Udaipur
A "practical education" is what Manish Jain teaches students at Shikshantar. "I build social entrepreneurship in them," says the former investment banker. Jain graduated in economics and international development and completed his postgraduation in education from Harvard. He spent four years as an educationist with UNESCO and USAID in Africa and Russia before he moved to India. "I found that a student who does well in the classroom is called good, and one who fails is labelled a failure. I wanted to teach the latter category," he says. Real learning takes place outside schools, is the motto of Shikshantar. Under Shikshantar, Jain later set up Swaraj University, which imparts young people practical skills. "NGOs have become bodies which are only answerable to the agencies that fund them. I want to be answerable to my society," he says. He approaches individuals who show interest in his work and urges them to contribute with their skills or money. Jain encourages students, mostly those who have failed Classes X and XII, to pick up subjects of their own interest, which could be urban farming, filmmaking, theatre or even studying medicinal herbs. The students are provided basic exposure in their fields, after which apprenticeship is arranged with experts. Some of the young people Jain taught assist in his Dariyadil shop that operates on a barter system, and a rooftop café, Halchal, where customers can bring their own raw material to cook, join the common kitchen to learn how to make oil-free food, and eat dinner prepared by themselves or by someone else. His wife Vidhi works with him in Shikshantar. Their daughter, Kanku, 10, is home-schooled. Jain says he will not send her to a regular college, not even a correspondence one. He says that degrees don't account for the fact that jobs are available for only 7 per cent of the country's young population, and a degree fetches salaries in the job market that aren't even adequate to repay the educational loan. For him, it's informal all the way.

impact.This is what motivated me to work in the NGO sector."
In 2008, Thakkar decided he wanted to make his mark in the developing world. Greenlight Planet's flagship product, the Sun King portable solar lantern, priced at Rs 1,200, has now found many takers in the rural interiors of Odisha, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. "Moving back to India was not just about building a new business in a foreign country. It was also about adapting to a new life and culture. There are two golden rules I have learnt in the past four years about working in the Indian rural development sector. Be flexible, as nothing will go the way you plan it. But be rigid when it comes to values and ethics," says Thakkar.

MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

ANISH THAKKAR 28
CEO, Greenlight Planet Inc, Mumbai
Working to provide solar home lighting for 1.6 billion people in 22 countries across Africa and Asia came with its share of challenges. "But the way our solar lamps have changed livelihoods for the better made the initial struggle worth it," says Anish Thakkar, 28, CEO, Greenlight Planet Inc, Mumbai. In 2005, Thakkar and two other students from the University of Illinois signed up for a summer project with the nonprofit society Engineers Without Borders. Their mission: To set up a biodiesel generator in Odisha. It was meant to generate

GURUSPEAK "Manish believes
in people's knowledge and strives to bring it to the fore. He broadens learning through non-institutionalised ways."
NITIN PARANJAPE,
Media Activist
by Rohit Parihar

electricity to operate farm implements and increase agricultural production. But when Thakkar returned six months after the project's completion to check on its progress, he saw that the generator was not only being used to power farm implements but villagers had wired it to homes for electricity purposes. This brought Thakkar face to face with the energy crisis facing India and inspired him to work on sustainable environment-friendly affordable lighting, "energy which everyone can afford". He started off in September 2007 and kept at it until Greenlight Planet was founded in 2009.
VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Born to a Maharashtrian mother and Gujarati father, Thakkar was raised in the US. While pursuing his bachelor's in electrical engineering at Illinois, he founded his first NGO, The Illini 4000 for Cancer, in June 2006. "I was inspired by Facebook back then. I realised how a business can be `tweezed' to have a social impact. This is what motivated me to work in the NGO sector. I work in areas I am interested in, such as energy and medical research, but at the same time I get to play my role in society," he says. In 2007, he completed his degree and went on to work as a researcher with Bioacoustics Research Labs in Illinois.

GURUSPEAK "Anish has proven
that if there is a will, there's a way. He was able to set up Greenlight Planet's operations in the challenging environment of Bihar and Odisha, even though he is an NRI."
MAYANK SEKHSARIA,
Co-founder,Greenlight Planet by Sonali Acharjee

ASHMEET KAPOOR 27
Founder of organic farming company I Say Organic, Delhi
The farmlands of Deoria in eastern Uttar Pradesh were an unlikely spot for engineer-turned-entrepreneur Ashmeet Kapoor, 27, to start his first venture. But for the Delhi boy, a socially conscientious venture scored over a commercially lucrative business idea. Kapoor graduated in engineering from the University of British Columbia, Canada, in 2008, and then completed a master's in entrepreneurship from Brown University, US, the next year. He was then working on a start-up venture, but left it and returned to India in 2010. Soon after, he took off on an 18-day train ride across the country to understand rural issues. After toying with concepts like water purification and electrification projects, Kapoor chose to focus on sustainable ideas in agriculture, for it could benefit both urban and rural India.

"I found that a student who does well is called good, and one who fails is called a failure. I wanted to teach the latter."

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

"Many farmers are underpaid and use chemicals that damage their health, their land and livelihood," he says. He set up I Say Organic, an entrepreneurial venture that supports organic farming, with an investment of Rs 65 lakh and chose Deoria as his site for a two-month-long experiment in farming. Its success spurred him to tie up with 50 farmers across Haryana and Himachal Pradesh to source organically grown fruits and vegetables and home deliver them in pockets of Delhi and Gurgaon. The farmers are even paid a premium of 25 per cent over the local market rate. "This model works both ways; the farmers are assured a market without middlemen and customers get easy access to organic foods that are usually restricted to the upper classes," says Kapoor. In March 2012, Kapoor made his

first sale. Just four months on, I Say Organic does weekly business of Rs 1 lakh, supplying up to 2,000 kg of produce to customers in south and central Delhi and parts of Gurgaon. "Changing people's lifestyle and getting them to order vegetables on the phone will take time but it's gradually happening," he says. He hopes to break even in the next few months and estimates a daily sale of 2,000 kg of organic vegetables by the year-end.

GURUSPEAK "Ashmeet is supporting organic farming and improving rural livelihoods by providing a market for farmers. I Say Organic practises fair trade and has a socially relevant business model."
SUNIL GUPTA,
Founder, Dharani Suphalam, a producers' cooperative society based in Sirsa, Haryana
by Aditi Pai

"The farmers are assured a market without middlemen and customers get easy access to organic foods."
JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

57

the Romantics

special issue
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

VAIBHAV GUPTA 30 OSD to Sachin Pilot, Minister for
Communications and Information Technology, Delhi
As an Officer on Special Duty to Sachin Pilot, Vaibhav Gupta has the ear of one of India's youngest and most energetic ministers. On a typical day, he's busy writing memos; briefing the minister on various issues; collating data for meetings; interacting with stakeholders on the minister's behalf and preparing him for interactions with the media as well as foreign delegations. Gupta says he'd always wanted a career that was intellectually challenging and contributed to public policy. He got on that track early. After attending Delhi Public School, Noida, he earned a scholarship to complete his A-levels at Shrewsbury School in the UK. In 2000, he won another scholarship from the Cambridge Commonwealth Trust to study economics at Cambridge University. Two years after graduating, he began a master's in international development and public policy from Georgetown University in the US. Gupta also spent three years working at the World Bank and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in Washington DC. The foreign exposure widened his perspective on global development issues, he says. Gupta's current job is exhausting, but he's thrilled at the opportunity. "Such opportunities are rare for young people who want to be involved in development or public policy in India," he says. He expected "a difficult ad-

MADHURAJOSHI 26 Research
associate,The Energy and Resources Institute, Delhi
Over 60 per cent of graduates from the London School of Economics opt to work with banks, consultancies or private firms in the first year after graduation. However, Madhura Joshi, 26, joined the MSc in international political economy course in 2009 with an entirely different motive. "I wasn't drawn to political consultancy. Instead, I was intrigued by research in the political economy of energy. Energy is what really drives the world today and I wanted to expand my understanding of the phenomenon." After completing her course in 2010, Joshi decided to return home and work with a research think tank. Choosing India over London was easy. "I have spent 25 years on Indian soil. A year abroad did not wipe away my con-

"I can now appreciate the challenges policy-makers face."

nection to the country," she says. Joshi joined The Gateway House think tank, an arm of the Indian Council on Global Relations, in Mumbai in 2010 as a research associate, working on natural gas management in India and BRICS group of countries. In 2011, she joined The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) in Delhi as a research associate. Joshi's current projects at TERI include research on energy security, governance and management. "Energy is a growing field in India and the opportunities for sector-specific research in the public sector and NGOs are aplenty. Working with the different aspects of energy governance has honed my research skills in a major way and also increased my awareness of the field," says Joshi. Politics and governance has long been a part of Joshi's academic career since the time she was doing her bach-

elor's in political science from St. Xavier's College, Mumbai. She went on to become the chairperson of the college's Political Science Association. "College gave me a solid grounding in politics and grew my interest in research work. I think it is important for youth to be aware of political issues and play their part in society. I have always tried my best to be a good social citizen," says Joshi.

GURUSPEAK "Madhura is an exceptionally committed and sincere worker. As a student she was always politically conscious. The most distinguishing factor about her is her ability to organise and delegate tasks effectively."
ARUNA SUNDRESH,
Head of the Department of Political Science, St. Xavier's, Mumbai
by Sonali Acharjee

"Working with different aspects of ener gy governance has honed my research skills and increased my awareness of the field."

MALLIKAAHLUWALIA 29
Consultant with the Ministry of Rural Development, Delhi
"Growing up in Delhi, I constantly saw poverty all around me. Even as a child, I felt the need to be a responsible citizen," says Mallika Ahluwalia, 29. Inspired by her grandfather, a retired IPS officer, and guided by a desire to make a social impact, Ahluwalia joined the rural development ministry as a consultant in February 2012. Her tryst with development and social policy began as early as 2001 when she joined Princeton University. "I spent my first summer in a physics lab trying to track the behaviour of atmospheric neutrino particles. I finally realised I needed to do something more `real'. That's when I decided to major at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs," says Ahluwalia. After graduating in 2005, she joined a United Nations World Food Progra-

VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

justment" since he was not from the Gupta's perspective on Government. "As an outsider, most people look at government functioning from a singular perspective. Working for the Government, I have been able to appreciate the challenges that policymakers have to face." Gupta recommends a stint in Government for young professionals. "They will develop a more nuanced understanding of the Indian economy and policy-making."

IAS. Two years in the job has changed

mme project to help manage food aid projects in Namibia for one-and-a-half years. Ahluwalia turned her focus on the intersection between private and public sectors when she opted for a dual MBA and master's in public administration and international development at Harvard University in 2009. Looking for ways to apply the rules of management and for-profit business models in the development space, she went to work with a farmer's cooperative in Uganda in mid-2011. "It was there that I realised that the development agenda must be owned and driven from within each community. It was time to come home," she says. Ahluwalia is

now associated with the Bharat Rural Livelihoods Foundation project of the rural development ministry, which seeks to trigger funding from NGOs and monitors usage of the same and leverages government funding across 170 tribal districts of the country. How has her experience of engaging with the Government been thus far? "I am lucky to

have worked with committed bureaucrats and inspiring mentors in the rural development ministry," she says. But what about the notorious red tape? "The same rules don't apply everywhere. One needs to respect the differences in work procedures. Remember that it's a marathon, not a sprint!"

GURUSPEAK "Mallika could have got any coveted job in the world. But she chose to come back to India and take on the challenges that most Indians only fulminate about in drawing rooms. I believe she is much more happy than she would have been had she been keying in memos in an MNC."
VIJAY MAHAJAN,
Chairman, BASIX Social Enterprise Group
by Sonali Acharjee

GURUSPEAK "Vaibhav came in as a generalist, but very quickly
grasped the critical issues the ministry is tasked with, and has adapted well to working in the Government."
SACHIN PILOT,
Communications and Information Technology Minister
by Pierre Mario Fitter

"It was in Uganda that I realised that the development agenda must be owned and driven from within each community."
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

58

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

59

the Romantics
for the Public, Bangalore

special issue
leviation: Natural resource management, education, health-hygiene-sani tation, livelihood, capacity building, infrastructure, resource mobilisation and renewable energy. The KGVK model trains farmers in agricultural practices and water management, and works to empower women. A rural BPO in Ranchi services overseas clients. Mahesh has a 12member core group at his headquarters in Ranchi that comprises professionals from World Bank, UNDP and IITs. KGVK's list of donors includes the Jharkhand government, the Sir Ratan Tata Trust and the World Bank. The organisation has now expanded into Bihar.

SANJANAJANARDHANAN 25 Ashoka Innovators
Empathy, according to Sanjana Janardhanan, 25, is not putting yourself in the other person's shoes. "It is opening yourself up to the world, it is communicating with the world,'' she says. Her enthusiasm for such empathy is boundless, as she seeks causes to champion, irrespective of who is mooting them. Her first project happened when she joined Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai in 2007. It was to educate Tamil migrants in Mumbai's Dharavi on HIV/AIDS. For the self-confessed "protected", convent-educated girl from Bishop Cotton in upscale Bangalore, it was a culture shock. "I had to educate 21-year-old men about safe sex. Some men got my phone number and would call at all hours, asking me to counsel them," Janardhanan says. "But I developed a thick skin and got on with the job." She has worked with the Maharashtra State Human Rights Commission, organising a feedback system for those who approach it; on Devadasi rehabilitation in Andhra Pradesh for Mothers Education Society, a local NGO; and documented statements of torture victims in Jammu and Kashmir for Jammu and Kashmir Coalition of Civil Societies. She has also been part of the civic campaigns of NGO Janagraha in Bangalore. The first signs of a social conscience and the consequent drive for social entrepreneurship surfaced during her media studies and communications degree from Bangalore's prestigious Christ College in 2006. "We made a film about child labour as the class project. We filmed some children on the streets and put them in the film without anyone's permission. That, I later felt, was wrong. It violated their rights," she says. The drive for theoretical underpinnings to her practical social work pushed her to study global media and communication at the London School of Economics in 2009. But she says she couldn't take a corporate job after that or even work with an international NGO. "It is easy to be sitting in an ivory tower and dictate policies. But there is no way you can reconcile what you do there with reality. I need to be aligned ethically and morally with what I do," she says. Ashoka Innovators for the Public, a privately managed platform for social entrepreneurship, has given Janardhanan the platform she wants--to be involved hands-on with those that cause the change.

ANAND RAVAL 28
Project manager, Gramshree, an NGO promoting artisans,Ahmedabad
Anand Raval, 28, returned to India in 2010 armed with a degree in management from Westminster College, UK. That's when he met Anar Patel, 41, in Ahmedabad. Patel reasoned with Raval that his skills could be put to best use in the social sector. Raval promptly joined Gramshree, an NGO of which Patel is the coordinator. Two years on, Raval is the mainSHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

MAHESH V., 31 CEO, Krishi Gram
Vikas Kendra, Ranchi
Three years ago, Mahesh V. returned to India armed with a master's in renewable energy from the University of Nevada and three years of work experience in the US, including a stint with the US Department of Energy. But after working for two years in the American consulting firm Corporate Executive Board's Gurgaon office, Mahesh wrestled with ennui. In the steel and glass of Gurgaon's Cyber City, everybody walked

the same and talked the same. In 2009, he kicked his job and toured the interiors of Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan. Today, Mahesh is the CEO of a Ranchi-based NGO Krishi Gram Vikas Kendra (KGVK), the Corporate Social Responsibility wing of the Rs 3,000-crore Usha-Martin Group. KGVK works in over 400 of India's poorest villages across seven districts in Jharkhand. The NGO has a unique Total Village Model that has identified eight key tipping points for poverty al-

RAJESH KUMAR

GURUSPEAK "Mahesh is certainly not a person who swims in a small pool. His heart is right at the bottom of the pyramid and he uses his expertise to convert corporate social responsibility into corporate social enterprise."
B.K. JHAWAR,
Founder and Chairman Emeritus of Usha Martin Group
by Sandeep Unnithan

"I have seen the KGVK model's impact on creation of prosperous and empowered communities."
H K RAJASHEKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

"No corporate job could have given me the contentment I am experiencing from my work at Gramshree."
stay of the Craftsroots Programme of Gramshree, opening an e-commerce website and an online purchase facility for artisanal products. The triumph of Raval's approach is manifest in the success of artisans like Babu Luhar, 50, from a village near Mehsana. Luhar, who had never sold brass pieces worth more than Rs 50,000 a year, has got a Rs 5 lakh order from a company that saw his work on the Gramshree website. "No corporate job could have given me the contentment I have now," says Raval.

NITHYAV. RAMAN 30
Project director,Transparent Chennai, an NGO working on the urban poor, Chennai
Nithya Raman had just finished her undergraduate degree in political science from Harvard University in 2003 when her parents, both IT professionals, decided to move from Boston to Chennai. She, too, returned, but chose Delhi instead of Chennai. She joined the South Asia Human Rights Documentation Centre, a human rights NGO, where she co-wrote a report for Amnesty International on the 20th anniversary of the Bhopal gas tragedy. She then joined the Hazards Centre, which deals with identifying and combating the "hazards" community and labour organisations face, as a researcher in 2004. This pushed her to pursue a master's in urban planning from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Boston. After her master's, Raman says she "had a goal to come back to Chennai and apply my degree here". She founded

GURUSPEAK "While Sanjana's
contribution in Ashoka leverages her expertise in communications, the key to her success lies in her ability to connect with people from all walks of life."
MANOJ CHANDRAN,
SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

Transparent Chennai in October 2010. Raman saw a gap in existing data about the city. "I realised that there was much less research on the issues of the urban poor as compared to the rural poor," she says. Today, Transparent Chennai collates data on civic issues in the city like access to services in slum settlements, accountability of local elected officials, and sanitation.

GURUSPEAK "It's remarkable
to see how Nithya has grown with Transparent Chennai. She had an idea, but managed to turn it into something concrete."
LALITHA KAMATH,
Assistant Professor, School of Habitat Studies at Tata Institute of Social Sciences

GURUSPEAK "Raval has helped
us realise our dream of running social sector initiatives with a professional touch."
ANAR PATEL,
Co-ordinator, Gramshree
by Uday Mahurkar

Diamond Leader for Framework Change, Ashoka Innovators
by Sowmya Aji

"I realised there was less research

by Lakshmi Kumaraswami

on the issues of the urban poor compared to the rural poor."

"It is easy to be sitting in an ivory tower and dictate policies. I need to be aligned ethically and morally with what I do."
JULY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

the Romantics

special issue

RAKSHITA SWAMY, 23 Consultant,
National Rural Livelihoods Mission, Delhi
When the minister insists on a glass door for his office, you know transparency is a serious concern. That's exactly what Rakshita Swamy is responsible for at the National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) of the rural development ministry. NRLM's aim is to mobilise India's 70 million rural poor households into self-managed institutions and facilitate increased access to their rights, entitlements and public services. Swamy is helping develop guidelines for social audits, community evaluation, easy-to-use grievance redressal mechanisms and processes for the disclosure of information and budget decisions. An alumnus of Delhi's Sanskriti School and Lady Sri Ram College, she went on to earn an MSc in social policy and development from the London School of Economics. "I was interested in learning about how poverty, development and policy are dealt with operationally in different countries," she says. "I want to contribute towards ensuring open and accessible platforms through which

people can participate in the schemes rolled out in their name," she adds. An internship with the Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan in Rajasthan when she was 19 gave her a first-hand feel of Ground Zero. Now with the Government for seven months, the first thing she has learnt is the need for patience. It takes time, she says, not because bureaucrats are lazy but due to administrative constraints. Swamy's job has taken her to Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Bihar and Rajasthan. "It's encouraging to see that people in Government are open to young people's ideas and suggestions and treat them as equals in consultations," she says.

GURUSPEAK "Rakshita, with her academic background and prior experience, is proving to be very useful in designing the transparency and accountability tools for the National Rural Livelihoods Mission."
NITA KEJREWAL,
Director, National Rural Livelihoods Mission
by Pierre Mario Fitter

"I was interested in learning about how poverty, development and policy are dealt with operationally in different countries."

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

JULY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

the Romantics
GAURAV CHIPLUNKAR 26
Researcher with J-Pal, that evaluates government programmes, Delhi
"When I joined Cambridge in 2010 for an MPhil in economics, I wasn't sure what I wanted to do. But I did know what I did not want to do. I had no inclination towards the banking and corporate sector, having seen enough people unhappy in that line of work. It

special issue
fessionally and personally," he says. Having worked on issues of rural finance and crop insurance at the UN's Food & Agricultural Organisation in 2008, Chiplunkar decided against joining the bureaucracy. "Development should be about people. I wanted to work free of strict rules and policies," he says. His focus shifted to working with independent NGOs. He had spent the summer of year on, he remains enthused with the dynamics of development research in the country. His present research looks into investigating issues of voter choice and politician behaviour in Delhi slums. "It has been an eye-opening and humbling experience. Visiting slums and watching people fill water from leaks in pipes gives you a whole new perspective of the city. At the end of the day, contributing to rural develCHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

"Contributing to rural development in India shows you how you can positively impact someone's life."
was at Cambridge that I found my true calling," says Gaurav Chiplunkar, 26. Chiplunkar spent little time debating his decision to move back home in 2011, despite having spent three years in the UK, first finishing a master's in development economics from the London School of Economics from 2008-10 and then the MPhil from Cambridge. "Working on development issues in Europe seemed artificial to me. There is a greater need for development researchers in Asia. I realised it was time to apply what I had learned. Moving back to India was a great decision for me both pro2009 in the UK working with the New Policy Institute on a research project that studied the impact of the National Health Service on consumer decisions. "The project gave me fantastic practical exposure on the impact that the public sector can have on lives and livelihoods. I realised all the more that I wanted to research on the same issues in India," explains Chiplunkar. Chiplunkar has been a research associate with the New Delhi-based Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Labs (J-Pal), an organisation which evaluates government economic development programmes, since 2011. A opment in India shows you the extent to which you can positively impact someone's life," says Chiplunkar.

GURUSPEAK "Gaurav, besides his academic prowess, is a keen leader with a great sense of calm about him; he is a great judge of people and situations. He is a fantastic sparring partner on diverse topics, from economics to cricket."
ANUBHAV MOHANTY,
Associate Consultant,Pricewaterhouse Coopers, London.(Chiplunkar worked with him during his dissertation at LSE.) by Sonali Acharjee

64

INDIA TODAY  JULY 30, 2012

