NET FLUX
tweet tweet

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video

app alert

Winning Formula
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on July 16: The top trend had people tweeting about their favourite music albums--from 21 by Adele to The Dark Side of the Moon by Pink Floyd. People discussed telltale signs when someone is lying. Answers ranged from `When your pupils are dilated' to `When your occupation reads politician' . Netizens tweeted about the `typical Indian mentality' in assuming that engineers were the smart ones and calling a girl who drinks, one with `loose morals' . Jaswant Singh being the unanimous choice for vicepresident of the BJP-led NDA camp created ripples. Fans of actor Katrina Kaif wished her on her birthday on July 16, causing her name to trend.
#Favourite Albums
5,86,191
COOKIE MONSTER SINGS TO CALL ME MAYBE

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for those who are single, ones who are organised and those who love sport. Make your smartphone smarter with these apps. BBC Olympics will give you information on the 2012 London Olympics, including live streaming and results. Brewster will take your contacts from across various social networks and bring them under one folder. RelationBook tells you which of your Facebook friends are single, to help you make the first move.

This week, a video showing `Cookie Monster' from the popular TV show Sesame Street singing to Call Me Maybe; an advertisement depicting the relationship between child Olympic athletes and their mothers; and The Dark Knight Rises trailer narrated by the American comic fictional character Pee-wee Herman went viral.
Cookie Monster sings Call Me Maybe

5.8 million views
Child Olympic video

1.7 million views
The Dark Knight Rises trailer

7,31,186 views
* Views from when videos were uploaded

star of the week
REBECCA

4,46,873

#Typical Indian Mentality
2,56,020

#Jaswant Singh
70,520

Tea Break
Lakshmi Rebecca, 31, host of the online chat show Chai with Lakshmi, gives the world positive stories on a weekly basis.The Bangalore-based host interviews celebrities and entrepreneurs and calls her show .The "urban, sensible and insightful" former researcher with Discovery and BBC started her show in March 2011, and has over 2,00,000 fans.

inter tales

#I KnowYou Are Lying When

A BOYWOOS A GIRL IN A CHICKIPEDIA EPISODE

#Happy Birthday Katrina Kaif
35,820

Boy Talk

web tips
Want more Twitter followers than Lady Gaga? Follow these tips and that might just happen: Tweet at regular intervals and engage your followers. Tweet about things that matter. Nobody cares about what you ate for breakfast. If you are serious about tweeting, add your username on your business card.

*Figures denote number of followers

news now
What caught the attention of people on the World Wide Web Marissa Mayer, 37, an engineer, has been appointed Yahoo's new CEO after a 13-year tenure at Google. The number of administrators managing Wikipedia has come down to eight,from 67 seven years ago.

Chickipedia, a new web series on YouTube, claims to teach you everything about relationships. Produced by Disney UTV Bindass, the series is aimed at "helping men understand women" . Each episode features a nameless boy and a girl and portrays a variety of weirdonet situations--from the girl who Bob Russell, a 66-year-old American wants to change her boyfriend, who lost an Austin-Healey 3000, his to the girl who has marriage favourite car, in 1967, found it on eBay, on her mind.Although the the online auctioning site, after 45 years. show comes across as French fashion house Yves Saint Laurent has sexist, it already has launched a limited edition eyeshadow palette over 5,00,000 inspired by Facebook.The colours include viewers. bright blue, white, black and lavender-grey.

