UP FRONT

ASHIS NANDY

SUICIDE AND THE INDIAN PEASANT
t one time suicide had a simple geographical profile in autonomous, self-willed peasantries along with its counIndia. Apart from random suicides, a large number of terparts in Russia and China--in response to the loss of them took place in Saurashtra in Gujarat and those agency during the last five decades. It is obvious that we are seeing the end of a 4,000-yearfigures were often compared with that of Scandinavia, the most suicide-prone area in the world then. There were a old tradition and the lifestyles organised around it. This number of small psychiatric and epidemiological studies on too is, to borrow from Indira Gandhi's famous diagnosis of the possible causes of these suicides and they were duly pub- corruption in India, a global phenomenon and we can do nothing about it. The unspoken official advice is to stay lished in professional journals. Strangely, once social researchers and journalists away from the romantic, nostalgia-laden pastoralists began to point out in the 1960s and 1970s that in addicted to mourning the demise of the agricultural Saurashtra, the suicides usually had a rather sordid back- lifestyle. Officially, the Indian peasant, for good or for ground and were mostly instances of young wives being worse, is becoming redundant, obsolete and disposable. But can one really ignore the role that the agricultural induced or forced to commit suicide, the suicide rates began to fall and the subject went out of the pages of news- lifestyle has played in India as a necessary counter-player papers and news magazines after a while. Probably the of modern India and as a cultural vector that has given this bad publicity made it dangerous to push young women in society its distinctiveness? Is it only an accident that both the family towards self-destruction; probably they discov- Gandhi and Tagore sought to include in their visions of a desirable society a strong presence of the pastoral, at least ered more inconspicuous ways of killing their wives. Suicide re-entered Indian public life in the 1980s and as a concept? Can anyone forget the three-fifth of Indians 1990s. At first, newspapers began to report cases of suicides who still depend on agriculture directly or indirectly? I suspect that the long shadow of this new epidemic of every week as if they were isolated instances. Only some much-maligned NGOs, stray movements for sustainable de- suicides falls on some of the apparently inexplicable velopment and organic farming, and some brave critics of features of Lancet's data on India and perhaps even China. Green Revolution, at the time a sacred cow of India's polit- Both these societies are seeing an implosion of their ical and scientific establishment, began to sing a different cultural systems and erosion of their civilisational values. tune. They pointed out that most of these cases involved And that does take a heavy psychological toll. I also believe peasants. They also claimed that this time it was a full- that the pockets of desperation we see in India are a feafledged epidemic and had broken out not in the poor, ture not only of our agricultural sector but also our tribal agriculturally backward states like Bihar and Uttar communities that have been, from puranic times, a necesPradesh, but in states where agriculture was being success- sary counterpoint to our `high' culture. They, too, now find fully modernised, to the applause of well-educated, urban themselves jettisoned as so many avoidable encumbrances. To write off such large sections of the people is not easy; Indians committed to the idea of fully industrialised agriculone needs strong psychological defences ture. There are estimates that by now, to do so. No wonder the high incidence of roughly 2,00,000 peasants have killed SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com suicides in recent years do not disturb themselves in the last two-and-a-half the newspaper-reading, televisiondecades. A large majority of them are watching Indians. And psychiatrists deal from Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, with things like depression and self-esKarnataka, Punjab and Haryana. teem, not desperation and agency. They There has been little public anguish do not recognise that the obverse of the over the epidemic. The whole thing is large pockets of desperation are the exseen as a `normal' price paid for panding pockets of narcissism in modern progress and modernisation. Once India, from within which the desperation again some psychiatrists and social scilooks like the cultivated discontent of a entists have written on the subject in handful of maladjusted individuals. This professional journals. A few of them narcissism creates a hermetically sealed have even connected the suicides to the world, real or virtual, ruled by the princhanging profile of psychiatric illnesses ciples of perpetual youth, perpetual conin India, which shows that depression has become the biggest problem in the Officially, the Indian peasant, nectivity and perpetual entertainment. From that world the pockets of desperacountry. Even fewer have been those for good or for worse, is tion and suicide are very far indeed. who have explored the desperation that becoming redundant, has pushed the Indian peasantry--once obsolete and disposable. one of the world's most resilient, Ashis Nandy is a social psychologist

A

10

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

