HEALTH

by DAMAYANTI DATTA

FIVE BAD HABITS TO BREAK
Whether you are hard-pressed for time or laidback, poor health habits can harm you
SHRIYA PATIL SHINDE/www.indiatodayimages.com

DON'T BINGE ON COFFEE
THE HABIT Caffeine increases
your heart rate, raises your blood pressure, irritates your stomach and brings on an acid reflux. However, coffee can also elevate your mood, says a study published in the Archives of Internal Medicine in May 2012.

DON'T BRUSH
RIGHT AFTER MEALS
THE HABIT Here's some
good news for slobs and slackers--Don't worry if you have not been brushing your teeth right after a meal. Scientists say it can damage the enamel of your teeth by driving food acids deeper into your dentin, the layer behind your enamel which provides support to it. The research was reported by the US Academy of General Dentistry in June.

DON'T SKIP BREAKFAST
THE HABIT Skipping breakfast triggers
off an unhealthy cycle.Your system slows down to conserve energy and to store calories. This affects your metabolism and the ability to concentrate.As a result, you tend to overcompensate by eating more at lunch. Studies in the American Journal of Epidemiology show that breakfast-skippers are more likely to be not just overweight, but obese.

THE FIX Three
cups a day is a reasonable amount. Try to avoid it late in the day. It takes up to seven hours to metabolise caffeine. A late cup can also keep you up at night.

THE FIX Eat a balanced diet of protein, fat and
carbohydrates within two hours of waking up.

THE FIX Don't brush your teeth within 20 minutes of a meal.

THE ART OF ANGER MANAGEMENT
THE HABIT If you are prone to anger, it doesn't help to hear
"practise self-control" . But for the last decade or so, psychologists have been experimenting with new ways of manipulating self-control. Now, an article in Directions in Psychological Science, March 2012, shows that self-control and aggression are closely linked.

THE FIX Practise self-control just as you would practise on the piano. In learning piano, people also use their non-dominant hand. Do the same: Use the mouse of your computer, stir your coffee or open doors with your weaker hand. Notice the difference after two weeks. People who practise this are known to control their aggression better.

DON'T TAKE SLEEPING PILLS TOO OFTEN
THE HABIT It's not worth the risk. A study published in the British Medical Journal Open in February this year found that anyone taking sleeping pills twice a month is four times more likely to die in the next two-and-a-half years than someone taking none at all. THE FIX Melatonin, the hormone produced by the brain, has something to do with our sleep cycle. It is produced in our body through the night and tapers off in the morning. Using melatonin as a sleeping aid has not been clinically approved. But Japanese researchers in May found that laughing a lot in the evenings causes the body to produce more melatonin. That means better sleep. No harm trying.
56

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

