Mail

Trapped in a Corner
JUNE 25, 2012

Sonia Gandhi is outflanked by a Mulayam-Mamata revolt that could destroy UPA 2

K. CHIDANAND KUMAR,

Bangalore

All for the President
History is proof that the election of the president, by and large, is a benign issue ("Trapped in a Corner", June 25). The way Mamata Banerjee used Facebook to seek support for Abdul Kalam was amazing or rather amusing, which shows her political theatrics. She made it chaotic, lost the tactical battle against Sonia Gandhi and, thus, brought disrepute to herself. As Abdul Kalam has rightly declined to contest the election, UPA 2's choice, Pranab Mukherjee, has become the frontrunner for the august office. One hopes he or any other prospective president will play a decisive role in an era of coalition governments and brighten office's role in Indian democracy.
SANJIV GUPTA, Australia

Lucknow Lifeline
There is nothing wrong in giving special attention to your constituency and stronghold areas by bringing investment to it but it should not be at the cost of ignoring other areas ("Backyard Benefits", June 25). And the kind of mandate Akhilesh Yadav has got from his state, he needs to fulfil his promises but should ensure that he does not stretch it too far.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

Akhilesh is doing a good job by ushering in a new era of progress in Saifai, a stronghold of the Yadavs. He has many more ambitious projects lined up for the place, which will go a long way towards bringing back good times to a place that was grossly neglected by the Mayawati government for apparent reasons.
PANCHALI GUPTA, Kolkata

The events in the run-up to the presidential election have shown us the obstacles faced by coalition governments. Pranab Mukherjee will certainly be elected as president of the Indian Republic, maybe even unopposed. He will assume office at a time of great significance in today's coalition era. It is more than likely that the 2014 polls will also result in a hung Lok Sabha and the president then will have a greater role to play. Mukherjee has had a long and distinguished career and by virtue of being the seniormost UPA minister, he has held all important portfolios and, hence, has all the necessary credentials to hold this important office. He, most certainly, will be an asset as president after the 2014 General Elections.
MOTUPALLI S. PRASAD, Chennai

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

``

``

The only way Sonia Gandhi can see UPA 2 through to the end of its term is by playing to the tunes of Mamata Banerjee and Mulayam Singh Yadav.

Mail
It is high time that the president be elected directly by the people. It's appalling how the common man has no say at all in deciding the next president even as political parties continue to hold each other hostage over various issues. The office of the president is above petty politics--it is imperative that its election process is revamped so that the country has only the very best as president.
SHAIMA KHAN, Durg

35
judicial review that must be done expeditiously.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

25). Now it is for the people to make the most of the recent industrial investments in the state.
SANDIP SINGH, Jaipur

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
A U G U S T 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Criminal Clemency
A record 30 presidential pardons in just 28 months, of which 22 relate to multiple murders, which include gruesome crimes on children as well, is a stark reflection of not just a benign but a grossly indifferent and insensitive mind ("Who Has She Pardoned?", June 25). And worse, President Pratibha Patil is a woman. But having said this, equally relevant is the fact that the President has only acted on the advice of the Union Council of Ministers. And if most pardons defy logic and are tantamount to travesty of justice, it is obvious that political expediency and vote-bank politics have prevailed over the natural course of justice. Such an embarrassing imbalance between crime and punishment bordering on perverseness certainly calls for a comprehensive

Though the president enjoys absolute authority as far as capital punishment is concerned, the recent pardoning of 30 dreaded convicts forces one to wonder about the basis of this clemency. The people pardoned had committed heinous crimes. By granting them clemency, the President has indirectly cleared subsequent release of these convicts after some time.This development is very unfortunate for the families of the victims as only the most strict punishment would have given them some solace.
RANJIT SINHA, Kolkata

Setting the Record Straight
I would like to take this opportunity to clarify on the point that finds mention in your story "The Price of Vendetta", June 11, which reads: "He saw a rise in his assets from Rs 36 lakh in 2003-04 to Rs 356 crore in 2011." I would like to apprise you of certain facts. In 2003-04 our income was Rs 1.09 crore and 2008-09 it was Rs 4.79 crore. My fatherin-law passed away in 2009. Our net worth in 2003-04 was Rs 4.79 crore and Rs 48.67 crore in 2008-09. My husband (Jagan Mohan Reddy) had investments worth Rs 19.5 crore in various projects prior to 2003-04 itself--a year before my father-inlaw became the chief minister. It might be relevant to point out that our net worth had gone up due to the sale of our shares in Bharat Cement to the French cement major Vicat Cement in April 2010. This deal was finalised several months after the death of my father-in-law. It is only in the year 2010-11 that our net worth had grown to Rs 407.22 crore due to the sale of our cement shares.
Y. S. BHARATI, Chairperson, Sakshi Media Group

10+2+3: A Game of Numbers?
The new pattern of education which has become popular as the 10+2+3 scheme seeks to divide schooling into two stages of education, instead of the integrated stage it is at present. After a child enters kindergarten at the age of four, he will finish 10 years of schooling--the first stage of education--and take a secondary school certificate examination at the end of it. In the second stage he will take two more years to finish his high school certificate examination; in the third stage he will take a bachelor's degree at the end of three years at university. For the first time a uniform pattern is being introduced instead of different states following different systems. At present many states have 12 years of school, then two years of an intermediate degree followed by another two years for a bachelor's degree. In other states the pattern is 12 years of school and three years of college for a bachelor's degree. The new pattern was introduced last year in many states. Under this scheme, the first batch of students took their Class X examinations this year in April-May. Perhaps the most far-reaching educational reform which the new pattern seeks to bring out is to make science a compulsory subject almost from the first years of schooling right through till the end of the Class X. The main criticism being levelled is that schools do not have the necessary laboratories for it. by Neena Vyas
WILLTHE NEW SYSTEM HELP CHANGE THEIR PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE?

Jailhouse Rocks
The delineation of the lifestyle and modus operandi of the dons in Taloja Jail demonstrate how the high and mighty in India treat jail more as a safe holiday retreat than punishment ("The Gang Lords of Taloja Jail", June 25). The meek caretakers of the law and order system are to be primarily blamed for this hopeless situation.
CHITRA ANAND, Bangalore

Bihar on the Move
Credit goes to Nitish Kumar for putting Bihar on the path of industrial progress (Bihar Enters The Industrial Age", May

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

