The Big Story

UTTAR PRADESH
and Muslims erupted. June ended with another bout of communal riots, this time in Pratapgarh district. It started with the rape of a Dalit woman at Asthaan village, allegedly by a Muslim gang. The victim's family lodged a complaint with the police. No action was taken. With the help of other villagers, they then torched 46 houses belonging to Muslims. On July 12, it was the turn of Biswa in Sitapur district. This time, two factions of the Samajwadi Party (SP) clashed, following BJP'S victory in the municipal polls. The factions had put up their own candidates, sabotaging each other's chances allowing BJP to win. The clash soon assumed a communal tinge as one of the factions was led by a Muslim. On the night of July 21, Muslims came face-to-face with the Hindus, mostly Yadavs, after they were prevented from offering tarawi (late namaz) at the mosque in Mirzapur village, on the outskirts of Faizabad. A major confrontation was averted when the administration agreed to allow the procession in. But tension in the village lingers, as Hindus are determined to build a wall around a Hindu religious site within the mosque's periphery. A day later, in Bareilly, 380 km away from the village, a group of kanwariyas (followers of Lord Shiva) deliberately raised the volume of their processional music while passing by the Gol Kamra mosque in the Shahbad area of the city. Muslim youth, who had gathered there to break their roza (fast) in the evening, protested; there was stone-pelting from both sides. What unfolded afterwards buttressed the view that Uttar Pradesh was sitting on a communal tinderbox. Even as police swung into action in Shahbad, the district administration was taken by surprise over reports of simultaneous outbreak of clashes between the two communities at three places in Bareilly--Muth, the railway station, and Shyamganj, as well as in the adjoining township of Aonla. It was clear the violence had been pre-planned. Petrol bombs were hurled and shots fired from country-made pistols at
AKHILESH YADAV WITH MUSLIM CLERICS BEFORE THE 2012 ASSEMBLY POLLS

CRACKS IN THE CITADEL
By Devesh Kumar

Anger against Akhilesh Yadav rises in the wake of communal riots as Mulayam worries about alienating his Muslim vote bank
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

e cannot admit it in public, nor can he deny it in private, but four months after installing his 38-year-old son Akhilesh Yadav as chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, Mulayam Singh Yadav knows he has made a mistake. He should have held the reins instead, with Akhilesh as his deputy. "There is something lacking. I had given six months for the desired results... Four months have passed. The message that should have reached the masses is

H

still missing," he said, at a party meeting on August 1. Under his son, governance has gone into a tailspin. The worst aspect of the ensuing chaos is the dreaded return of communal riots. Muslims of Uttar Pradesh, who returned the Yadavs to power, are deeply disillusioned. This is the fastest rejection rate ever in this state's electoral history. In June and July, there were as many as five riots in the state. While four persons each were killed in Kosi Kalan near Mathura, and Bareilly, communal violence also took place at Pratapgarh, Faizabad and Sitapur,

sparking fears of a resurrection of the dark days of the early 1990s, when the demolition of the Babri Masjid in December 1992 triggered a sharp religious and social divide. The Kosi Kalan violence took place on a Friday, when a Hindu Jat youth used water meant for pre-prayer ablutions by Muslims, to wash his hands. As such incidents go, this would normally have led to no more than a mild altercation. It exploded like a fuel truck instead, fed by festering rumours and the suspicion that a Hindu girl had been raped. A pitched battle between Hindus

30

AP PHOTO

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

NEW

NEW

The Big Story UTTAR PRADESH
GAGAN JAIN MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Shyamganj. Four people, including three Muslims, were killed. Curfew was imposed on all the nine police station areas. Areas under five police stations continue to remain under curfew in the night at the time of writing this report. Mulayam is respected by the Muslims because he protected them during and after the Babri Masjid demolition. As a measure of their trust, he has earned the sobriquet "Maulana Mulayam". But his son is quite the opposite, and SP'S Muslim vote is rapidly slipping away. "There is a complete breakdown in the administrative machinery," says Afzal Ahmad Khan, a 70year-old retired Indian Army captain. "We had alerted the district administration about the trouble brewing in Mirzapur village. Not only did it not take notice, it even ordered the gate of the mosque to be locked, and deployed Provincial Armed Constabulary personnel at its entrance. Only the courts have power to order the locking of the gate of a place of worship," he argued. According to him, the administration not only failed to take any preemptive action, but also acted partisan. "In Pratapgarh, houses of Muslims in Asthaan village were burnt twice, but they kept sleeping," said Ahmad Ali, a retired lecturer at Faizabad's Government Inter College. "In the previous Assembly polls, over 80 per cent Muslims voted for SP. And this is what we get in return," he said. Akhilesh Yadav, say SP leaders, has an easy-going attitude towards work, and suffers from a short attention span. Party workers are bewildered with his propensity to go on holidays, and bidding goodbye to all official work after 6 p.m. Comparisons with Mayawati's track record in combating communal violence are inevitably made, even though a section of the Muslim community feel that four months is too short a time to assess a chief minister's performance. "These are early days yet, to assess the political fallout of this sudden spurt in anti-Muslim violence, but everyone is now saying Mayawati was better. She was a strong leader, even though she had insisted she did not need Muslim votes," argues Khalid, a mechanic from Meeranpur Katra in

(ABOVE) ASTHAAN VILLAGE IN PRATAPGARH, WHERE 46 MUSLIM HOUSES WERE TORCHED; A NEWLY CONSECRATED MOSQUE, THE SITE OF RIOTS IN MIRZAPUR VILLAGE, FAIZABAD

In the previous Assembly polls, over 80 per cent Muslims voted for SP.And this is what we get in return."
AHMAD ALI, Retired lecturer,
Government Inter College, Faizabad

" "

The CM has not bothered to visit riot-hit areas till now.He sent Azam Khan to Pratapgarh after the worst violence was over."
MOHD. ASHFAQ, Shopkeeper, Faridpur, Bareilly district

Shahjahanpur district. Akhilesh has not lost all the goodwill, though. "He is young and inexperienced, and should be given more time. But he'll have to pull up his socks soon, or SP will be in trouble in the 2014 elections," says Mohammad Shamim Qureshi, a homeopath from Rudauli, on the Barabanki-Faizabad border. Instead of grappling with the crisis, Yadav Jr seems disconnected. "He has not bothered to visit any of the riot-hit areas till now. He sent Urban Development Minister Azam Khan to Pratapgarh after the worst phase of violence was over. And PWD Minister Shivpal Yadav visited Bareilly only on July 29, a week after the riots," laments Mohammed Ashfaq, a 42-year-old shopkeeper from Faridpur in Bareilly district. Heightened expectations among the Muslims after SP'S stunning victory in the Assembly polls, and the state government's failure to address basic issues and fulfil its pre-poll promises, have led to a sense of letdown. "We know that reserving 18 per cent seats in government jobs will be difficult. But

they could at least take steps to regu- the month," he added. "The yatra began as an austere larise the jobs of 7,000 muallims tapasya (penance). It has now been (madrasa teachers)," says Ahmad Ali. A weak administration is being ex- trivialised, and often degenerates into ploited by mischievous elements. There a picnic. The Kanwariyas are mostly were reports that peeved with the de- from the poorer classes, but are these feat of its candidate in the Bareilly may- days accompanied by DJS who play bhaoral poll, which was bagged by the jans set to Hindi film tunes. The Hindu trading community arranges for their SP-backed I.S. Tomar, members of the Sangh, who were waiting for an oppor- food and shelter--it's an opportunity tunity, used the month of Shravana, for them to do good business," which sees the commencement of Chauhan adds. According to him, in Kanwariya yatra, to trigger the back- Shahbad, the police prevailed upon the lash, according to senior officials in the Kanwariyas to lower the volume of the music blaring from loudstate government. speakers in their procesThis year, points out sion before they reached D.S. Chauhan, IG (BarePEEVED AT the mosque, but they illy), a substantial part of BJP'S LOSS IN increased it the moment Kanwariya yatra coinBAREILLY'S they had crossed it, procided with the month of MAYORAL POLL, voking an altercation. Ramadan. "Earlier, the This year there was yatra was restricted to members of Mahashivratri. But this the Sangh used also a quantum leap in the number of Kanwayear, there has been the Kanwariya riyas, say district adminheightened religious acyatra to trigger a istration officials. "They tivity among the Hindus, backlash. travel 80 km to Kachhla who performed worship in Badayun district to on all four Mondays of

Bareilly to collect holy water from the Ganges and offer it at the seven Shiva temples in the city. It's very difficult for us to impose restrictions along the entire route. Our resources are already spread thin. The Kanwariyas have now been infiltrated with lumpen youth, often under the influence of alcohol. We've even confiscated marijuana and opium from them," says another senior official in Bareilly. Most of Bareilly's Hindu miscreants, interestingly, hail from the backward Lodh caste. Muslims are disillusioned with the government for its failure to ensure peace. "Events in Bareilly reflect the failure of this government, its police and administration," said Ittehad-eMillat Council founder Maulana Tauqeer Raza Khan, grandson of Aala Hazrat Maulana Ahmed Raza Khan, the founder of the Barelvi sect. Confronted with a Muslim backlash, Rajendra Chaudhary, spokesperson of the SP, defended the state government and its Chief Minister. "It's wrong to say that the Chief Minister has been aloof. He is keeping a close eye on the developments through his officials. He had sent ministers to assess the situation in Pratapgarh and Bareilly, and has directed his officials to draft a report on the factors that led to the riots," he told INDIA TODAY. He also promised that strict action will be taken on the basis of these reports. Attempts by SP leaders such as Azam Khan to position themselves as Muslim community leaders, have also been scoffed at. "There are three or four big faces in Akhilesh's team who claim to champion the Muslim cause. They may be leaders in their own Assembly segments, but they can't claim to represent the entire community in the state. They are only fulfilling their vested interests. The Chief Minister should have regular contact with the people, instead of using his ministers as intermediaries," says Afzal Ahmad Khan. With Lok Sabha polls less than two years away, time may be running out for SP in Uttar Pradesh. "If you can't execute your promises, give us justice at least," says Muid Ahmad, a farmer from Safdarganj in Barabanki. Akhilesh Yadav seems to be failing to do both. 

32

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

NEW

NEW

