Mail

The Storms of August
J U LY 3 0, 2 0 1 2

Mulayam Singh Yadav has repeatedly told his cadre to prepare for general elections in 2013: When will he strike?

Will there be a `storm of August' from Mulayam this monsoon session? He's as unpredictable as the three grand ladies of Indian politics; Mamata, Mayawati and Jayalalithaa.
A . S R I K A N TA I A H ,
Bangalore

Time Running Out
The Congress-led Government will have a tough time during the riotous month of August ("The Storms of August", July 30). Mulayam Singh Yadav is a seasoned politician and his aim is to grab maximum seats in the Lok Sabha. He will exploit the weak points of the Government and build a strategic bridge for early elections in 2013. There will be attacks from other political parties as well. The Government should quickly reshuffle the Cabinet, strengthen the administration and coordinate its efforts with allies and opponents. It should handle criticism with confidence and courage and take quick decisions. Rahul Gandhi should play a greater political role, rather than an emotional one. The people

of India should vote to bring a single majority party to the Lok Sabha instead of a coalition.
R.D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Filthy Show
The molestation case in Guwahati raises questions about the efficacy of the existing laws in the country and the attitude of the Government. ("Politics of Filth in Divided Guwahati", July 30). The most bewildering fact is that obscurantist politicians have tried to politicise the issue instead of considering it as an absolute failure of the administrative system. Laws with provision for stringent punishment should be passed separately in order to deal with such crimes.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

With his son taking care of the home turf, Mulayam Singh Yadav has broader goals at the national level. However, his dreams depend on the collapse of UPA and the future of his party depends on the next coalition having weak foundations. Strange politics our politicians play.
K. CHIDANAND, Bangalore

The tragic incident that ruined a young girl's life is being turned into a political battle. It would bode well for the publicity of this case to be used instead to mobilise support and relief for the poor girl and help change the depraved mindset of the Indian male.
SHEKHAR YADAV, Pune

Mulayam Singh Yadav is probably one of the shrewdest politicians around. He knew that if he had to get a special financial package for Uttar Pradesh, he would have to support the Congress-sponsored candidate for the president's post, and he did it. Now that he has got the

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

NEW

``

``

Mail
package, it suits him to start distancing himself from the Congress and wait for the opportune moment, wherein he would project himself as the true messiah of the poor and pull the carpet from beneath the Congress's feet. It's now just a matter of time.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

35
the formation of the state, have treated Mumbai as no more than a milch cow. They have also amassed huge amounts of ill-gotten wealth, as reflected in the scams that they have allegedly been involved in. Their interest in infrastructure development, if any, was reserved primarily for their native areas. The initiative for Mumbai's development was taken up only during Shiv Sena rule, through the construction of flyovers as well as the Mumbai-Pune Expressway. One only hopes that the political strength that the Thackerays derive from their possible reunion is utilised in the right way to spruce up Maximum City.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

done and the village goes too far along the path of oppression for it to be rescued. It seems that despite the importance given to educating the youth, their education has gone to waste, since so many men of the village actively support such backward decrees.
SAMEER KUMAR, Ranchi

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
S E P T E M B E R 1 6 - 3 0, 1 9 7 7

Politics of Instability
The approaching polls (due in February 1978) to the Legislative Assembly in Maharashtra presents a marked resemblance to the Lok Sabha polls in March, which toppled the Congress government at the Centre. Election campaigns of both the Janata Party and the Congress are in full swing, with a spate of demonstrations and counterdemonstrations being organised by the rival camps. The Janata Party got the ball rolling with what is referred to as the "rolling pin march", on August 31, in which an estimated 5,000 women, sponsored by the Janata Party, staged a demonstration against the failure of the state government to contain price rise. The morcha also demanded the resignation of chief minister Vasantrao Patil and his ministry. The Congress party swiftly retaliated with a countermorcha on the same day, with the Congress Seva Dal protesting against the failure of the Central government to check price rise, and expressed full support for the leadership of the chief minister. For the Congress, it seems that old habits die hard. The Congressbacked morcha held on September 7 saw over 3,000 women being transported to Azad Maidan. Weeping children shouted well-rehearsed slogans like " Why the rolling pin morcha in Bombay and not in Delhi?"; "Janata Party is full of crooks"; and "Atrocities on Harijans is the behaviour of Janata Party".
JANATA PARTY DEMONSTRATION IN BOMBAY DEMANDING RESIGNATION OF CHIEF MINISTER V.R. PATIL

Quintessential Hero
There will be no match for Rajesh Khanna in Bollywood and there can be no other actor of his calibre ("The Original Superstar", July30). He had an inimitable style and set new standards as far as acting and fashion are concerned. Who can forget those memorable films such as Aradhana, Do Raaste, Kati Patang and Amar Prem? His death is a huge loss to the world of cinema. Kaka, as he was popularly known, sparked a frenzy never seen before and never since. He was a superstar in the truest sense.
MAKESH KAPASI, Delhi

Change Agents
The story on young entrepreneurs who left their lucrative careers abroad to return to India to follow their dreams was a captivating one ("They Have a Dream," July 30). They chose to return to India to work for social welfare and development. Their satisfaction levels are much higher as they are doing what they love to do. Their current dreams are more precious than the foreign dreams that they left behind. This is truly a lesson for those who are keen on unconventional career choices. The story was an eye-opener for many.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Misplaced Pride
The new edicts banning women under 40 from using cellphones or even venturing out alone are bizarre in their incongruity with the "pride" of the village (Asara), their co-educational Muslim Inter College, founded in 1924 ("In Asara, Life Stops Before 40", July 30). These measures seem to have been taken not to protect the women of the village but to keep the strong patriarchy in place by blocking out any avenues of independence for women. One can only hope that the incumbent panchayat head will be able to reverse these decisions before too much damage is

Happy Reunion
It is in the interest of Mumbai ("Truce Within Parivar", July 30) that truce indeed prevails within the Thackeray parivar. The estranged cousins, Raj Thackeray and Uddhav Thackeray, have shown a willingness to join hands and bury their differences. Other politicians from the Congress and NCP, who have been at the helm of Maharashtra politics since

Not in the Red
The story "Who Switched Off Power" (July 30) mentioned NTPC as running at a loss of Rs 25,439 crore. NTPC is a Maharatna PSU of the Government, with profit after tax of Rs 9,224 crore in 2011-12, net sale of over Rs 60,000 crore as well as total revenue of Rs 64,830 crore.
K.M. PRASHANTH, DGM (CC), NTPC LIMITED

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

