Special Report POWER CRISIS

INDIA'S DARKEST HOURS
Former Union power minister wasted his six-year tenure. Irresponsible states have only compounded the power crisis.
By Dhiraj Nayyar

COMMUTERS AT THE RAJIV CHOWK METRO STATION IN DELHI DURING THE BLACKOUT ON JULY 30

t can only happen in UPA. Hours after Union Power Minister Sushilkumar Shinde presided over the most extensive power cuts in Indian history, affecting an estimated 670 million people over 16 long hours of complete blackout in the last two days of July across north and east India, he was promoted to the coveted job of Union home minister. The country should be seriously concerned about Shinde's elevation. As home minister, he will have to anticipate and prevent complex terrorist plots hatched against India, based on what is at best patchy intelligence information. As Union power minister, Shinde failed to anticipate and prevent a massive collapse of three of India's five national power grids despite having all the definitive information about the impending catastrophe. Shinde was either asleep at the wheel, or displayed extremely poor judgment, even as the warning lights flashed brightly in front of him. Shinde, who has been power minister for over six years, knows that the country suffers from power deficit at all times. By the Government's own estimates, presented

I

in the Economic Survey in March 2012, the difference between supply and demand of electricity is around 8 per cent, which rises to a little over 10 per cent in peak period. Shinde also knew that the demand for power goes up sharply if the monsoon rains are deficient. That the monsoon is seriously deficient in the months of June and July is a fact that the minister ought to have known. He would also know that the states of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, now being blamed by the Centre for the power crisis, draw more electricity from the Central pool than usual if the monsoon fails because farmers need the power to run pumps to water their fields. Data from the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) for the month of July shows that all three states, along with Rajasthan, had been over-drawing power beyond their allocated quotas from mid-July, at least two weeks before the grid collapsed. There was plenty of time to discipline the erring states. But Shinde's power ministry did little, other than issue a letter of warning on July 12. Shinde was blasé when asked for an explanation as he demitted office. "I have briefed PMO. In US, light (electricity) does not come for four days, here we

Special Report POWER CRISIS
got it (restored) in a matter of hours. People should appreciate how work is done at the grid." Shinde's engineers may have been efficient in restoring power, but it was Shinde who allowed the collapse to happen. An inquiry committee, appointed by Shinde, will now pinpoint the exact reasons that led to such a massive collapse, a first since 2001. Sources in the power ministry suggest that the overloading happened at transmission lines somewhere between Delhi and Agra, and Agra and Gwalior. That puts the needle of suspicion firmly on Uttar Pradesh, even though Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan were also drawing beyond their quotas when the grids collapsed. Uttar Pradesh's power authorities believed they could get away because Shinde's ministry has not strictly enforced any penalty for such indiscipline. Unfortunately, the financial penalty, even if imposed, may not have been a deterrent. According to existing rules, states are fined Rs 1.65 per kilowatt-hour (kWh) that they overdraw. The price of electricity traded on open exchanges is around Rs 9 per kWh. Hence from the cost point of view, it makes sense for states to violate grid discipline and pay a penalty. CERC had, in March 2012, suggested that financial penalties for grid indiscipline be increased, but the power ministry is yet to decide on those recommendations. The sensible solution would be to raise penalties and move to a system where states have to pay in advance for the electricity they buy from the Central pool. There is another, more drastic solution that Shinde could have deployed--he could have ordered habitually errant states to be cut off from the central grid. Political weakness ensured this never happened. "Can you realistically imagine Shinde cutting off power to Mulayam Singh Yadav's Uttar Pradesh?" says an official in the power ministry. The Congress has usually been timid in front of its allies. Especially now, when it depends on Mulayam for its survival. Shinde has had six years in office to bridge the growing gap between demand and supply of power, but his record of achievement has been abysmal. According to government statistics, between 2006 and 2007, and 2011 and 2012 (also Shinde's tenure in office), capacity addition to the power sector grew at just over 8 per cent per year. However, actual electricity generation over the same period grew by just 2.5 per cent per year. So, while Shinde presided over a reasonably impressive 50 per cent increase in India's generation capacity, he is also responsible for a very poor 17 per cent increase in total electricity generation.

POWERLESS IN THE COUNTRY
A vicious cycle that must be broken by states PROBLEMS SOLUTIONS
Grid indiscipline States draw much more than their allocation from Central pool, leading to breakdowns in the grid. Insufficient power generation There is a huge gap between installed capacity and actual electricity generation. Transmission and distribution losses An average of 30 per cent of electricity generated is lost because of theft and poor infrastructure. Bankrupt SEBs are no incentive for private sector With losses of around Rs 1 lakh crore, most SEBS can't afford to buy power at market prices from private producers. Low tariffs for consumers Governments supply power at low cost to regular consumers and give free power to key groups like farmers. Enforce grid discipline Increase quantum of penalties for violation. Make states pay for power before they can draw it. Ensure coal supply Remove environment regulations which forbid new coal mining in large forest areas. Privatise SEBs Government-run firms have little incentive to curb losses. In states where they are privatised, losses are much lower. Restructure debts of SEBs Write off debts, but strictly on the condition that state electricity boards are subsequently privatised. Raise tariffs Empower independent regulators in states to periodically raise power tariffs, irrespective of the Centre's stand.

he main problem is the lack of availability of coal to power India's thermal power stations. Around 65 per cent of India's total power generation is dependent on coal. This dependence increases when the monsoon is bad. Take the case of the Anpara thermal power project in Sonbhadra, Uttar Pradesh. The total power generation potential of the two plants located in this project is 1,630 MW. In June and July, Anpara generated power at an average of 1,300 MW daily, more than 20 per cent below its full capacity. A senior official of Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation, who is associated with this plant, says the shortfall in generation is because of unavailability of coal. "Anpara needs 25,000 metric tonnes of coal every day. But this summer, Coal India has provided 20,000-21,000 metric tonnes coal daily," says the official. There is currently a coal shortage of 85 million tonnes in India. Coal India Limited has consistently argued that the environment ministry's decision to designate large tracts of forest land as

T

A STREET IN KOLKATA DURING THE OUTAGE ON JULY 31
AP

no-go areas for coal mining has meant that they are unable to enhance capacity. As environment minister, Jairam Ramesh refused to make any concessions to the cause of infrastructure and industry. The Prime Minister, in a style typical of UPA, promoted Ramesh as Cabinet minister for rural development to ease him out of environment in July 2011. By then, Ramesh had virtually shut down new coal mining, something his successor Jayanthi Natarajan has failed to reverse. Coal India and its boss, Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal, must also share the blame. According to some experts, Coal India can mine in areas which are not designated no-go but since it is a cash-rich monopoly, it has little incentive to act. Jaiswal has done little to prod the management of Coal India and has made

THREE VILLAINS Poor decisions and flawed policies have had a role to play in the worst power crisis
SUSHIL SHINDE In his six-year tenure as power minister, he added 50 per cent in generation capacity but only 17 per cent in actual electricity generation.
28
INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

JAIRAM RAMESH In his two-year tenure as environment minister between 2009 and 2011, he blocked all new coal mining with demarcation of no-go areas.

SRIPRAKASH JAISWALIn his two-year tenure as coal minister, he failed to reform Coal India or end its monopoly.Shortage of coal is over 80 million tonnes.

no move to allow competition to it. Imported coal is too expensive. Shinde, as power minister, failed to convince his colleagues the urgent need to enhance the supply of coal. According to one senior official who was present at an inter-ministerial meeting that featured Shinde, Jaiswal and Natarajan, Shinde made no impact. "He sat in complete silence, even as the others held forth," says the official. Needless to say, the meeting ended with no resolution of the crisis in coal supply. The Centre is the main villain in the power crisis, but states have performed important supporting roles. Bankrupt state electricity boards, still owned by governments in a majority of states, are an epicentre of the power crisis. The accumulated losses of state electricity boards are estimated to be around Rs 2 lakh crore, a massive 2 per cent of India's GDP. The causes of bankruptcy are well known. First, state electricity boards lose an average of 30 per cent of their supply, which is either stolen or leaks out because of poor infrastructure. Those boards which have been

privatised have reduced losses-- Kolkata's CESC for example has losses of under 10 per cent. The politics of free and subsidised power is an additional burden. In Uttar Pradesh, the supply cost of one unit of power is an estimated Rs 6 per unit. Consumers are charged only Rs 3.5 per unit. The Uttar Pradesh government under Mayawati had raised tariffs twice in her five-year tenure. The populist Akhilesh Yadav has ruled out any price hikes. In Tamil Nadu, another state with a perennial power crisis, there were no hikes in power tariffs for nine years until Jayalalithaa came to power in 2011. The failure to revise power tariffs also reflects poorly on independent power regulators. Says a senior official, "They are supposed to act independently of government but in most cases they do not." In Rajasthan, the state electricity board has run up losses of Rs 46,000 crore. The high accumulated losses mean that the state has no money to spend on its power network, and is barely able to keep power generation going. In Bihar, the state elec-

tricity board recorded a loss of Rs 1,600 crore in 2011, double of what it did in 2007. The Bihar government, under the seven-year rule of Chief Minister Nitish Kumar, has done nothing for power generation. It has failed to add a single megawatt to its generation capacity. Under the circumstances, bankrupt state electricity boards are in no financial state to buy power from private producers. State governments have little money to build new power generation units. Private power producers have no incentive to set up units in states. State electricity boards, therefore, end up overdrawing from their Central allocation. It is a vicious cycle which has not been broken by a majority of states. Shinde had six years to sort out all the problems of the power sector. Instead, he left office praising himself for an excellent performance, even as the public suffered the mess he presided over in UPA 1 and UPA 2.
with Amitabh Srivastava, Ashish Mishra, Rohit Parihar and Devesh Kumar

AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

NEW

NEW

