SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story

Log on, click, buy
THESE INTERNET START-UPS ARE COOLAND TOTALLY WORTH IT. HIT LIKE!

BY SHILPA MEHTA

BAG TO DIFFER
Tarini Nirula, 24, began selling her products online in 2011 and they have been a great success ever since. "My Facebook page, which also doubles up as an online boutique, serves as a great platform to showcase my designs," she says. Nirula's occasion-wear bags are hot sellers online, targeting fashion forward 20 and 30 year olds. "My label focuses on designs that are dynamic, yet functional and stylish," says the accessory designer. Calling her Facebook page her lucky charm, Nirula says, "I get calls every other day from design boutiques, and also buyers from outside India for bulk orders, which just goes to show how rapidly this online shopping trend is catching on." CHECK OUT facebook.com/TariniNirula COST Rs 2,000 to Rs 6,000
PRASHIN JAGGER

VIRTUAL CLOSET
Nirali Malji and Aneesha Dalal, both 21 years old, started off with the fashion blog cupcakesandcloset a year ago and as it received more and more hits, they realized the potential for something bigger. Slowly, they began retailing products online. "We started searching for products and put up our first collection on Facebook," says Malji. "Since it got a good response, we have been putting up a new collection every week," she adds. Sourcing stuff from countries such as Singapore and Malaysia, their product range consists of tops, dresses, blazers and accessories like bagsand scarves. "We keep ourselves updated on what's in and our weekly collection always has something trendy," says Dalal. The duo's Facebook page which has over 9,000 `Likes' provides you with an order form. You can also mail them the product code to make a purchase as well. CHECK OUT facebook.com/ cupcakesandcloset COST Rs 1,200 to Rs 3,000 for dresses, tops and blazers

DESI CHIC
With her blog acting as her retail outlet, Aditi Prakash, 35, started her label Pure Ghee Designs three years back. Prakash sells handcrafted fashion accessories which celebrate the diversity of Indian design--whether it's bags with ajrak fabric or kitschy sarongs.

Nirali Malji and Aneesha Dalal (right)

"We send buyers our catalog on request and they place orders from it," she explains. Admitting that the customers were reluctant to buy through her blog initially, she says, "Buyers were slow to come, but now we get regular orders, and word of mouth publicity on the internet also helps." "Trust builds over a period of time. You learn as you go along," she adds. CHECK OUT puregheedesigns. blogspot.com COST Rs 400 to Rs 6,000

