UP FRONT

BIBEK DEBROY

MASTER OFTHE BLEAK HOUSE
efore P. Chidambaram's name was announced as with them. Though one shouldn't pre-judge, Chidambaram's finance minister, in speculative conjectures, several home minister persona doesn't inspire a great deal of confinames did the rounds. The list included a couple de- dence in this case. There are also standardisation, harmoniscribed as non-political technocrats or specialists. If one does sation, removal of exemptions and taxing income. As finance the right thing by reforms, how does it matter whether the per- minister in UPA 1, Chidambaram has exhibited tendencies toson is political or non-political, as long as he possesses requi- wards taxing items that aren't income--Fringe Benefit Tax for site expertise? Preference for politicians suggests the agenda, instance. A raid raj has also been associated with the earlier the objective function and the constraints will be driven by not Chidambaram tenure. Higher public expenditure, higher tax economic rationale but what is politically proper. Political pro- rates, retrograde taxes, cesspools of cesses, raids to generate priety is euphemism for perceived electoral dividends, where revenue, and legerdemain in window-dressing deficit numthe ballot rather than the bullet is bitten and savoured. That bers don't inspire confidence. Realist industry and markets effectively determines contours of 2013-14 Budget, and 2014- will factor these in and take solace from the truth that any 15, if there is one. Chidambaram is perceived as one of the ar- other UPA finance minister would have damaged no less. chitects of 1991 reforms. That flows from his role as 1991-96 However, those who still bask in the hype of 1991 reform crecommerce minister. Slashing QRs (quantitative restrictions) dentials and believe that Chidambaram is innately businessand revamping export subsidies is chalk. The cheese of finance and commerce-friendly, are in for a shock. This doesn't mean has many more holes. Think of the dream budget of 1996-97. nothing will get done. For a start, GAAR and retrospective tax It turned into a nightmare because of the Fifth Pay Commission laws (especially penalty and interest) will hit a pause button, and it was the finance minister, rather than Left, who pushed though not a delete. And there will be some reforms in finanPay Commission implementation through. If one still recalls cial sector to assuage investor confidence. This leaves big-bang reforms, which concern both other slashing of tax rates in a dream budget, one should be reminded of a statement issued by Chidambaram when he was Central ministries and states. There are two caveats. First, home minister, just before 2012-13 Budget was finalised. He announcing big-bang reforms first and bothering about follow-up later, hasn't been his predecessor's style. With advocated higher tax rates for the relatively rich. Being a political animal, there is no denying that Chidambaram, any flashy announcement (pensions, banking, Chidambaram is malleable in convictions and knows politics insurance, FDI, petroleum product pricing) should be treated is not about the art of the impossible. A budget is with scepticism, until institutional delivery is ensured. about reviving political spirits, not those of the animal variety. Reforms are never big-bang (other than 1991). They are Consider Chidambaram's track record as finance minister steady-state, even if they masquerade as big-bang, and the between 2004 and 2008. Whatever deficit indicator one present state is somewhat unsteady. Second, reforms aren't takes (fiscal, revenue, primary), the sharp worsening oc- fashioned by ministers alone. There is a bureaucracy in fiSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com nance ministry and there is a vacuum curred in 2008-09 and lest we forget, now, both in quantity and quality. Given Chidambaram was then finance ministhe `Hard Times', it is best not to have ter, not Pranab Mukherjee, though `Great Expectations'. In weaving `A Mukherjee got the blame for profligacy. Tale of Two Cities', Chidambaram will It was Chidambaram who first pushed be constrained by the so-called incluback terminal year of Fiscal Responsisive agenda and cater more to Bharat bility and Budget Management (FRBM) than to India. Whether that serves the Act and then hit the `pause' button cause of either Bharat or India is a in 2005-06. On most computers, the separate debate. However, that's the `pause' key is next to `delete' key. Ergo, compulsion he will operate under, Chidambaram buried FRBM and fiscal which is why he is in finance ministry, consolidation and it is presumptuous to and not a non-political technocrat, or a believe he will resurrect either now. politician who doesn't know the ins and Widening public expenditure is a outs of budget-making, and therefore Chidambaram legacy, as is violation of lacks skills to get back on roundabouts promises on improving efficiency of what is apparently given away on public expenditure. (Read 2004-05 Being a political animal, there is swings. Sounds like a `Bleak House', Budget speech on food stamps and tarno denying that Chidambaram but that's the way it is. geting subsidies only towards poor.) is malleable in convictions Conversely, there is tax reform. In and knows politics is not about part, say Goods and Services Tax, this inBibek Debroy is professor at the Centre volves talking to states and negotiating for Policy Research, Delhi the art of the impossible.

B

10

INDIA TODAY N AUGUST 20, 2012

