An

impAcT,Feature

Celebrating South Korea Independence day on 15th August

South Korea and India

FORGING DIPLOMATIC TIES
South Korea also referred as the land of the morning calm is located in the southern half of the Korean Peninsula and is one of the oldest civilizations in the world. South Korea came into existence in 1948 when Korea was divided into two halves, North and South. Soon with the assistance from United States it becomes the second most advanced economy of Asia. South Korea's international outlook can be judged with its alliance with the United Nations, WTO, OECD and G-20 economies. It is also a founding member of APEC and the East Asia Summit and major non-NATO ally of the United States. South Korea has a high-tech and futuristic infrastructure making it a global leader in technologically advanced goods such as electronics, automobiles, ships, machinery, petrochemicals and robotics. There are leading South-Korean companies operating successfully in India in the fields of Energy, Food Processing, Chemicals, Shipping, and Heavy Industries, Petrochemicals. To name a few such companies are, DOOSAN, LOTTE, Samsung Chemicals, Hanjin, Hyundai Heavy industries, GC Caltex etc. India and South Korea has recently decided to develop engagement in civil nuclear energy cooperation as well as space activities including the launch of Korean satellites by India. In view of the large Korean business presence in Tamil Nadu, the Republic of Korea (ROK) expressed interest in opening a new Consulate General in Chennai while welcoming India's decision to open a new Defence Attache's Office at its Embassy in Seoul before the end of the year. The two sides exchanged views on the Asia-Pacific region, including enhanced cooperation and coordination between them, and agreed to work closely together in the East Asia Summit as well as in the ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN Defense Ministers' Meeting Plus (ADMM Plus). Korea and India are geographically apart, yet they share centuries-old relations. The establishment of diplomatic ties between the two countries in 1973, however, marked a watershed in their modern day bilateral relations, registering steady progress overtime. An otherwise steady and friendly bilateral relationship reached its recent high in the year 2010, when the two countries put in force their historic Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement or CEPA and also entered into Strategic Partnership during the landmark State Visit of H.E. Lee Myung-bak, President of the Republic of Korea to India. The visit of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to Korea in March this year has further deepened the strategic partnership. Reflecting the strategic nature of their partnership, both countries are expanding their cooperation in a number of areas, including defence and security. The Korea-India Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement has unlocked the huge untapped potential of our economic relations and surged two-way trade and investment. Since CEPA has come into force, trade between the two countries has registered phenomenal growth of almost 70%. In 2011, bilateral trade reached 20.6 billion US dollars from less than 1 billion US dollars in 1991. Today, Korean investment in India stands at 3 billion US dollars, while Indian companies have invested over 1 billion US dollars in Korea. Around 400 Korean companies are doing business in India. Hyundai Motors has 20 per cent market share in the domestic passenger car segment, while LG and Samsung have 40 to 60 per cent share in the domestic electronic goods market. Korean steel giant, POSCO's 12- billion US dollar mega steel project in Odisha by far remains the single largest foreip direct investment ever made in India. Impressive growth in bilateral trade and investment notwithstanding, there remains enormous scope for further augmentation, befitting the true economic potential of the two countries. The two countries have, therefore, set a new target of 40 billion US dollars of two-way trade by 2015. Besides, Korean companies, based on their core strength, are actively looking for investment in India particularly in areas such as nuclear energy, defence industry and shipbuilding. In tandem with robust economic and political cooperation, the cultural and people to people exchanges have also witnessed a steady progress. The successful celebration of the 'Year of Korea in India1 and the 'Year of India in Korea' in the year 2011 has further cemented the bilateral cultural relations. We are also going to open a Korean Culture Centre in New Delhi by the end of this year as also celebrate 40 years of diplomatic relations next year. A promising future beckons both Korea and India and the two countries are determined to realize the full potential of their relationship.

Prime Minister Manmohan Singh with President Lee Myung-bak

AnimPACTreature

SSANGYONG: Driving all the way to India
 Apart from being the president for the automotive and farm equipment sectors in Mahindra & Mahindra, you are also the chairman for Ssangyong, which saw a 30% volume growth last year. What plans are being made to ensure this kind of volume growth this year? We have indicated a volume target for Ssangyong at 123,000 units for 2012, which is a 8.8% growth over last year. Given that the automotive markets in Europe and Korea are stagnant, this is a good growth on top of a 38.2% growth last year. Our volume growth target is driven by several facelift and refresh models which have already been launched including Korando Sports in January, Rexton W in June and Rodius Euro in July. Later in the year Ssangyong will also launch a gasoline variant of Korando. All these launches have been very well received in the market and we are reasonably confident of achieving our sales volume target for the year.  To what extent do you think would Ssangyong deal help Mahindra & Mahindra in penetrating into the international markets considering the company's aim of taking its SUVs to markets in places such as Brazil and South Africa? We already collaborate with Ssangyong in South Africa where Mahindra South Africa (MSA), a subsidiary of M&M, distributes Ssangyong products. We are evaluating several other markets where we can collaborate over a period of time. We are proceeding with caution in this area as there are many stakeholders like distributors and customers whose interests have to be taken into account. We also consider other factors such as brand and market positioning before deciding on the extent and timing of collaboration in international markets. 톂here is big news of Mahindra & Mahindra launching Ssangyong in the Indian market in October-November this year. What are your hopes from this launch? What expectations should a consumer keep from this development? Yes, we will be launching the Rexton in India. This product will position us in the premium SUV segment beyond XUV500 and hence it is a very significant launch in terms of overall brand development. As Mahindra has always done we expect to provide consumers a luxury SUV at a value price. 톉ou are often referred to as the father of the Scorpio. Are there any such marvels from Ssangyong one should know about? Rexton is a time tested product platform of Ssangyong. The new product Korando-C which is the first monocoque product from Ssangyong is also : making its mark. We have also recently announced development of a new compact SUV by Ssangyong to be launched in the next 2-3 years which we believe will take Ssangyong to a new level within the automotive industry.  How lucrative was it for Mahindra & Mahindra to invest in a South Korea based company from the FDI perspective? We invested in Ssangyong in 2011 with a long term perspective, given the immense potential for synergistic collaboration. It is too early to evaluate the success of the investment, but we are absolutely confident that we are on the right track. The two companies have complementary strengths and capabilities, and we have the right combination for achieving our long term vision.  How has your experience been in dealing with the South Korean authorities? What were the challenges you faced while refurbishing Ssangyong? We are very happy with the proactive cooperation that all Korean authorities have extended to us to facilitate our doing business with Korea. We have found government authorities to be prompt, responsive, business-oriented and investor-friendly. Ssangyong's main challenge has been to fill up the product pipeline, recruit sufficient R&D manpower, and a brand building exercise which got affected during its years of receivership. On all these fronts, it is already in the recovery process and is on track to become a competitive automobile manufacturer.  Mahindra & Mahindra started importing Ssangyong cars into China late last year. How profitable has this step been? Ssangyong re-entered China in August 2011 through its own wholly owned National Sales Company and two regional distributors for North and South regions. Currently the focus is on building the distribution network and the brand. Though we cannot comment on the profitability of specific markets, suffice it to say that China is a very important strategic market for Ssangyong. i Some people are of the opinion that this is a career defining initiative for you. How convinced are you with this belief? Ssangyong acquisition is an important milestone in our journey towards achieving our long term vision for Mahindra's Automotive business and the group as a whole. Acquisition and success of acquisition cannot be ascribed to one individual. i Please throw some light on areas such as technical cooperation and shared expertise, and how the two companies have benefited in these areas. We see huge potential for synergy in collaboration in product and technology development, and in sharing R&D facilities and technical resources. We are already using each other's R&D infrastructure for testing of vehicles and aggregates. We are also working jointly on development of future technologies which will be applied in Ssangyong and Mahindra vehicles. Many of our future products and aggregates, currently under development, will be built on shared and jointly-developed platforms. We believe that this is the biggest area of collaboration and synergy, and it.willtethe cornerstone of the success of our partnership.

