AnimPACTl Feature

HIMACHAL PRADESH

SCALING HIMALAYAN HEIGHTS
I Pradesh marches ahead
present BJP Government took over the reins of the state on 30th December, 2007. 'Sab ka hit, Sab ka kalyan (welfare of all)' is the motto adopted by the Government in its governance. The priorities on top of the Government's agenda are- 'Sadak' (Road), 'Shiksha (Education)', 'Swasthya (Health)', 'Swarojgar (employment)', 'Swablamban (Self-employment)' and 'Swabhiman (Selfrespect).1 Himachal Pradesh is heading towards becoming educational hub of the Country. 19 per cent of the state's total budget is being spent on education. One Technical University in the government sector, one Central university, 11 Universities in the private sector and a number of other educational, technical and professional institutions have been opened during last four and half years in the state. Himachal Pradesh is one of the first few states in the country which has implemented the Right to Education Act, in the year 2009. It is also first state in the country to have set up the State Education Regulatory Commission for ensuring quality education in the educational institutions being set up in the private sector. Over 3400 kms of new roads and 260 bridges have been constructed during last four and half years in the state. One big achievement of this period is the construction of Harsipatan bridge on river Beas at a cost of Rs 18 crore which has benefited population of over 50,000 of Mandi, Hamirpur and Kangra districts. Another bridge at Chamba-Pattan in Kangra district has also been constructed by the government at a cost of Rs. 17.65 crore and dedicated to the people in the recent past. This has also met the long pending demand of the people of the area. Hitherto cut-off far flung area of Dodra Kwar in Shimla district and Chota Bhangal in Kangra district have also been connected with

I Prof. PREM KUMAR DHUMAL
Hon'ble Chief Minister, Himachal Pradesh

T

he hill state of Himachal Pradesh is on a fast growth trajectory, undergoing speedy development in various fields in last four and half years. It can be gauged from the fact that the state's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has gone up to Rs. 54,695 crore in the year 2010-11 from Rs. 33,963 crore in the year 2007-08. Per Capita Income which was Rs. 43,966 in 2007-08 has gone upto Rs. 65,535 in 2010-11 and is likely to go up to Rs. 73,608 in 2011-12. The literacy percentage of the state has gone up to 83.78 per cent which is higher than the national average and also literacy percentage of other developed states in the country. Having been conferred 67 Awards by prestigious national, international agencies including Government of India, speaks volume about good governance and development that the state has witnessed, under the leadership of Chief Minister, Prof Prem Kumar Dhumal, popularly known as common man's CM. The

To provide transparent, responsive and corruptionfree administration, the state has enacted Himachal Pradesh Public Services Guarantee Act, 2011 under which the services of 12 important departments have been notified. The state has also framed Himachal Pradesh Lokayukta Bill, 2012 bringing all public representatives from panchayati raj institutions to Chief Minister under its j

Feature

road by taking up construction work on a war footing scale. Health is another sector which has been accorded top most priority. As against Rs. 396 crore spent on health sector in 2007-08, Rs. 862 crore is being spent during this financial year. The endeavour of the Government is to bring better health care facilities at the door-steps of the people. Over 800 doctors and almost similar number of paramedical staff have been appointed and posted in far-flung areas of the state in last four and half years so that people do not face any inconvenience in getting treatment nearer to their homes. Health insurance cover of Rs. 30,000 is being given in case of hospitalisation and Rs. 1,75,000 in case of serious illness. From this year, all those working under MNREGA and other organised activities have been covered under the health insurance scheme. The Government has doubled the pension of aged and handicapped persons from Rs. 200 per month to Rs. 400 per month thereby benefiting over 2.77 lakh eligible persons in the State. Daily wage of the daily wagers has been enhanced from Rs. 75 to Rs. 130. To fulfill its promises of women empowerment, the state government has reserved 50 per cent seats in panchayati raj institutions and local bodies for women from the year 2008 so as to make them active partner in the development of the state. A separate department for 'Women and Child'has been opened for the development of women. Four time increase has been made in the financial assistance being given under 'Matri Shakti Bima Yojna'. 'Jiwan Shree Insurance Scheme1 is being implemented for 'Anganwari Workers' and 'Anganwari Sahayikas1 under which a Rs. 75,000 cover is being given in case of death due to accident, Rs. 30,000 in case of natural death and Rs. 20,000 in case of death due to disease. To raise production in the state, maximum area is being brought under irrigation. The work on Rs. 104 crore Balh Valley Irrigation Scheme and Rs. 204 crore Fina Singh Medium Irrigation Scheme is in progress. Rs. 93 crore Nadaun Medium Irrigation Scheme has been sent for Government of India's approval. Swan river channelization and Bata river channelization would be completed by next year. The present Government's biggest achievement is dedication of Rs .68 crore Water Supply Scheme which has benefited 1,31,293 population of Dehra, Khundian, Jaisinghpur and Palampur. Rs. 300 crore 'Doodh Ganga Yojna1 has come as a boon in supplementing the income of the people in rural areas. Loan upto Rs. 5 lakh are being given for purchase of milch cattle on which 33 per cent subsidy is being given to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and 25 per cent to general categories. For milk related activities such as purchase of machinery and setting up milk related units, loans upto Rs. 30 lakh are being given for which the Government is providing 33 per cent subsidy to scheduled castes and scheduled tribe

The priorities on top of the Government's agenda are-- 'Saddle1 (Road), 'Shiksha (Education)', 'Swasthya (Health)', 'Swarojgar (employment)1, 'Swablamban (Self-employment)' and 'Swabhiman (Self-respect)/

beneficiaries and 25 per cent to general category beneficiaries. 4,30,250 soil testing cards have been issued to the farmers. Tomato, potato and ginger have been covered under weather based crop insurance scheme The work on Rs. 100 crore most modern Market Yard at Parala in Shimla district has been started and one similar market yard is being set up in lower areas to benefit the farmers. To ensure remunerative prices to the fruit growers in the state, support price has been announced every year for apple and citrus fruits like mango, kinnoo, malta and 'galgal'. Effective steps are being taken to provide better transport facility especially in far-flung areas of the state. The Government has taken a decision to give routes to private operators to carry people up to focal points in small transport from where HRTC and other buses will ply under 'Mukhya Mantri Parivahan Yojna'. To fulfill the promise of providing transparent, responsive and corruption-free administration, Himachal Pradesh Public Services Guarantee Act, 2011 has been enacted under which the services of 12 important departments have been notified. Another important bill 'Himachal Pradesh Special Courts (Attachment and Confiscation of Property) Bill 2011' has been passed in last Monsoon session of Vidhan Sabha and sent for the approval of the President. It entails provision to punish the guilty besides confiscating the property amassed through corrupt practices. The state has also framed Himachal Pradesh Lokayukta Bill, 2012 bringing all public representatives from panchayati raj institutions to Chief Minister under its purview. E-Samadhan of public grievances has been constantly monitored by Chief Minister Office. Programme like 'Prashashan Janta Ke Dwar' are being organised in far-flung areas of the state in which the chief minister, ministers along with senior officers, listen to the grievances of the people and try to solve these on the spot. 'Sugam Kendras1 and lok Mitar Kendras' have been set up in different places in the state where various public services are being provided to the people under one roof. The state government has simplified the revenue procedure to ensure timely services to the people. The Patwari have been made responsible to provide record in a stipulated period. To boost tourism development, schemes like'Har Ghar Kuch Kehta Hai' 'Har Gaon Ki Kahani' and 'Home Stay' have been implemented in the state. Rs 428 crore is being spent on developing infrastructure for tourism in the state with the assistance of Asian Development Bank, under which Heritage Museum in Shimla, beautification of Pongdam complex, Tourist complex and Masroor temple complex have been taken up. Himachal Pradesh's endeavours in conservation of environment in last four and half years have been appreciated at national and international level. It has been conferred 'Prime Minister Award' for sustainable management of plastic and also 'Diamond State Award' for the best initiatives in environment preservation and protection. An agreement has been signed with the World Bank for reducing carbon emission. In fact, Himachal Pradesh is on the thresh-hold of becoming the carbon neutral state in the country. The Government is encouraging environment friendly, employment and income generating industries in the state. Himachal Pradesh is heading towards becoming a self-reliant and prosperous state, providing the people with ample opportunities for education, health and employment, enabling them to realise their optimum potential for growth and contribute towards placing their state on top of the development map of the country.

AnimPACTFeature

SENTINEL OF ENVIRONMENT
m em 
Himachal Pradesh, famed as a tourist's paradise for being blessed with Nature's boundless bounty, is also taking rapid strides towards industrial and economic development. The state also has to its credit various bodies and agencies to help it strike a rational balance between growth and environmental preservation. Notable among them is the Himachal Pradesh State Pollution Control Board (HPPCB), constituted under the provision of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act. 1974, We must strive to make Himachal Pradesh a 'carbon neutral' state in the country and also reduce Green House Gas (GHG) emissions so as to contribute to the survival of all forms of life.
I Prof. Prem Kumar Dhumal HON'BLE CHIEF MINISTER
The State Board is a nodal agency for prevention & control of pollution and so also protection of environment in the framework of regulations. Following are some of the landmark achievements of the HPPCB:

 Public interface:
 The State Board, an ISO 9001: 2008 accredited organisation, has been interacting with the public by way of public hearings, interactive meets on the World Environment day, Pollution Prevention Week, etc.  Conservation Code in the form of a pledge has been developed and circulated in all schools of the state, to be recited by the children with morning prayers.  On festivals, the State Board issues mass appeals through media for environment-conscious celebrations and it has been noticed that the level of pollution over the years has reduced substantially.  Industrial Pollution Control and Management: The State Board exercises regular checks on the sources of pollution and regulation of the conditions of consent granted to the industries with the prime objective of controlling pollution at source. There are 2797 water pollution control systems and 2539 air pollution control systems installed by the different industrial units in the state.  Monitoring of Ambient Air Environment: The Board is keeping constant watch on air quality through continuous monitoring of ambient air quality at twelve locations viz., Shimla, Parwanoo, Paonta Sahib, Jassur, Barmana. BaddiBarotiwala, Nalagarh, Kala Amb, Manali, Una, Sundernagar and Dharamshala and taking remedial measures wherever necessary. Four new stations at Manali, Una, Sundernagar and Dharamshala were established during 2011-12 to monitor and assess the air quality of these growing urban centres, apart from industrial corridors.  Monitoring of River Water Quality: Water quality monitoring of major river systems is being carried out at 219 locations on a quarterly basis. The State Board has recently introduced 30 new water quality-monitoring stations into the monitoring network and the water quality protocol issued by the Ministry of Environment & Forests is being followed in letter and spirit.  Bio-Medical Waste Management: To implement the Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998, tbe State Board in constant persuasion with the concerned health institutions/local bodies has succeeded in installation of 12 incinerators at various towns of the state.  Civic Waste Management: The Board in constant persuasion with the concerned authorities has commissioned 35 sewage treatment plants with tbe cumulative treatment capacity of 79.66 mid and 10 municipal solid waste processing facilities at different towns in the state. This has helped in moving towards better disposal and management of sewage and municipal solid wastes. a Hazardous Waste ManagementJhe Common Treatment, Storage, Disposal Facility (TSDF) at village Majra, Tehsil Nalagarh, District Solan is operational since June, 2008 and is being used for scientific disposal of landfillabte hazardous waste generated by the industries.

 Environmental Governance:
The State Board has undertaken following initiatives which have been effective in providing efficient, transparent and prompt service delivery to the users, curtailing the delays and also increasing productivity by reducing the use of paper and obviating the unnecessary travel costs:  The Board was the first in the north India to adopt fully web-based consent mechanism. This has been appreciated by the industries' associations as well as Confederation of Indian Industry.  Online real-time monitoring of air emissions in all the cement plants has been initiated and the data is being uploaded in public domain; the process is on to getting the data transferred to CPCB and HPPCB servers.  As hydropower is the major developmental thrust area for the state government, Himachal was the first state in the country to introduce the concept of maintaining minimum flow in its rivers by making 15 per cent of lean flow available in the rivers throughout the year. 15 hydro projects have so far already installed real time monitoring mechanism.  Fully web-enabled online real time monitoring of minimum flow of 15 per cent water availability has been made mandatory for major hydropower developments.  The State Board in consultation with Google Earth has initiated the process of CIS based monitoring of environmental parameters particularly in the hydropower development and air pollution intensive industries.  The Board has installed the video-conferencing facility with its regional offices for prompt decision making and service delivery to the end-users and the people of the state.

 Plastic management:
 Himachal, bestowed with the Prime Minister's Award for Sustainable Plastic Waste Management in 2011-12, is the first state in the country which had banned the manufacturing of poly-ethylene carry bags way back in 1999 and the process of its management is still being continued with the involvement of public.  In sync with the state's campaign for using the plastic waste for construction of roads, the State Board has contributed towards propagation of technology in this effort.

it is clear that in its pur , es enshrined in the enviro...... the HPPCB has been steadfastly following the principles of sustainable development. Also, continuous efforts are being made by the Board to expand its activities to fulfil the needs of current as well as emerging environmental concerns, challenges and new statutes.

