Photographs by AP

(LEFT) A CHILD AT A RELIEF CAMP IN BHOTGAON ON JULY 25; BODOS AT A CAMP IN KOKRAJHAR ON JULY 28

Na tion

ASSAM

CLUELESS ON AVOLCANO
By Kaushik Deka

Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi vacillates as fresh violence strikes fear among refugees in relief camps
which 0.23 million were Muslims. Now more than 450,000 people are staying in the relief camps in Kokrajhar and Dhubri districts. Less than 50 per cent of the Muslim population in Kokrajhar was affected by the clashes, it's hard to believe that Muslim population increased so sharply in a year," he says. Gogoi too admits that there could be people from outside the affected areas in relief camps. "We have told the BTC leadership that there is no space for any illegal migrants in the BTAD areas. Only bonafide land owners will live in BTAD. We have records with us and we will go only by that," he said. The Chief Minister claims that the number of relief camps has shrunk to 242 from 278 and about 116,000 inmates have returned home. But there are still 350,960 people in the remaining camps. Worse, people who had left the camps to return to their native villages are now turning back to the camps in droves following fresh violence in Kokrajhar and Chirang. I

E

ven as Assam bleeds, Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi continues to vacillate. After over 400,000 of the displaced people filled the 278 relief camps in Bodoland Territorial Autonomous District (BTAD) areas following the bloody clashes between Bodos and immigrant Muslims on July 20, Gogoi declared on August 1 that his government would send back all the refugees to their homes by Independence Day. On August 7, he changed his mind: "I did not say that I would send back the people by August 15. What I meant was that the process of rehabilitation would start on August 15." The U-turn only shows how clueless Gogoi is over what he himself calls a volcano and which has already claimed 78 lives. "Assam is like a volcano. It can erupt anytime. Such things (communal violence) keep happening. It has happened earlier, it can happen again," Gogoi said on August 7. As an explana-

tion from the head of the government, it is far from satisfactory. Asom Gana Parishad President and former chief minister Prafulla Kumar Mahanta says, "If such things keep happening and the government can't control it, what's the role of the government then? We did not expect such an immature statement from the Chief Minister." Gogoi seems to be content with announcing a CBI inquiry into the violence. After a brief lull after the violence on July 26, nine persons were killed in Kokrajhar and Chirang between August 5 and August 7. Gogoi claims that 170 people allegedly involved in the riots have been arrested. A seven-year-old Muslim boy from Bhowraguri village in Chirang district has not yet recovered from the death of his 55-year-old father and 18-year-old brother. The boy's family has been staying at a relief camp in Bhowraguri since April 23 after their house was set on fire. On August 5, the three had secretly left the camp to broker a sale of cows at

a weekly market in Kajalgaon. They were waylaid by around 25 tribal youths who hacked the boy's father and brother to death. He fled and returned to the relief camp. The boy and his 37-year-old mother are now too scared to return to their village. It is this fear that the attackers continue to exploit. Even the Bodos are not willing to leave the camps by Gogoi's deadline, fearing retaliation. "We want to wait at least till five days after Eid. This government can't give us security. We won't leave the camp," says Pranjit Mushahary, 34, a forest department employee who is staying at a relief camp in Gossaigaon, Kokrajhar district. While refugees at relief camps show no inclination to return to their homes, the Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) has demanded that the credentials of the inmates be verified before they are rehabilitated in the BTAD areas. BTC has doubts whether all the inmates of the relief camps were displaced from the BTAD areas during the

ethnic clashes. It wants rehabilitation to proceed in a phased manner. Khampa Borgoyari, the BTC deputy chief, says the council has passed a resolution that those who have land in the BTAD area should be rehabilitated immediately in the first phase and those who do not have land but whose names appear in the voters' lists should remain in the relief camps till BTC and the state government arrive at an agreement on their fate. He claims "illegal immigrants" could take advantage of the situation and infiltrate BTAD areas. "Kokrajhar district's population, as per the 2011 Census, was around 1.03 million, of

WHILE REFUGEES AT RELIEF CAMPS SHOW NO INCLINATION TO RETURN TO THEIR HOMES, BODOS HAVE DEMANDED THAT CREDENTIALS OF THE INMATES BE VERIFIED.

110

INDIA TODAY N AUGUST 20, 2012

