UNIVERSITIES WITH A PROMISE
An Insight on New Universities on the Horizon
India has made a huge progress in the past decade. The improved education system is often cited as one of the main contributors to the economic rise of the country. Much of the progress in education has been credited to the private universities. These privately run establishments have been contributing tremendously to building careers and providing higher education to lacs of aspirants. We take a look at some of the New Universities on the horizon who would be instrumental in transforming India in this HpraHp
A

Anil HP

C Fpresentation

e next educational revi educational institutions aggressively gearing up to

here has been a great surge in the demai for private education in India owing to be infrastructure, courses, faculty, internatioi tie ups and career opportunities. Figuratively leaking, India today has 650 universities and j,000 colleges across its many states. Private Universities in the country have grown manifolc the past six years, according to the findings of a new report. While the country had 20 private universities prior to 2005, the figure surged to 107 last year. India has made a huge progress in the past decade and the country envisages being on' of the world's next up and coming superpowers that would drive the world's economy. India's improving educational system is often cited as one of the main contributors to the economic rise of India. A quality education leads to a quality career and a good general enrolment ratio (GER) of a nation is reflected in the GDP. India however is yet to match global standards in these measures as most of the state run institutions fall short of working towards this end. Some of them have exceptionally high cut offs whereas some of them have poor infrastructure, faculty and very obsolete curriculum. The State governments have not done anything remarkable towards this end except for a few States establishing their own State institutions, both public and private, as part of their routine. This is the age of the next generation. A simplified doctor, engineer or teacher are not the only jobs that hold a promise. A lot of specialisations have opened doors for students to make careers out of their passions. An MBA no longer is just monotonously tied to the same old finance or accounts, specialised MBA courses have also made it possible for a lot of students to develop their core managerial competencies. The most noteworthy factor of this surge in private Universities is the fact that these Universities have tie-ups with a lot of prestigious enterprises that secure the future prospects of an inspiring student in terms of career opportunities. These Universities concentrate on not just education but a holistic personality building of the students with strong emphasis being laid on strengthening their personalities and indulging them to pursue their hobbies. The outcome is an overall personality development along with a quality education. It is not that education is not available or there is a dearth of opportunities, the question here is the quality and the relevance of the education that is being provided in the country by state run institutions. Are these institutions really helping student shape a career that cannot be challeng by global advancements? Most likely, the answi a no. Unless it is an MM or an NT or prestigious Universities like Delhi University, Aligarh Muslir University etc- most tertiary areas have seen a steady decline of the quality of education provii in the public sector. Privatisation of education i

eed of the hour and with that coming into India is going to witness a sea change in education in the country was being perceivec of private Universities have exploited the comings that our nation is faced with to form them into opportunities that will usher i a new revolution in the Indian educational sector. These Universities not only boast of a great infrastructure and dedicated faculty but also come with the perks of proving a world class educati with various exchange programs and tie ups w Universities of international repute. These private Universities are the ultimate hope fo churning out capable professionals who can t ke the global challenges head on and prove their mettle at par with their international counterp These institutions are well equipped with train faculty and opportunities to explore extracurri pursuits. In most state run institutions teache have a half hearted approach at teaching, these private institutions have a constant monitoring of their faculties so that nobody slacks. Privatisation of the educational sector has been of great interest to the future employees of aspiring students. This type of education proves to be an investment. These institutions professionally hone the skill sets of the students to such an extent that they become assets to the enterprises that they get placed in which is just like a great return on the investment made by the parents towards their education. The tie up with international Universities also provides them with a platform to compete for a career at an international level. A lot of students that pass out of these institutions get absorbed for jobs abroad, making them Indian assets in the global market. In the end of the day, it has to be understood by the public and the private sector alike that the youth of India in the present generation are well aware of the global opportunities. This is all thanks to the advancement made in information and technology. The youth of our nation will not settle down for just about any course, they are more into specifications and specialisations. They are more discerning about their future prospects than they were a decade back. The private institutions have a good understanding of this phenomenon and they bring to these capable youth a wide variety of career choices and a whole lot of opportunities. This has to be the most promising educational phenomenon of recent times иии'""ein empowering the youth of the nation is / going to translate into shaping the economic 3 of the country. mding at the forefront of this revolution are ome of the key Universities whom we are taking a i look in the next few pages. Read on to ge

FOCUSEDUCATION

*

.

BHARATHUNIVERSITY
- Ahead of Its Times.
n environment in which students can fully realize their abilities and potential is a goal which every educational institute strives to achieve. With this as a directive and through a mission of moving beyond text books, Bharath University has achieved this goal within a span of 28 years. Bharath University was established under the aegis of Sri Lakshmi Ammal Educational Trust with the aim of imparting higher knowledge in Science and Technology to aspiring boys and girls so that they can emerge as competent scientists, engineers and technologists of repute. To achieve this, Bharath Institute of Science & Technology, fondly called as BIST, was started in the year 1984. BIST was accorded Deemed University status in the y e a r 2003 by University Grants Commission (UGC). Currently, a student can choose from a spectrum 39 UG programs and 139 PG programs to achieve mastery and excellence and to be well equipped to achieve his/her dreams. Bharath University's 14 schools of excellence provide faculty to help students specialize in the field of their choice and interest. The constant unwavering drive to provide an excellent academic environment for the benefit of students and faculty to acquire a high level of competence and expertise along with an understanding of human dignity and values has borne many a fruitful result. For instance, an 8-member team from the university turned out to be the only team to represent India at RoboCup 2011 in Istanbul, Turkey. Bharath University's team of budding technocrats defeated as many as 1200 teams from nearly 73 countries from across the world to walk away with the Super Team World Championship award. The team definitely made India and their alma mater proud at an international level. The team competed in the Rescue Robot

A

category - their project "Robo Truck" was designed specifically to promote research in employing robotics in the field of rescue operations and other similar situations. The relevance of this project to current world affairs and situations was not lost on the judges. The international experience for a student is fortified with Memorandums of Understanding that Bharath University has signed with several foreign educational institutions and international professional organizations. This arrangement facilitates the exchange of students as well as faculty and makes sure that several students get an opportunity to attend and even present technical papers at International Seminars and Conferences. Presently, the university has established academic and research collaborations with many leading academic institutions like University of California - Berkley, Cornell State University, Texas A&M University, Minnesota State University, Iowa State University, Nebraska University, Pace University, Western Michigan University, Thomas J. Watson School of Binghamton, University of Missouri, Canada's University of Saskatchewan, University of Manitoba, McGill University, UK's University of Northampton and Australia's Melbourne University. Bharath University also has similar MoUs with the industry and MNCs such as IBM, Sun, Oracle, Nokia, SAP and CMC (a TATA initiative). The complaint that students graduating from engineering colleges and universities are not industry-ready is something that is often heard at campus placements and recruitment drives. Bharath University has designed several ways to address this issue. Language labs were created to hone communication skills using proven international techniques. Each department or school of excellence goes to great lengths to organize guest lectures and arrange visits to various industries. These industries are chosen to

=o=

bring alive the technical aspects of your course through practical application. Job based certificate programs have been made available in the university to aid students during campus placement and recruitment season. For example, the CGNA certificate course increases the employment value of B-Tech students in the field of networking. The proctored methodology adopted by the university ensures that a set of 20 students are assigned to every faculty member for guidance and counseling. Such initiatives have had the desired effect- For the academic year 2011-2012, the university had achieved 92 % in placements. Bharath University's high quality faculty is truly a galaxy of academic stars possessing the highest of academic qualifications (Doctorates) and sound experience in research and industry apart from academics. The faculty is encouraged to take-up consultancy assignments and funded research programs. The Centre for Professional Development hones their skills in the areas of teaching, testing and evaluation. Advanced training is offered to faculty members who have more than ten years of teaching experience. The purpose of this training is to create an interest in the field of research and research methodology. Such an advanced training aims at serious research, special project work and inventions. To motivate its teaching staff, the university has several welfare schemes which have helped retain the best. Thanks to such highly qualified and motivated faculty of distinction heading

and staffing the various departments, the university has earned an enviable reputation for excellence over the years. Dr. Rajani, Director R&D from the university has the first Indian woman to receive the ABET award of excellence from USA. ABET is recognized as the worldwide leader in assuring quality and stimulating innovation in applied sciences, computing, engineering, and engineering technology education. All disciplines and courses are designed to provide current and indepth analysis to understand complex technical subjects better. An international learning experience is achieved with Edu-Sat smart classrooms. Students enjoy the comfort of getting trained by the best technical tutors from around the world through Satellite TVs. Interactive video and computer based instructional units are exclusively set up to offer a wholesome learning experience to the students. This facility has so far been available to only students of a select few international institutions. Many eminent professors and scientists from India and abroad conduct classes for students under the Visiting Professor Fellowship program. The uniquely

DHAKAIM

UNIVERSITY
(Declared us 3 of UGC Act. 1956} U FT I J Sj U 6\ 6> 65> 6O 6> fli L D &> LD 0 F t X C' E I . I. I' N C i i

28
V I", A R S

financial assistance is also provided to many research projects undertaken by faculty and students. The sprawling campuses of Bharath University are wifi enabled which help in keeping students and faculty well connected all the time anywhere and everywhere. The student population is truly diverse representing all states of India. It has also drawn many international students. The students are privy to several facilities to ensure a conducive and comfortable environment. Facilities such as 24 hrs (all days) Health Centre with full fledged facilities like the ICU and supported by a well-trained team of 5 doctors, and 20 nurses. Once a week, specialist doctors are available with whom students and faculty can consult on health issues and be treated free of cost.

designed special courses offered by the Institute have already placed it on par with some of its counterparts, both at home and aboard. Research acquires top priority at Bharath University. Hence, there are several research centers within the university campus which facilitate research and development. The Advanced Centre for Robotics and Automation, Centre for Nanotechnology, Centre for Renewable Energy Studies, Disaster Management, Computation Mechanics and Crystal Growth are some of the centres dedicated to scientific and advanced technological research and development. These centres are open to both students and faculty. Students are encouraged to apply patents for their projects and

The library is a haven for knowledge seekers with a collection of almost one lakh books and subscriptions to 80 national and international journals and periodicals. The service is fully computerized. Athletes and sports enthusiasts can access swimming pool and enjoy facilities for world-class facilities for indoor games such as chess, carrom, table tennis, badminton and outdoor games such as volleyball, basketball, football and cricket. Bharath University gives great importance to the welfare of its students. It has separate fully equipped hostel facilities for boys and girls. The facilities include 10 blocks of hostels with landscaped gardens and compound walls for safety and security. All hostel blocks are connected by well-lit roads. The design ensures comfort for the student at all levels. Each wifi enabled block has separate gym, library, laundry facilities and internet centres; each floor in the hostel has TVs with cable connection; each block is enabled with Wi-Fi facility; safety measures throughout the hostel blocks are ensured. Post-graduates students have separate block of hostels which have been designed keeping in mind the maturity level of older students. All students enjoy the privilege of choosing their own menu at hostels.

Bharath University believes in offering support in every form to its students. Several scholarship programs worth Rs. 6 crores are given to achievers in academics and sports. Scholarships and awards benefit meritorious and deserving students. Financial assistance is also given to economically backward students. Free education is offered to toppers in Bharath Engineering Entrance Exam (BEEE), state exams, and to outstanding sports talent. Financial assistance is available to all faculty and students for presenting technical papers at seminars, conferences and in journals in India and abroad. The college has several events lined up for each academic year, they include technical workshops, guest lectures, intra collegiate competitions culturals and medical camps. Days such as water day, women's day are celebrated in its true spirit here. Bharath University has four campuses, three in Chennai and one in Puducherry. The world is an oyster for the students who utilize all the opportunities offered by this university, it's easy to stay ahead with Bharath University.
tt M A K A 1 M

UNIVERSITY
IBei.WiftJ.iUBCAci.us6i LJ IT IJ S, U 6O O> OT5 SO 3> &> Lg ffi LT>

YEARS I) h E X C R L L. EN C E

28

Bharath University # 173 Agharam Road Selaiyur, Chennai - 600 073 Tamil Nadu, India Phone: + 91 - 44 - 2229 0742, 2229 0125 For Admission: +91 - 44 - 2229 0247 Fax: + 91 - 44 - 2229 3886 Email: vc@bharathuniv.ac.in For Admission: admission@bharathuniv.ac.in For Placement: placement@bharathuniv.ac.in

FOCUSEDUCATION

Е

GALGOTIAS

UNIVERSITY SOUGHT AFTER (EitnhltihpH unHer Gnlnntini Universitv Uttnr PrnHpih Art Nr> 14 of 9fll 1 \S MOS. UNIVERSITY

SERIOUS LEARNING GROUND OF THEFUTURE
SERIOUS ROCKSOLID ACADEMICS, INTERNATIONAL LEVEL FACULTY, FOCUS ON RESEARCH, INNOVATIVE LEARNING METHODOLOGIES, EXCELLENT INDUSTRY CONNECT AND MUSCLED INFRASTRUCTURE ARE THE FOUNDATION OF THE LEARNING EXPERIENCE AT GALGOTIAS UNIVERSITY IN NOIDA. HERE'S A GROUND-LEVEL AND HORIZON-LEVEL VIEW INFRASTRUCTURE
Infrastructure is a strong asset of the University. There is a central library with over 70,000 volumes, spacious lawns, air-conditioned classrooms, wi-fi coverage across every campus and a Web SIM student service which tracks the academic and professional progress of every student. "We realise that the environment in which one studies is as important as the studies itself. This is because students don't have to waste time worrying about broken Internet lines, weak administration and congested campuses," says Dr. Bala Rajagopalan, Pro-Vice Chaeellor of the University.

THE ROAD SO FAR
"There is a significant gap between the demand for educational institutions and the number of universities in our country. The purpose of Galgotias Educational Institutions (GEI) was to bridge this gap with a university that embraced quality education," says Suneel Galgotia, Chairperson and Chancellor of GEI. The first branch of GEI was set up in

1999 as the Galgotias Institute of Management and Technology. The Galgotias College of Engineering and Technology followed in 2000 and the Galgotias Business School in 2007. In 2011 all affiliated-colleges were integrated together under university status.

INNOVATIVE LEARNING INITIATIVES
What really stands out at the university is its commitment to innovative avenues of learning. "We want to give our students a holistic education. It should not be that they are only good at theory and have no

idea about how to develop their personalities and soft skill sets," says Dr Bala Rajagopalan, Pro-Vice Chancellor, Galgotias University. To this respect, Galgotias is the only university in India that makes business communication a compulsory module under the general MBA. degree. "The aim was to introduce a comprehensive view of communication. The course has been designed to teach students logical and analytical thinking as well as how to apply them in specific instances such as interviews and research." adds Rajagopalan.

INTERNATIONAL FACULTY BASE
Diversity of faculty is another unique facet of the university. Academicians from America, UK, Norway, France and Singapore form the bulk of the faculty here. However, these are not foreign nationals but N R l s who have come back home. "We wanted to bring faculty who had exposure to international teaching and principles. But we also felt it was important for them to be Indian so that they could make a connection between an Indian student body and foreign teaching methods. The theory has worked and we have extremely engaging classroom discussions today," explains Dr. Ashok Saxena, Viee Chancellor, Galgotias University.

ACADEMICS
Although known for its technology and MBA degrees, the university is home to over 1 1 different schools of academic study. Teaching is always supplemented with ample practical exposure, individual tutorials and interactive discussions. "What makes learning at Galgotias special is the dedication that our faculty puts into every lecture. They want to effectively deliver information. No class is ever one-sided. We make sure that students can always voice their opinions and ample feedback is given to them on every doubt. This encourages them to think instead of blindly learning," says Suneel Galgotia, Chancellor of the university. THE GALGOTIAS EDGE

INDIA'S LEADING MEDIA RANK

GALGOTIAS AMONG INDIA'S
FINEST INSTITUTIONS YEAR AFTER YEAR, FOR EXCELLENCE IN ACADEMICS & RESEARCH. Ranked No. 1 in AMARUJALA-IMRB International Education Survey 2012 Awarded for Teaching Excellence at Indian Education Awards 2012 Ranked among Top Engineering Institutions year after yeor by Dataquest Awarded Business School with Best Industry Interface at Suntec, Singapore

LOOKING AHEAD
The university is also looking to promote its placement cell in the future. Already there is a 100 per cent placement rate with popular campus recruiters including Wipro, Infosys, Accenture, NUT and Huawei. "Last year one of our students, Naveen Goswami, was offered a ' 50 Lakh annual compensation package from Helix Energy Solutions in Texas, US. This just goes to show the quality of our students and faculty. There is lots left for us to achieve, we have only just begun," says Saxena. A rigorous admission and interview process awaits aspiring candidates, who must meet a minimum of 75 per cent in their Class 12 board exams. But the end rewards make the initial struggles worthwhile to many a student.

COMMUNITY
A resident Cafe Coffee Day and Mother Dairy Ice Cream cart are just some of the perks available to the student community here. Concerts, student fairs and over 30 clubs constitute the majority of after-class entertainment. "We try to provide a healthy mix of fun, games and learning to all. This year we held the NASA Challenge where a team of our students designed a moonbuggy which won the competition. The moonbuggy is now on permanent display at NASA in Huntsville, Alabama," says Dr Ashok Saxena, Vice Chancellor of the university.

a

ASIC, UK accredits Galgotias Globally Benchmarked Higher Education

GALGOTIAS STUDENT NAVEEN GOSWAMI, B.TECH-CSE, SETS A NEW BENCHMARK. PLACED WITH US FIRM AT US$ 90,000 & 50 LAKH) GLOBAL PACKAGE. Naveen Goswami recently joined Helix Energy Solutions, Texas, USA. During his final year, he developed a polynomial time algorithm for the "Minimum Vertex Cover Problem" - regarded as the most efficient in the history of computer science and mathematics.

"My brand is my name, and I personally stand behind it whenever anyone reaches out for the quality I offer. It is about much more than standing for consistent quality. My brand stands for everything I have believed in. I have worked ceaselessly to build standards of unprecedented excellence in these domains."

Suneel Galgotia
Chancellor

GALGOTIAS
UNIVERSITY
(Established under Galgotias University Uttar Pradesh Act No. 14 of 2011)

www.galgotiasuniversity.edu.in, 0120-4370000, 0120-4513999, admissions@galgotiasuniversity.edu.in

I

FOCUS

GLA University: Where
Few universities in north India fits into this definition by the 19th century British Prime Minister and essayist Disraeli and GLA University, Mathura, UP is one of them. Located in one of the holy cities Mathura, in the heart of Brij Bhoomi, the sprawling campus of the University, spread over more than 100 acres of land, reflects pure institutional excellence.

J

ust step into the campus and have a feel what it stands for. Be it the self-assured and energetic expressions of the students, the munificent ideals of Guru or teachers, the inspiring aura of the founders and the management. In fact, the entire campus echoes the philosophy behind the G L A U. Nestling between Agra and Delhi, the University has strength of over 4,500 students. The campus indeed accommodates every soul with a feeling of space and carefree environs. The GLA University caters to the most discerning of mindsets and has a diverse student base that forms the backbone of life at the campus. The students you meet hail from all parts of the nation. The most inspiring aspect about the university dawns upon you when you analyze the provisional planning and educational care that are religiously practised at GLAU. The university is equipped with one of the best engineering and information technology labs in Uttar Pradesh, the mega state and can easily be regarded at par with the best of the institute of the nation when it comes to infrastructural excellence. The classrooms are spacious and accommodative; one never feels cramped for space. The other notable resource center of the university is its well-stocked and up-to-date library

which has a compilation of books related to the subjects of study as well as reading and reference materials that keep one in tune with intellectual development, contemporary culture and artistic expressions. One of the most pro-active and progressive philanthropic groups of the state, GLA Group has been setting unparalleled benchmarks in the fields of technical and management studies since its inception in 1998. The university board has respected names like, Prof Preetam Singh, Former Director, IIML and MDI Gurgaon, Prof Shashi K Gulhati, Former Prof of Civil Engineering, IITD, Prof. K.R Singh, former Director of Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University and Prof. Bheem Singh, a veteran in Electrical Engineering from IIT Delhi. With an esteemed and much reputed assembly of names coming together to act as the patrons of GLA, the imitable progress made by the university in terms of educational standards, new innovative teaching methods and student facilities par excellence has been the stand-alone feature that sets GLA way apart from its contemporaries. With a track record of inducing confidence and credibility amongst its students, GLAU has produced brilliant professionals in the fields of engineering and management. The university's placement portfolio would impress every aspiring student to be a part of its legacy and carve a niche for himself in the professional arena. Such marquee recruiters as Infosys, Wipro, TCS, HCL, Jindal Steel, HMSI, Bosch, Honda Motors and Scooters, Suzuki Motorcycle, Reliance, Hindustan Glass, Padmini,

education is about living.
IDBI, HDFC, Cryobank, Amaron Batteries, KEC, Cease Fire,Techpro are regular visitors to the University for campus placement which reaffirm their belief in the brand GLA year after year. "I am really proud of my almamater because of which today I have reached a place where I rub shoulders with the likes of I I I graduates indicating that GLA is one of the best", so says Arvind, a GLA alumnus and an engineer at Samsung Electronics. Such a statement vouches for the excellent education that GLAU has imparted in its products i.e., students. THE INEGRITY A University is a place where life does not stop with the sunset neither does it begin only with the sunrise. Like any real life community, life at GLA is a 24 x 7 community. We have created learning opportunities and encourage our students to use these opportunities for learning. The students are provided with ample opportunities to hone their skills-set as per the requirements of the corporate world in the form of Personality Development Programmes wherein they are groomed by industry experts. The syllabi have been specially designed to cater to the latest trends in the corporate. While designing the syllabi we have given due weightage to the reports of NASSCOM, McKinsey and World Bank mentioning on the issues of employability and skills set of graduating engineers in India The courses have been designed to train and develop the graduating students in the areas of communication skills, critical thinking, problem solving, decision making, ethics etc. The care has been taken that each individual has his or her set of preferred mechanism as some learn by listening, some by reading, some through interactive dialogue, some by solving problems, some by project activities, and some by getting their hands dirty and by doing and so on. The life at campus represents the academic prowess the university stands for. The teacher-student ratio in every department of the various faculties of studies is near perfect paving way for personalized mentorship of the students. The mutual admiration and camaraderie shared between the management, faculties and the students give the institute, the healthiest educational environment one can aspire for coming to the student facilities in the campus you marvel at the arrangements being done for the students, be it the well-equipped labs for the students and their internships being organized with most of the

COURSES OFFERED Presently, the University offers various courses such as B.Tech. B.Pharm, BBA, BCA, B.Sc. (Biotechnology), B.Com (H). at the undergraduate level; M.Tech. M.Pharm, MBA, MCA, M.Sc. Biotechnology at the postgraduate level and doctoral programme in various disciplines of Engineering, Management, Pharmacy, Biotechnology, Applied Physics and Chemistry and English. With the start of doctoral programs the University positions itself as one of the most prolific research centers in the country and looks forward to give its students all the requisite expertise, experience and exposure that would enable them to pursue a career filled with professional dexterity and personal achievements.

'иA University should be a place of light, of liberty, and of learning".
-BEN1AMIN DISRAELI

FOCUSING
What do you think is the best thing about an education in GLA University?
Education at GLAU inspires you to challenge your limitations and look at things that are beyond the obvious. Knowledge not only liberates you, it also brings with it the responsibility to give back to the society and help transform the society around you aiming for its betterment by fostering all round development. With the vision so broad and the mission clearly defined, GLAU represents the true purpose of education as to how to live besides learning which is an unending process and that changes the life of the people and impacts the future of the nation. best corporate establishments from various industrial sectors or, the facilities like further research and development for the teachers at coveted institutes like the NT. GLA University is impressive you on every account. With such a prolific and near perfect profile for a University, GLA in its entirety gives us a backdrop of the ideals that are inscribed in the very soul of its founder and chancellor, Mr. Narayan Das Agrawal, who took the initiative to realize the dreams of his father, Late Mr. Ganeshi Lai Agrawal by laying the foundation of Sri Jagannath Prasad Ganeshi Lai Bajaj Charitable Trust Samiti and GLA University. A man of simple beliefs, productive vision and great spiritual ingenuity, Mr. Narayan Das Agrawal was inspired by his dreams of presenting every aspiring knowledge seeker, the opportunity to realize his dreams and foster a sense of indelible confidence amongst them. Explaining the vision of the GLA University the Chancellor explains that he wants GLAU "To be a pace-setting University of academic excellence focused on education, research and development in established and emerging professions." The one major aspect that defines GLAU and its credentials is the discipline that the faculty and management as well as the students practise in their individual capacities. Giving a direction to the young minds in a world where there are so many distractions one definitely needs discipline to achieve one's goals efficiently. Once the value of discipline is inculcated into one's mind, one automatically becomes a self motivated individual who will always strive to reach one's goals.

What is promised in terms of career to the students of GLAU?
We pay utmost attention to make sure that any student who comes to GLAU is somebody who goes out of here as a self sustaining independent human being and towards this end we work consistently with our placement cell. The students are provided with ample opportunities to hone their skills-set as per the requirements of the corporate world in the form of Personality Development Programmes wherein they are groomed by industry experts. The syllabi have been specially designed to cater to the latest trends in the corporate. To see our students well placed gives me a great sense of satisfaction.

How does the campus at GLAU reflect the nature of the University?
The campus at GLAU is very close to my heart. It is the first thing that you see when you enter the premises and I assure you that it is abuzz 24/7 with an ever enthusiastic group of students. Just step into the campus and get a feel what it stands for. Be it the selfassured and energetic expressions of the students, the munificent ideals of Guru or teachers, the inspiring aura of the founders and;^fcrianagernent- the campus reflects the strong iJeafs that the University is built on.

TALK

.T>

PHILOSOPHIZING GLAU: GLAU at its ideological core believes that simple philosophies ultimately lead an individual to gain the real insights in life. Adhering to the basic principles of humanity the person ultimately inculcates Truthfulness, Honesty, and Perseverance within his character. Mr. Agrawal stresses, "Look within your soul, get a hang of what your spirit desires and you'll realize the ultimate goal you are meant to achieve in life. It's not just about finding a means to better your career prospects. Education inspires you to challenge your limitations and look at things that are beyond the obvious. Knowledge not only liberates you, it also brings with it the responsibility to give back to the society and help transform the society around you aiming for its betterment by fostering all round development". With the vision so broad and the mission clearly defined, GLAU represents the true purpose of education as to how to live besides learning which is an unending process and that changes the life of the people and impacts the future of the nation. As per the Chancellor of GLA University, Shri Narayan Das Agrawal, "The present era of liberalization comes with its own set of opportunities and challenges. It remains for the students to explore the vistas of success vis-avis their ability to utilize class room teachings to solve real life problems. I firmly believe that GLA University would remain committed to this cause and help the students to realize their full potential. The success of training and placement reflects the maturity of any educational establishment and GLA is no exception to it."

What is the mission and vision for GLAU?
At GLAU we aim to give a holistic package, inclusive of education and overall development of personality for a student. To be a pace-setting University of academic excellence focused on education, research and development in established and emerging professions.

Tell us something about the faculty
At GLAU, teachers are both mentors and friends. We stress on the importance of treating the students as equals and at the same time guiding them to become successful alumni of GLAU, The teacher-student ratio in every department of the various faculties of studies is near perfect paving way for personalized mentorship of the students. The mutual admiration and camaraderie shared between the management, faculties and the students give the institute, the healthiest educational environment one can aspire for.

Tell us about the infrastructure at GLAU
We at GLAU strive to provide the best possible opportunities to our students so that they have everything they need to excel at their beck and call. The University is equipped with one of the best engineering and information technology labs in Uttar Pradesh, the mega state and can easily be regarded at par with the best of the institute of the nation when it comes to infrastructural excellence. The classrooms are spacious and accommodative; one never feels cramped for space. The other notable resource center of the university is its well-stocked and up-to-date library which has a compilation of books related to the subjects of study as well as reading and reference materials that keep one in tune with intellectual development, contemporary culture and artistic expressions.

Prof. Jai Prakosh
VICE CHANCELLOR

FOCUSEDUCATIQN

ITM University, Gwalior

Celebrating dreams of
Every youth dreams of a successful career and college life is the threshold where these dreams find a foundation. Choosing the right educational institution is of utmost importance for a strong and well based careergraph. ITM University, Gwalior is the amalgamation of innovation, discipline and fun while learning and all of that comes together to give the youth a comprehensive and well rooted start to their career. The core values of the University are humanity and ethics blended with sincerity, integrity and accountability, productive delivery supported by healthy competition, efficiency and dynamism coupled with sensitivity. ITMU Gwalior seeks to nurture innovation and ability to think differently with rational creativity, appreciation of sustainable socio-cultural values and to feel proud to be a good professional contributing to the betterment of humankind and Mother Earth.

T

he vision of the University is to develop into a centre of excellence in education, research, training and consultancy to the extent that it becomes a significant player of the country and the world. The mission coincides with the vision to meet the global need of competent and dedicated professionals, to undertake R & D, consultancy & extension activities which are of relevance to the needs of the humankind and to serve the community by interaction on, scientific, technical and other aspects of development.

ITM University, Gwalior was established by the State Government Act, M.R and is notified in the Official Gazette (extra-ordinary) of the State Government after having received the assent of His Excellency Governor of M.R ITM University, Gwalior, is sponsored by Samata Lok Sansthan, a registered charitable Trust. The University is recognized by UGC and the technical courses are approved by AiCTE. The Trust was successfully running various Institutions in discipline of Engineering. Technology, Life Science, Computer Applications, Management, Nursing & Education etc for last 15 years enjoying the top ranking in the State & the Region. It is

ranked as the 7th in India as Power Private UniversityICMR Survey 2012 and also ranked as the Best Upcoming Private University in India - Brands Research 2012, Singapore. The flagship Institutions under ITM Group of Institution (known as ITM Universe' - brand name) like Institute of Technology & Management (ITM) & Institute of Allied Science and Computer Applications (IASCA) at Gwalior are NBA & NAAC accredited respectively. The campus at ITMU Gwalior is an enriching as well and visual treat for the students with well manicured greenery and state of the art facilities. High standards at the University are the result of both the learning opportunities offered and resources, experienced faculties, including rich libraries, museums, state-of-art laboratories and latest software. The faculties at ITMU Gwalior have exposure to international learning systems and are defending their research at the best Universities of the globe. ITMU Gwalior is coming out with international journals in many

,,,...

The academic therefore is not merely reduced to a daily chore; students are encouraged *~ have a good time while pursuing their stud Whether it is the thrill of competition or the desire for a fit body, ITMU provides a plethor of opportunities that will demand commitment,

ver 15000 young minds
disciplines, largest library in central region, well equipped class-rooms and large inventory of software. All combined offers an unparalleled learning environment. The Campus life at ITMU Gwalior will offer an endless feast to your mind. With a wealth of sporting and cultural activity at the University, initiatives ensure that aspiring performers enrich their education with a high level of activity outside the lecture rooms. Students beyond their classroom will have countless opportunities for involvement and extra-curricular enjoyment. One sees hundreds of original works of Art permanently displayed in common areas & monumental sculptures in marble, granite, mild steel or stainless steel in open areas. There is so much of world class curricular and extra-curricular activities throughout the year that the city folks of the Region eagerly awaits for each event. The largest Amphitheatre of India at ITMU Gwalior Campus becomes witness to ever bubbling energies of youth. There is no barrier between students & higher authorities in this Campus. Each student expresses through ITM's various clubs. In 100 Acres sprawling lush green environs of Vindhyachal ranges, the beautiful campus of ITM University, Gwalior is the most Happening & Happy campus in this part of India attracting Scholars, Nobel laureates, Artists, Heads of States & Top Corporates to mingle & interact with more than 15000 students of different streams. The academia therefore is not merely reduced to a daily chore; students are encouraged to have a good time while pursuing their studies. Whether it is the thrill of competition or the desire for a fit body, ITMU Gwalior provides a plethora of opportunities that will demand commitment, dedication and skill development.

satisfaction thiflilRng smiles on t faces of young boys & girls as they enjoy the learning process in thecampus, make life long friends, work hard to cope with the challenge of their curricular & co-curricular schedules and indulge with vigour! extracurricular activities, find time t< party, groom themselves as fine Ladi & Gentlemen sensitive to global arts culture, ready to plunge into their chosen professions and finally work overtime to care for their immediate & Global family and see that Mother Earth and all its inhabitants are saved from catastrophic human I interventions.
I - RAMASHANKAR SINGH, Chancellor

FOCUSEDUCMIION

Programmes

Programmes

SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY

B.Tech./*B.Tech. (Hons.) *school of Civil Engineering nursing Mechanical Engineering Computer Science Engineering Information & Communication Technology Electronics & Communication Engineering school of Electrical Engineering pharmacy Biotechnology school of MB. & Automobile Engineering info, science B.Tech. + MBA / B.Tech. (Hons.) + MBA school of Mechanical Engg. & Industrial Management Business & Information Technology Management commerce Electronics & Comm. Tech. Management Biotechnology Management B.Tech. + M.Tech. / B.Tech. (Hons.) + M.Tech.| Electronics & Communication Engg. Computer Science Engineering Information & Communication Technology Mechanical Engineering Biotechnology Civil Engineering M.Tech. Computer Science Engineering Information Technology Civil Engineering Measurement & Control school of Mechanical Engineering computer VLSI Design applications Embedded System Chemical Engineering Nano Technology school of life Materials Science Industrial Production Management Ph.D. ] Civil Engineering Mechanical Engineering Electronics & Communication Engg. Diploma Civil Engineering Mechanical Engineering Computer Science Engineering Information Technology Electronics & Communication Engg. Electrical & Communication Engineering Electrical Engineering school of Electronics & Instrumentation education Chemical Engineering Automobile Engineering school of Industrial Production Management medical & B.Tech/B.Tech. (Hons.) Lateral entry paramedical (all above branches)

M.Sc. Nursing (Medical Surgical Nursing, Obstetrical Gyne. Nursing, Community Health Nursing) B.Sc. Nursing (Hons.) Post Basic Nursing GNM B. Pharmacy M. Pharmacy M.LI.Sc. B.Lib.l.Sc. BBA BBA (Hons.) MBA (Dual Specialization in International Business, HR, Marketing, Finance, Operation Management, IT Retailing, Marketing Research, Supply Chain Management) MBA (Retailing) MBA (Finance) MBA (Executive) "BBA (Hons. )+MBA Ph.D in Management B.Com. (Computer Application/Taxation) B.Com. (Hons.) B.Com. (Hons.) [for CA pursuing students] "B.Com. (Hons.)+MBA BCA BCA(Hons.) "BCA(Hons.)+MCA MCA Ph.D in Computer Applications B.Sc. (Hons.) Biotechnology M.Sc. Biotechnology M.Sc. Microbiology M.Sc. Food Technology M.Sc. Environmental Science & Technology B.Sc. in Science/Life Science/Engg./Forestry/ Ph.D. Biotechnology / Microbiology / Environment Science M.Sc. Petroleum Technology Ph.D. in Maths/Physics/Chemistry M.A. (Education) B.Ed. " D.Ed. M.Sc. Medical Biochemistry M.Sc. Medical Microbiology B. Optom. (Bachelor of Clinical Optometry)

School of Architecture

school of hospitality management

BHM BHTA

The courses are approved by statutory bodies like AICTE, NOTE, Council of Architecture, Indian Nursing Council etc.

ITMU Gwalior has been at the forefront of learning, teaching and research and leader in many different fields in its educational endeavor. In a relatively shorttime span it has created an image for its excellence as an institution of higher learning through outstanding teaching and world-class research so as to produce well-rounded graduates with lifelong abilities to provide leadership within the societies they serve. ITMU Gwalior have a well-deserved reputation for last 15 years for excellence, as demonstrated by host of educational institutions already operating under out flagship banner i.e., ITM Universe. The University aims to offer a rich learning environment where outstanding students and scholars from around the world are continually challenged and inspired to do their best possible work. The programmes are being designed for its emphasis on critical thinking and broad interdisciplinary exposure to the full range of intellectual discovery. ITMU Gwalior look forward to break down artificial disciplinary barriers. The University aims to provide its students with a rich and varied academic environment through choice based credit system, modular approach, cafeteria approach, multipoint entry and exit, industry based credits, students exchange etc., that ensures opportunities for both intellectual development and the acquisition of professional knowledge and skills. It is designed in a manner that offers students necessary competencies to face the challenges of the new economic world order. The University offers academic programmes in cooperation with University of Staffordshire, UK and University of Greenwich, London, UK. ITMU Gwalior are making endeavours to further extend this network with other well recognized Universities of the globe in the domain of dual degree, research, training, student exchange, faculty exchange and placement of students. Additionally ITMU Gwalior are proud of our research linkages with well recognized labs of the country. ITM University, Gwalior has the highest footfalls of industrial leaders in central regions. More than 20 CEO's visit every year to share their experiences. With an enviable track record of highest number of placements in central regions, experts from industry are at the Board of Studies. Companies like TCS, Infosys, HR L&T and Wipro are few flagship companies who are regularly visiting ITMU Gwalior.

ITMU provides everything on the platter to students. ITMU have academics, training, placement and co-curricular activities as its base. It is proven that ITMU is better than the best. It is the best place which gives recognition to talents and helps in identifcation of the self. ITMU has the best infrastructure, excellent placements, training sessions and The Best Education. MRADUUAIN Placed in L&TInfotech

I may move apart but nothing will diminish the role ITM has played in my life. The awesome campus with so many amazing events happening throughout the year brought me closer to ITM and helped me explore myself to the depth I never reached. During the last 4 years ITM has grown not just in size, buildings and numbers but also in stature, as a place of true learning. Not to forget the most amazing friends I made. They have made this the most diffcult of goodbyes. DULCIEAGRAWAL Placed in Infosys

Am indebted to my father for living, but to my teachers for living well. What accounts for my success are the constant motivating faculties of ITMU. I am thankful to TAP Cell for providing me such great opportunities. SHOBHIT SINGH Placed in L&T Infotech &IAF

ITMU is a great campus with World Class Art & Sculptures. It is a splendid place of fun & frolic too. I have enjoyed some great moments here. This campus is happy & happening, sporty and above all progressive. ABHISHEK MISHRA Placed at IBM

FOCUSEDUCATION

KMT University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
(Declared U/S 3 of UGC Act, 1956)

INCULCATING GLOBAL PERSPI
In today's age of exposure and value addition, KIIT has been able to live up to society's expectations. Its unique focus on quality education with humane touch has resulted in its transformation from a small technical institute to a world class University within the shortest span of time.

T

he growth of KIIT as a world-class University spreading over 25 sq. km. of prime land in 20 lush green sprawling campuses in a built-up area of 7.5 million square feet in Eastern India is incredible indeed. It was declared a University (u/s 3 of UGC Act of 1956) in 2004, within only six years of commencement of Degree programmes, thus earning it a place in the Limca Book of Records. KIIT, now a multi-disciplinary University with 23 constituent Schools offering diverse programmes, has proved itself to be the much sought after higher education centre of the country. With 17000 students pursuing both graduation and post-graduation studies, KIIT stands out as a class of its own both in quality and quantity. Student community of the University is highly disciplined due to its student friendly policies, setting it apart from other institutes. Even though it is a self-financing institution, KIIT is a well structured and decentralized organization. It is perhaps

the only self-financing institution in the country where top functionaries, including Chancellor and Vice Chancellor, are renowned academicians. Excellence of KIIT is reflected by the performance of its very first passing out batch of students of KIIT School of Law in 2012. All 41 eligible and interested students of the batch were absorbed by 16 legal firms, chambers of top Supreme Court lawyers and companies that visited the campus. KIIT School of Law, which was established in 2007 on the pattern of National Law Schools, is now regarded as at par with the best law schools of the country. Similarly, the first batch of M.B.B.S. student of Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS) also passed out this year. Even though KIMS is only five years old, it features among top 30 medical colleges of the country, according to a survey published in The Daily Pioneer on its 16th May 2012 edition. и From Unknown to Well-Known The story of KIIT University, from a modest Vocational Training Centre in 1992 started with Rs. 5000/- to a sprawling University, is the story of indomitable spirit of its Founder, Achyuta Samanta. He converted his childhood

I iW BlSD I P

. T - , T B

ECTIVE IN HIGHER EDUCATION
struggle and hardship into his strength and went on to script this incredible success story. Emerging from obscurity, Samanta is now well known not only because of KIIT, but also because he has shown the path for professional education in India. и Schools of KIIT University

School of Civil Engineering; School of Computer Engineering; School of Electrical Engineering; School of Electronics Engineering; School of Mechanical Engineering; School of Computer Application; School of Applied Sciences; School of Law; School of Management; School of Rural Management; School of Biotechnology; Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS); Kalinga Institute of Dental Sciences (KIDS); Kalinga Institute of Nursing Sciences (KINS); School of Fashion Technology; School of Film & Media Sciences; School of Fine Art; School of Language; School of Yoga и National & International Recognition In order to make its presence felt in the global education scenario, KIIT University acquired membership in various prestigious world bodies, accreditation boards and associations like University Mobility Asia and the Pacific (UMAP), Association of Commonwealth Universities (ACU) and International Association of Universities (IAU). Each of these bodies have large number of member Universities and members benefit from exchange, degree equivalence, fellowship and research grants in furthering the cause of higher education amongst themselves. The 400 odd Universities body UMAP has been so impressed by KIIT that it decided to have its India Office in KIIT University. и National & International Standing KIIT University is accredited by NAAC of UGC in 'A Grade1 (Highest CGPA among self-financing universities) and NBA of AICTE. It is a member of prestigious national and international organizations. и International Association of Universities (IAU) и Association of Indian Universities (AIU) и Association of Commonwealth Universities (ACU) и University Mobility in Asia and the Pacific (UMAP) и International Association of University Presidents (IAUP) и Association of University of Asia Pacific (AUAP) и Institute of International Education (HE), New York и United Nations Academic Impact (UNAI)

KIIT in its endeavor to reach out to every knowledge centre of the world has entered into academic partnership with more than 60 world-class universities. KIIT has tie-ups with leading international universities like Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), Bangkok, University of Cambodia, Czech University of Life Sciences, Prague, etc. Though there is specific agreement with individual universities, yet some of the common points are students, faculty & research scholar exchange programme, internship for UG/PG course, research and development participation, short-term courses for faculty & students, short-term occupational training, exchange of publications & information and seminars and conferences. As per the arrangements, hundreds of KIIT students have been going to various foreign partner universities every year. However, it is not one way traffic from KIIT. The university also has been receiving exchange students from partner universities. International exposure of KIIT has opened floodgates of opportunity for its students to join leading foreign universities for higher studies. To make the most of this opportunity, KIIT University uniquely places equal emphasis on academic placement, meticulously grooming interested students for higher studies and actively supporting their efforts to secure admission in reputed institutions. As a result, as many as 159 students from different Schools of the University were academically placed in 2012, securing admission in leading institutions of higher education in India and abroad. In KIIT School of Biotechnology, 42 out of 75 students have been selected to join reputed national and international institutions for higher studies.

Some of the Foreign Institutions Where KIIT Students Joined ETH, Zurich, Switzerland; EAWAG, Dubendorf, Switzerland; European Master in Law & Economics; University of Lyon, France; Nikita Chandel, Texas; A&M University, USA; University Law College, University of London, UK; Oxford University, U.K.; Cambridge University, U.K.; Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok; Czech University of Life Sciences, Prague; Hanseo University, South Korea

FOCUSEDUCATION
и Research & Development A 1000-strong team of faculty, scientists and researchers form the intellectual capital of KIIT University. The team provide thrust to research and development activity and their quality is amply demonstrated by the patents held by various faculty members and the research grants coming from various agencies both in India and abroad. KIIT School of Biotechnology, established only in 2007, has emerged a centre of excellence in the field, bagging research projects worth over Rs. 50 crore. These projects are sponsored by foreign agencies like ETH, Zurich, Switzerland and various bodies of Govt. of India such as Department of Biotechnology, Department of Science & Technology, ICMR, CSIR, ICAR, etc. KIIT University has set up 10 interdisciplinary centres of excellence to provide impetus to research and development activity. These are:и KIIT Technology Business Incubator (Supported by DST, MSN/IE, DIT, Govt. of India) и Biogas Development Training Centre (Supported by MNRE, Govt. of India) и Centre for Children's Studies (Supported by UNICEF) и Centre for Innovation and Research & Research and Development Cell и UMAP National Secretariat of India и Open Source Drug Discovery System (Supported by CSIR) и IBM-KSOM Centre of Excellence (Supported by IBM) и Centre for Excellence for SAP (Supported by SAP, USA) и KIIT Centre for Environment and Global Sustainability и ISTE Students' and Faculty Chapter и Seminars and Symposiums KIIT is a vibrant institution. It has been organizing academic deliberations of national and international signification since its inception in 1997. Thousands of policy makers, academicians and corporate leaders grace these events providing invaluable exposure to KIIT students. The 31st National ISTE Convention, organized by KIIT University in 2001, was a landmark event in the history of this prestigious meet due to its grand success, which changed the shape of further sessions. More recently, the 92nd session of IEA (2009) and 99th Indian Science Congress (2012) at KIIT were addressed by Hon'ble Prime Minister of India Dr. Manmohan Singh. Recent International Meets 99th Indian Science Congress (2012) International Conference on Distributed Computing and Internet Technology (2012) International Symposium on Molecular Basis of Human Health in Response to Mutagens and Environmental Stress (2012) International Conference on Digital Library (2011) International Seminar on 150 Years of Indian Penal Code (2011) First BCI International Moot Court Competition (2011) 52nd Philip C. Jessup International Law Moot Court Competition (2011) International Law Week (2010) International Conference on Cell Signaling and Diseases (2010) International Conference on Economics and Business (2010) International Conference on Bioinformatics (2010) 99th Indian Science Congress KIIT had the distinction to host the 99th Indian Science Congress, held in Odisha after a long interval of 34 years. Organized with active collaboration of NISER, Govt. of India, the five-day mega scientific event was attended by more than 18,000 delegates from India and abroad, including many Nobel Laureates. The Congress was inaugurated by Dr. Manmohan Singh, Hon'ble Prime Minister of India. Children's Science Congress, inaugurated by Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, Former President of India, and Women's Science Congress, inaugurated by Smt. Nirupama Rao, Hon'ble Indian Ambassador to U.S., were held in the sidelines of the 99th Indian Science Congress. The Congress attracted participation of distinguished scientists, Cabinet Ministers from the centre and state, Secretaries, heads of scientific bodies, top officials and captains of industry. и KIIT Global As a progressive institution, KIIT University is sensitive to the growing trends of globalization of higher education. International interaction of KIIT University is not new. Way back in 2001, KIIT was one of the first institutions in the State of Odisha to attract foreign students into its various academic programmes. In subsequent years, their numbers grew steadily. At present student body of KIIT University has representation from over 20 countries, including most of the South Asian nations, proving that its reputation as a quality institution of professional education transcends borders. KIIT University values the diversity that international students bring to campus in terms of culture, background and perspectives. A decade long exposure to international environment has led to the creation of infrastructure and support systems which are the most appropriate to welcome foreign students. The University has a proactive

International Programme Cell, which provides guidance to international students right from their arrival in the institute in the matters of their cultural, legal and academic needs and other issues of relevance. Keeping in view the communication needs of the prospective students from South Korea, China, Thailand and Japan, the University has established a language lab to improve the communication skills in eight foreign languages including English. There is a dedicated hostel for international students with superior amenities. Facilities and support services apart, a curriculum tuned to global standard is a major attraction for foreign students. In order to maintain such high standard, KIIT has roped in faculty and staff members from 13 countries. Besides, international luminaries such as Nobel Laureates, Ramon Magsaysay Awardees, Ambassadors, renowned legal and management personalities regularly deliver special lectures at KIIT University and interact with the students. The management of the institution has identified internationalization as an important thrust area for the next ten years. Starting this year, a series of measure are on the anvil, including a setting up of a high impact 'KIIT Global' secretariat in the campus to coordinate the efforts. и Student Achievement KIIT uniquely promotes students research and projects of its students have the distinction of being appreciated at national and international forum, including the prestigious India Science Congress. KIIT students are high achievers imbibed with competitive spirit to achieve anything. Since its inception, core objective of KIIT has been to provide high quality exposure and value addition to its students. The University promotes a policy of actively promoting innovative idea among students. As a result students are well exposed to international scenario and perform well at national and international level, bringing laurels for the University, State and country. KIIT has also produced high achievers in many disciplines of sports including two Chess Grandmasters - Kiran Manisha Mohanty and Swayams Mishra (B.Tech). и KiiT International School KiiT International School, another addition to KIIT Group of Institutions, has become the only school in eastern India to offer International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (IBDP). Besides IBDP. It also offers International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE) of University of Cambridge as international curriculum and Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) as national curriculum. Padmashree Ruskin Bond, iconic writer is the Brand Ambassador of KiiT International School. The School with a holistic approach continues to attract students from all parts of the globe through its curriculum it inculcates the virtues of self discipline, intellectual pride and confidence among the students for becoming global citizens. The curriculums are headed by highly qualified and experienced Principals, supported by highly qualified teachers, drawn from different countries, to deliver quality education. For further details please long on to www.kitt-is.org

PLACEMENT
KIIT University enjoys employers' confidence on it to prepare its graduates for the present day competitive environment. The University has secured excellent placement for all its graduates passing out in 2012. Total 1,920 job offers were generated in campus placement for 1,625 eligible students of 2012 passing out batch of various streams. As many as 323 students bagged two job offers, while 34 were pampered with three offers. These job offers were made by 185 companies which visited different schools of KIIT University - Schools of Engineering, School of Computer Application, School of Biotechnology, School of Law, School of Management and School of Rural Management - for campus placement. With job offers outstripping eligible students in almost all streams, the University has yet again achieved a record placement. KIIT School of Law created history by achieving cent percent placement for its very first passing out batch. In technology streams, three top recruiters TCS, Accenture and Wipro gave job offers to 1128 students. Campus placement of 708 KIIT students by TCS in a single day is a record for highest placement conversion in Eastern India.

FOCUSlDUCfiTION

Bharath University 173 Agharam Road, Selaiyur, Chennai - 600 073, Tamil Nadu Tel: + 91 - 44 - 2229 0742, 2229 0125, 2229 0247 Fax: + 91 - 44 - 2229 3886 Email: vc@bharathuniv.ac.in, admissi< >n@bharathuniv.ac.ifl www.bharathuniv.com

UNIVERSITY Plot N o.2, Sector 17- A Yamuna Expressway, Greater Noida, Gautam Buddh Naga Uttar Pradesh, Opposite Buddh International Circuit. Contact Call Centre: 0120-4370000, 0120-4513999 www.galgotiasuniversity.edu.in

GALGOTIAS

GLA
MATHURA

UNIV1-RS1TY

-,

GLA University 17km Stone, NH-2, Mathura-Delhi Roa P.O. Chaumuhan, Mathura-281 406 (UP.) Tel: +91-5662-250900, 250908/909; Fax: +91-5662-2H68 E-mail: admission@gla.ac.in Website: www.gla.ac.in

UNIVERSITY
GWALIORMP INDIA

"CELEBRATING DREAMS" ITM University Gwalior N H - 75, Jhansi Road, Sithouli, Gwalior, M.P. - 474001 A Ph : 0751 3921000 Email : admission@itmuniversit}'.ac.in / info@itmuniversity.ac.in www.itmuniversitj'.ac.in

KIIT University, Bhubaneswar - 751024, Odisha Phone : +91 674 2725113, 2378550 Fax : +91 674 2725721, 2740326 ; Email: kiit@kiit.ac.in: www.kiit.ac.in

