PARK HYATT, HYDERABAD

I

ONE OF THE BEST IN THE WORLD
Park Hyatt hotels are premium luxury hotels designed to cater to the discerning individual seeking the privacy, personalized service and luxurious elegance of a contemporary hotel.

is L

ocated in Hyderabad's posh address, the upscale Banjara Hills, Hotel Park Hyatt with its beautifully crafted eight storey Madurai granite construction offers unique amenities for a truly authentic Deccan experience. One of the most outstanding features of the Hotel is its magnificent facade, clad in natural Madurai granite from South India. The facade is clean and modern with expansive glass doors and windows, and an impressive porte-cochere with a shimmering steel mesh ceiling fixture giving it a chandelier effect at the entrance. The lobby is impressively designed with sparkling waterfeatures and plants that surround the hotel's signature 35 foot tall white abstract structure that can blow your mind away. "Park Hyatt hotels are premium luxury hotels designed to cater to the discerning individual seeking the privacy, personalized service and luxurious elegance of a contemporary hotel," Spacious, welcoming and modern; each of the hotel's guestrooms is among the largest around. Soft, neutral earthy tones and shades of silver and green in the guestroom ' furnishings create a soothing ambience, while large glass windows add natural daylight within the room. The stylish and contemporary interiors are designed by the international design team, Hirsch Bedner Associates. For the convenience of busy corporate traveller, each guestroom is equipped with oversized work desks, easy-to-use in-room technology and conveniently placed electrical outlets and lightfixtures, while the luxurious bathrooms provide a sanctuary after a hard day's work studded with an oversized bathtub and rain shower, providing luxurious amenities from Miller Harris.
· CONFERENCE AND BANQUETING FACILITIES ·

The Hotel accommodations are ideally suited for business executives and leisure travelers alike seekinga luxury experience in the Charminar city. · THE MANOR: Park Hyatt Hyderabad is the first hotel in India to feature Hyatt's innovative style concept. Named 'The Manor' at Park Hyatt Hyderabad, the meeting facilities are designed in a comfortable and welcoming style to reflect the entertainment spaces of private areas. This unique concept offers small and mid-sized groups a personal, tailor-made meetings or events experience aided by a dedicated Events Service team. Park Hyatt Hyderabad's total meetings and events facilities measure more than 17,000 square feet/nearly 1,600 square meters and feature a separate entrance and spacious parkingfacilities.

"My dream is to place India on the world hospitality map. I am thrilled to see tourists admire and adore this masterpiece as one of the best in the world". Dr. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY M.R

AnimPACTreatiire

It was pleasure to work with world's best architects/interior designers to create this masterpiece. We are honored to be a part of the best hospitality chain in the world. This year we are rated as No. 1 in all 600 properties of Hyatt worldwide.
- T. V Sandeep Kumar Reddy Promoter, Park Hyatt Hyderabad · SPA AND OTHER FACILITIES ·

Hyderabad Golf Course is just over five miles/nine kilometers from the hotel. · THE RESIDENCE: The city's first ever five-star serviced apartments attached to a hotel, The Residence, at Park Hyatt Hyderabad, offer an exclusive "home away from home" experience with a wide range of services and facilities. The fully furnished apartments are spacious, bright and airy with high ceilings and city or atrium views. The apartments have fully-equipped kitchens with high-end appliances, stylish furniture and complimentary wireless Internet. The residences are built in flexible configurations of one, two and three bedrooms measuringfrom 927 square feet to 2,317 square feet (approximately 90 square meters to 225 square meters).
· MANAGEMENT ·

· THE SPA: With treatments inspired from the royal Nizams of Hyderabad, The Spa, offers hotel guests and local residents, an enticing bouquet of result-oriented beauty and wellness therapies. The ingredients used in the creams and lotions include saffron, pearls and other exclusive items. The Spa, also offers other amenities including Swedish sauna, Steam room, Beauty salon, and a Fitness center featuring a temperature-controlled swimming pool, latest gym and cardio equipment. For golf enthusiasts,

Gayatri Hi-tech under the dynamic Chairmanship of Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy alongwith his son Sandeep Kumar Reddy has developed this magnificent property. Dr Reddy is a well-known eminent industrialist and Member of Parliament. Speaking about his venturing into hospitality space Dr Reddy says, "This is a very special project, and I am delighted to see the project complete and go in to the best hands of a leading global hospitality company. The future looks exciting and bright as Hyatt's management is constantly introducing new ideas in all areas of hotel life, which makes Hyatt a successful company, that it is today."

S n a p Shots
Hyatt Group has 600 hotels in 75 countries worldwide. Park Hyatt Hyderabad is rated as world's best in the year 2012 amongthe group. P«Jfl . park Hyatt has been designed by the world famous John Portman & Associates of Chicago, USA. The Stylish & Contemporary interiors are done by the International design team Hirsch Bedner Associates of USA. Park Hyatt is the most luxurious brand of Hyatt Group & this brand has been broughtto India forthefirsttime by Reddy's. All restaurants (Tre-Forni, Oriental Kitchen & Bar, Dining Room & Living Room) are conceptualised by a Japanese interior designer. A 35 feettall dazzling sculpture has been especially imported from USA. Health Club, Spa and Swimming pool are one of their kind in the country. Marble, Kitchen equipments, Chandeliers, Fittings and Accessories are chosen selections from countries like Czechoslovakia, UK, US, Italy, Japan, France, Switzerland, Australia & Austria. Conventional 100 feet high pillars in lobby covered by special granite are imported from Angola, South Africa. High tech security system, Auto-frisking system entails guests to simply walkinwith no frisking. Underground car scanning system allows a car to enter the hotel without manual checking.

