Soc iety EDUCATION

FUN AS YOU LE ARN
Mobile apps, e-books, board games, audio-visual aids. The classroom takes a backseat as new-age educators marry games and technology with education.
By Aditi Pai

MUMBAI

Soumya Banerjee 52
FOUNDER,ATTANO.COM
Cartoon Network along with Attano, a site with educational e-books, launched video e-books and interactive activity books, based on the channel's brands like Ben 10, Generator Rex and the Powerpuff Girls.

s a 12-year-old playing Scrabble and Canasta with his grandparents in Jodhpur, Manuj Dhariwal, now 26, never imagined he would one day create his very own board game. In 2008, the graduate in design engineering from IIT-Guwahati, with brother Rajat, 29, and sister-in-law Madhumita, 30, launched Aksharit, India's first board game in Hindi. With 200 tiles (100 each for aksharas and matras), it went on to win the first prize at the Ideas to Implementation competition at IIM-Calcutta in 2008. Over the past four years, the colourful board game has made Hindi fun for over 300,000 students across 3,000 rural and government schools in Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. And the trio of IIT graduates has now taken Aksharit pan-India in 11 regional languages and into cyberspace with a digital version. "Games have the power to make learning effortless and fun and instil an ability to take on challenges," says Manuj, founder of MadRat Games, their company. Like the MadRat team, several professionals are changing the way young India learns. Giving textbooks and blackboards a miss, these new-age educators are devising games and infusing large doses of innovative technology to make learning more interactive and engaging. Be it honing your sports skills or learning the skeletal system with 3D models, there is a movement to instil fun and entertainment in the education process. K. Sharat Chandra, 32, decided to teach young children the basics of arithmetic with a tweaked version of

A

the popular snakes and ladders game, a staple in most homes. So, in 2005, the IIT-IIM alumnus set up Butterfly Fields in Hyderabad as a hobby centre for children to learn concepts of science and mathematics. In 2008, he partnered with schools to set up mini science centres and create concept maps and e-learning content for teachers. With 4,000 private and government schools in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka on his rolls, Chandra now creates math and science card games, board games and activities for children that are mapped to the curriculum of various syllabi, including Andhra Pradesh state board, ICSE and CBSE. "A child learns better
HYDERABAD

"One has to recognise the power of making e-books available to everyone at the click of a button."
ndiatodayimages.com MANDAR DEODHAR/www.i

K. Sharat Chandra 32
FOUNDER,BUTTERFLYFIELDS
Creates maths and science card games, board games and activities for children mapped to the curriculum of various syllabi--ICSE and CBSE.The company has created 350 models so far.

"We focus on ensuring that the child learns concepts by understanding underlying principles."
SRINIVAS

through action rather than by reading or even watching a video of a concept being explained. We focus on ensuring that the child learns concepts by understanding underlying principles," says Chandra, whose company has created over 350 such models and games. Technology, too, is giving these new ideas a boost, teaching subjects in a format that the GenNext enjoys best-- e-books and mobile apps. Soumya Banerjee, 52, founded Attano.com in

2009 and took textbooks to the digital world. These books allow readers to bookmark pages, scribble notes and even map a child's learning pattern and provide assessments. "Technology allows the book to evolve and integrate media through audio and video clips. Also, students in any corner of the country can access the same book," says Banerjee, who is based in Mumbai. With a master's degree in computer science from the University

of Houston, US, he wanted to use his 20 years of corporate experience to bring about a change in education. His 200 books currently have 50,000 users. Sensing that the mobile-bred generation gorges on anything that flashes on the palmtop screen, in December 2011 Jaipur-based Prafulla Mathur, 29, launched Money Games, a mobile app that teaches children the basics of banking. Besides decoding terms such as savings, assets, bank accounts and

liabilities, children learn to set goals and plan their finances to achieve these goals in a desired time period. "Educational apps can bring science to life in ways a textbook can't. In terms of children's education, technology extends learning in the same way as Lego blocks and other art materials, exposing children to animals, landscapes and activities that they cannot experience in person," says Mathur, who came back to India in 2009 after a stint in the banking industry in the UK to start his company Queppelin. Marrying technology with education, 40-year-old Sanjeev Mansotra's CORE Education and Technologies pioneered 3D education in India. In the company's portable 3D lab in Mumbai, students can learn human anatomy with 3D skeletal systems and organs rather than chalk-onboard diagrams. "Technology makes education more attractive, lucrative and comprehensive. Tech-education is in line with the Government of India's agenda of access, inclusion and quality in education," he says. While most focus on academic education solutions, Srinivas Rao Cheedella, 39, and his colleague Anurag Jain, 40, quit their jobs with

Dell Services in 2010 to set up India's largest vocational training institute. They wanted to "bridge the gap of eight million between the demand and supply of skilled manpower across vocational streams". Two years later, their company Laurus Edutech has 140 centres across India and trains over 34,000 people every year to become electricians, welders, medical lab assistants, tailors and auto mechanics. Besides technical training, the centre uses educational games to teach the importance of ethics and professional conduct. "At the end of each game, the purpose is to drive home the message that being a good worker reaps more benefits. Aside from teaching theory, we also want to build the character of our students but merely preaching is ineffective," says Cheedella. When Dev Roy, 39, returned to India in 2009 after a successful career with Barclay's Capital in London, he decided to help Bangalore children take to sports. Nostalgic about the city he grew up in, he started LeapStart, which offers physical education and sports programmes from kindergarten to high school. Their play modules include elements of SPARK, a researchbased public health organisation of

58

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012

AUGUST 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

BANGALORE

Dev Roy 39
FOUNDER,LEAPSTART
It offers physical education and sports programmes from kindergarten to high school.The modules are age-appropriate and progressive.

"Children even learn dance by rote. They don't know how dance can be used as a form of expression."

San Diego State University Research Foundation, whose programmes promote lifelong wellness. Here, children are taught unconventional lessons like how to fall without injuring themselves and social skills like how to interact with each other. The modules are ageappropriate and progressive. There is even a specially-designed physical education programme for children with learning disabilities. "If you have not played a sport as a child, or done theatre for example, when you enter the world of finance at 21, you are not equipped with life skills such as how to cooperate while competing or how to be a leader," he says. The company has 100 schools as part of its programmes. With young Indian parents adopting a new approach to education, these new-age services are fast catching on. Meritnation.com started in 2009 with an initial funding of Rs 11.5 crore from Info Edge (India), but within two years raised Rs 20 crore. The site offers study material in the forms of fun academic formats like quizzes, videos, games and puzzles. The resources follow the syllabi of CBSE, ICSE and 12 state boards and the site already has a virtual "classroom" of 3.2 million students from across the country. "We realised that visuals and animation not only make learning fun but also reten-

BANGALORE

Manuj Dhariwal 26
FOUNDER,MADRAT
Created Aksharit, the first ever Scrabble-like board game in Hindi.Aksharit is used by 300,000 children in schools in Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh.

"Games should have value beyond entertainment. If they are educational, they make learning easier."
tion easier. While children get to play games, parents know these games are constructive," says Pavan Chauhan, 38, who founded Meritnation.com with fellow IIM-B graduate Ritesh Hemrajani. "It is important to customise learning according to the assimilation levels and competency of every child. An effective classroom would be one where children can access relevant materials," says Chauhan, who has 20 years of teaching experience with The Learning Tree and Disha Public School. Giving a modern twist to academics, these new-age educators are making learning entertaining for today's wired generation.
with Devika Chaturvedi, Ayesha Aleem, Mona Ramavat and Sonali Acharjee

SANDESH RAVI KUMAR

