Leisure
BOOKS FA S H I O N CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Cover Girl
Anjum Nayar, 24, has one forgettable film, Mallika, to her credit, but gets to throw the tantrums of a Bollywood star in Cover Story. There is also Jackie Shroff playing a journalist, who chases her for an interview. An adaptation of the Dutch film, The Interview, it is directed by Dutch director Laurens Postma. The Delhi girl, who went by the name Sheena in Mallika two years ago, says, "I had planned my career before moving to Mumbai, but it just didn't happen." Perhaps changing your name with each film isn't a good plan?
NAYAR

SPOT THE STARLET
Tamannaah, 22, has a lot more in common with Sridevi than just the 1980s style costumes she wears in posters of the remake of Himmatwala. She doesn't brandish a whip, like Sridevi did in her firebrand act in 1983, but both started out as child actors and switched to Bollywood after successful stints in the south. Tamannaah debuted in the Hindi film Chand Sa Roshan Chehra in 2005, before Telugu and Tamil films claimed her. Now, director Sajid Khan has brought her back opposite Ajay Devgn. How will the queen of Kollywood fare the second time?
TAMANNAAH
YOGENSHAH

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND THINGS THAT MATTER
MUST SEE

Size Matters
Ileana D'Cruz, 24, is slimmer in the forthcoming Barfi! than her fans down south are used to, but she is piling on the films. She has already bagged her second Bollywood film, Ramesh Taurani's Phata Poster Nikla Hero, opposite Shahid Kapoor. While she may have lost her love handles, she still has two backto-back Telugu releases this month-- Julayi with Allu Arjun and Devudu Chesina Manushulu with Ravi Teja.
KOLHAPURE

D'CRUZ

Actor Dhanush singing a jingle in a new advertisement for Tata Nano. He switches between driving and singing at a studio in a two-minute video on YouTube.
MUST APPRECIATE

Ajay Devgn's Rs 15 lakh donation to the kin of a spot boy who died on the sets of Son of Sardaar.
MUST CONGRATULATE

Flight of Fancy

MUST WONDER

At rumours that Karan Johar will reunite actors Kareena Kapoor and Hrithik Roshan in a film, for the first time after Main Prem Ki Diwani Hoon in 2003.

YOGENSHAH

American actor and former Friends star Jennifer Aniston, on her engagement to actor and scriptwriter Justin Theroux.

Tejaswini Kolhapure's languishing film career may just take off,as Anurag Kashyap ropes her in for his thriller, Ugly,opposite Mahesh Bhatt's son Rahul.Her 2003 debut film Paanch,also with Kashyap, remained unreleased,and her next few attempts at acting were futile.She has had a long stint as a model and has occasionally acted in plays,but is best known as Padmini Kolhapure's little sister.Now may be the time to change that.


Compiled by Nishat Bari

72

Number 35; For the week August 21-27, 2012, released on August 20

