UP FRONT

SURINDER S. JODHKA

HER NAME IS ASPIRATION
n August 4, a 23-year-old woman, Geetika Sharma, urban parents, even those from the relatively less prospercommitted suicide in her home in Delhi. Two days ous economic backgrounds, have begun to look at their later, another young woman was found dead in her daughters differently. Notwithstanding conservative values home in the town of Mohali, close to Chandigarh. The two and strong faith in the institution of family, very rarely do incidents are not related but the individuals involved have urban parents discriminate against their daughters when it several things in common. Apart from being "young" and comes to sending them to schools and colleges. The new market economy also shapes social relations "dead", they were both associated with powerful and influential men. They are both dead because they were women and aspirations. While a rapid growth of service sector and had had "bad" experiences with the two men. While the creates demand for a variety of labour force, the growing woman who died in Mohali had been briefly married to the culture of consumption and commodities creates new aspison of a senior Haryana politician, the suicide note left rations which encourage everyone to work and accomplish behind by Geetika Sharma too indicates her being "manip- dreams. Nothing is more valuable in the consumer society than a good amount of disposable income. Everything seems ulated" by the other powerful man. The two women, in a sense, represent a new generation achievable. India lives with contradictions. As the country of Indians who grew up in the new India of the 1990s, where grows richer, so do its contradictions. The development of market economy during the 19th the expanding markets and service economy offered aspiring men and women opportunities beyond the conven- century in Western Europe that brought women into the tional jobs in the public sector and government depart- newly emergent labour markets was also accompanied by ments. The expanding service sector in particular offered a a new democratic consciousness and the rise of women's large variety of jobs to educated and young women and movements about their rights as citizens. In the 1960s and enabled them to think of their futures beyond the traditional 1970s, the feminist movements raised more fundamental questions about the relations of power in the private sphere. roles of motherhood and homemakers. The process of liberalisation initiated during the early By the 1980s the West saw the rise of a new consciousness 1990s was not merely about making the Indian economy about women's equality. The change was radical. India too has had its feminist movements. The so-called more competitive. It also began a process of social transformation. India today is no longer imagined as a land of "vil- autonomous women's movements that emerged during the lage republics" and agriculture. It is the service economy and 1980s raised questions about the pervasive violence against urban manufacturing that contribute most to the national women in the streets and at homes. They also raised income. The new economic order that linked India to the questions about differential wages and rights of working global economy in a much more intense mode also produced women. Even when these movements were mostly led by the a new cultural order. The new cultural economy of com- middle class urban women, they articulated concerns of different sections of Indian women. merce, commodities and consumption SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Women's empowerment, as they arcreated aspiration for mobility and gued, could happen only when the patripromised a new lifestyle that would proarchal mindset of the Indian society and vide comforts and dignity to those who the corresponding structure of social reworked hard irrespective of social posilations would change. However, the tion in the traditional order. Women who process of liberalisation and globalisajoined the new service economy not only tion empowered women through the went out to work and made friends market. They raised aspirations and based on their individual tastes but also desire for participation and mobility. The brought home handsome salaries. question of politics of social relations Apart from those from the metropolseemed redundant. It is this absence of itan centres and middle classes, women politics and blindness to the social strucfrom the lower middle classes coming tures of gender and patriarchy that from smaller towns and even rural produces the kind of urban and areas entered a new life of working out"modern" society where young midside the home, often at odd hours. The The expanding service sector dle class women, despite being new middle class family of urban India offered jobs to educated and empowered, are much more vulnerable no longer looked at its daughters merely young women and enabled than they have ever been in the past. as paraye ghar ki mehman, a "guest" to them to think of their futures be brought up for the house of her beyond the traditional roles of in-laws, where she assumed her final Surinder S. Jodhka is a professor of sociology identity, that of a wife and a mother. The motherhood and homemakers. at Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

O

AUGUST 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

