Na tion

GUJARAT
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

POLICEMEN GUARD NARMADA CANAL TO PREVENT WATER THEFT

MODI FACES POLITICALDROUGHT
The rain gods have deserted Modi. His rivals are ready to exploit the discontent.
By Uday Mahurkar

G

ujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi's toughest challenge in a tough election year could be from the rain gods. That much was made clear on July 17, as police and security personnel patrolled a 130km stretch of the Sardar Sarovar dam's branch canal from Dhanki in Surendranagar to Malia in Rajkot district, to prevent farmers from stealing water. Though the Narmada water is essentially meant for irrigation, the state government has been forced to reserve it as drinking water for Kutch in north Gujarat and Saurashtra, where Modi is expected to face tough opposition in the Assembly polls, expected to be held around end-2012. It may be too late, though. As Gujarat Water Resources Minister Nitin

Patel said, "More than a quarter of the monsoon season is gone, and the state has only received 150 mm of rainfall. We should have had 800 mm by now. If the monsoon does not set in soon, crop yield will be affected, but we are geared to tackle any crisis, including that of drinking water." Only around 270 villages in the state need to be supplied drinking water by tankers these days. In the 1990s, when the Narmada canal and check dams were not yet in place, the

number of tanker-dependent villages used to be in the thousands. The state has 210 medium and small dams, which, this year, are only 33 per cent full, below the expected 50 per cent. The crop situation could be grim if monsoon doesn't set in soon. Seventy per cent of the sowing is over, and if rains plays truant till the first week of August, 30 per cent of the crop will wither away. Paddy transplantation is on hold in large tracts, as there isn't enough water for the flooding re-

WITH A QUARTER OF THE MONSOON SEASON GONE,THE STATE HAS RECEIVED ONLY150 MM OF RAINFALL,AGAINST THE USUAL800 MM.
AFP

MODI

quired for the crop. The Sardar Sarovar dam on the Narmada river could be Gujarat's saviour, as the dam, despite holding 35 per cent less water in store than last year, will help the state tackle a potential drinking water crisis. The problem is more acute on the irrigation front, with catchment areas of the state's big dams--from Sardar Sarovar to Kadana on the Mahi and Ukai on the Tapi, located in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan respectively--having received little rainfall. There has been some improvement in the past week, though. If the monsoon fails, it could lead to an urban-rural conflict on election eve. There are murmurs of discontent from some farmers in Saurashtra, who have been denied water from the Narmada for irrigation. This is ammunition for the opposition Congress, as well as Modi's arch rival, former chief minister Keshubhai Patel, who are already accusing his government of being antifarmer and pro-corporate. Most of Modi's key ministers-- Vajubhai Vala, Anandiben Patel, Nitin Patel and Saurabh Patel--come from urban areas. The government will have to balance distributing the scarce resource between urban and rural areas, without upsetting the satraps. Keshubhai, along with former chief minister Suresh Mehta and former Union minister Kashiram Rana, is holding rallies under the banner of `Parivartan' (change) in the state. On July 22, he called Modi "as thickskinned as a rhinoceros in dealing with people's problems". Dubbing him as a "decayed fruit" who should be thrown out, at a rally in Rajkot, he accused the Chief Minister of making false claims on development, and of being "a liar". Modi and his supporters have maintained a dignified silence so far, but the trio is not missing any opportunity to attack the Chief Minister, and a drought will provide an all-access pass. But as Nitin Patel puts it: "We're hopeful there won't be a drought. If there is one, let's not forget that effective tackling of drought will fetch us public appreciation. We are prepared to face any situation." 

ECONOMY

India Inc Loses Faith
BT-C fore survey shows Business Confidence Index has slipped below the 50 mark in the last quarter
he confidence levels among India's businessmen have reached a new low. According to the latest Business Today-C fore survey for April to June 2012, the Business Confidence Index (BCI) has slipped to 49.3 on a scale of 100. When the first survey was conducted for the first quarter (January to March) of 2011, the confidence levels stood at 74.8. By the time of the last quarter, of January-March 2012, it had slipped to 55.4. This fall in the confidence index to below the psychologically positive 50 mark is worrying, as it signals a fall in hiring and

T

74.8

BUSINESS BLUES
How the Business Confidence Index slipped over the last year
64.4

56.8
52.3

55.4

49.3

Graphics by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Apr-June 2011

July-Sep 2011

Jan-Mar 2012

Jan-Mar 2011

Apr-June 2012

Oct-Dec 2011

expansion in the economy. The sharpest decline in the confidence levels is actually among the small businesses, where it has fallen from 57.2 from the previous quarter to 50.5, on a scale of 100. Sectorwise, the heavy engineering industry appears to be the most pessimistic, scoring just 48.3 points. Businessmen have often complained of the "policy paralysis" in the UPA Government, which has led to the problems currently faced by industry, of high interest rates, delays in project approvals, and uncertain land acquisition policies. Nearly 53 per cent of the 500 chief executive officers and chief financial officers polled have said that their profit margins were squeezed in the April to June quarter of 2012, and a massive 57 per cent of them expect the profits to fall further in the current quarter of July to September. Nearly 59 per cent executives say they do not expect their selling prices to pick up even though cost of raw materials has risen substantially. With no major reforms having been announced by the UPA Government so far, the situation for the next quarter looks grim. Nearly 80 per cent executives polled in the survey do not expect demand to pick up in the July-September quarter. Fortyfive per cent expect the overall economic situation to worsen. Recently, top corporates bosses like Ratan Tata and Azim Premji expressed hope that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh would push through positive economic reforms, starting with the contentious issue of foreign direct investment in multi-brand retail. He needs to deliver, if the mood of India Inc has to be lifted from gloom and doom.
by Shravya Jain

34

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 6, 2012

AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

