BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE CREDIBILITY DEFICIT
t could be a coincidence, but one wonders. This is the first measured in single or even double-digit crores.) Belligerence is not an answer. Rai was not an RSS session of Parliament in over eight years where Pranab Mukherjee is not in charge of the treasury benches. It is swayamsevak when he wore shorts. Nor did he carry a also the first session when Government has fallen, not from hammer in one hand and sickle in the other when in college. He is a distinguished bureaucrat who was made CAG its legal perch, but flat on its face. The principal responsibility of leader of the House is by the Prime Minister, perhaps because Dr Singh saw in Rai to preserve the government's majority, and, in this age the very virtues that he identified with. It's a thought: Is of performance politics on television, protect its Manmohan Singh the present Prime Minister at odds with credibility. In a toss-up, the second takes priority. Without Manmohan Singh the former public servant? Would Pranab Mukherjee have been able to cut the a majority, a government collapses. But without credibility Government's losses if he was still in Parliament? He led the party disappears. In 2008 Dr Manmohan Singh would have been defeated Congress strategy when Coalgate's elder brother, 2G, over the nuclear deal but for the generosity of Amar Singh. stalled the winter session in 2011. His public counterattack But even at its lowest ebb in the numbers game, Dr Singh's was softened by private communication with the credibility was on the ascent. His management of the nu- Opposition. In parliamentary politics, you never subvert clear debate was an excellent illustration of a fundamen- any path towards the other side of the floor. Mukherjee also tal rule in democratic politics: The ground on which you understood that corruption is quivering quicksand, and take a stand determines the course of a battle. Dr Singh can quickly drag down those who take a non-negotiable sold the nuclear deal as good for the country, and found a position on it. He found a way out of the 2G blockade at an growing number of buyers. He energised an urban middle affordable price. He lost a day's headlines but saved the class eager for better relations with the United States, government from further battering. But the game is different now. Every party has its own which saw this pact as axis of a new partnership. Dr Singh would have won the subsequent General Elections even if rules. The BJP demands the Prime Minister's resignation but only to etch another groove into public memory through he had lost the vote in Lok Sabha. Four years later, the situation is reversed. He is now the headlines. It would be a bit baffled if its demand was accepted. man who looked the other way while party hacks and allies Mulayam Singh Yadav is anxious to singe the Congress as long made money. There is a pervasive smell of sleaze about as he is not caught warming the fire. Mamata Banerjee's partCoalgate. Begin with just this question: Why did Dr Singh nership with Congress does not extend to elections; she needs appoint Santosh Bagrodia, a businessman from Calcutta Coalgate for campaign rhetoric--later. The Left is too dazed without any political credentials, who came from nowhere for debate; it only wants rest and recuperation. Mayawati is focused on her calculator, checkand returned there unlamented, SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com ing out when the Yadav demowho added no value to party or graphic equations will go awry so country, as minister of state for that she can maximise her coal? Bagrodia has chosen silence rebound. The Congress is in disaras his only veil. ray, since its declared heir is invisCoalgate is not a confrontation ible, and its seniors are on the way between Congress and BJP. If the to retirement. This Parliament BJP had accused Dr Singh of causused to be a jigsaw puzzle, where ing a phenomenal loss to the exthe pieces lay scattered but chequer, it would have raised a would eventually fit. It has now stutter on the first day and a yawn become only a puzzle. on the second. The accusation Numbers do not dominate the carried weight because Vinod thought process of the present Rai, appointed by Dr Singh to Lok Sabha, in the way they did head Government's primary audit in 2008, because they have authority, CAG, has offered a thick become irrelevant. The tussle and detailed analysis of the has shifted to credibility, or at process and manipulation behind The BJP demands the Prime the arbitrary allotment of coal Minister's resignation but only to etch least comparative levels of this scarce resource. This is more blocks and asserted that loss of another groove into public memory dangerous for politicians, for the revenue could be as much as through headlines. It would be a bit credibility game has an unforgivRs 1.86 lakh crore. (Gone are the ing referee: The voter. days when corruption could be I baffled if its demand was accepted.

I

SEPTEMBER 10, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

70

