NET FLUX
web wow

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

app alert
This week's app round-up has something for Facebook fans, car drivers and the organised. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. Broadcast for Friends allows you to record and air live video directly to your Facebook wall. Drive OFF deactivates SMS and call notifications once you start going faster than 15 km per hour.

What if your notes, messages and blogs came to life? That's what Stray Factory, a Chennai-based theatre group, created with 'Blogologues' , where they performed plays adapted purely from blog content. Six blogs from across India were chosen and performed in Chennai on August 29. From an air journey gone awry, to a rant about the many changes in our lives, the subject of the plays revolved around what a typical blog post would be about.As an added bonus, the group came out with `Twitter Theatre' , an improvised performance based on tweets from the audience.
A PROMO FOR BLOGOLOGUES

star of the week
MALLESH

Blogging Action

Top of the Lot

Torture Tune

tech tips
We are more than a little irked by the 20 SMS a day cap. But if you own a smartphone, you're in for some luck .
Whatsapp will let you text,share pictures,videos and your location at no cost. Facebook messenger helps you send messages to your pals on the website. Magic Jack lets you call any cellphone and leave voicemails at no cost.

If there's someone who has gained fame overnight for all the wrong reasons, it's Vennu Mallesh. Mallesh's video It's My Life, an English pop song, he composed, wrote and sang Regularly organbecame an instant hit with 1.8 lakh ises weekly chores views in four days.The auto-tune according to priority track, now hailed by netizens as the and reminds you latest instrument of torture, is so when you set them ridiculous that it comes across aside for later. as a parody till you see and hear the 28-year-old from weirdonet Hyderabad earnestly belting out lyrics like `I am Rapper Will.I.Am of the The Black Eyed a very good bad Peas will launch his latest single Reach for boy'and `I am a the Stars from the Mars rover Curiosity. kids lover' . A restaurant in Tokyo called Robot Restaurant has entertainment in the form of 11-foot-tall robots designed to look like women.

tweet tweet

viral video
A STILL FROM THE FAKE AD

Ruling the Roost
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on August 28 Mumbaikars lamented about the constant heavy showers throwing their lives out of gear.
#MumbaiRains
1,681,274

#CAG
1,089,844

Shocked and angry tweets poured in about CAG's report on coal block allocation. BJP politician Sushma Swaraj's description of the issue as "mota maal"also started trending. Netizens lauded but also questioned activist group India Against Corruption (IAC) when members protested outside the homes of Sonia Gandhi, Manmohan Singh and Nitin Gadkari. The most random trending topic had people describing their Maruti cars, with some calling it garibo ki Mercedes.

This week, a fake advertisement promoting the forthcoming iPhone5, an animated video depicting how the latest Batman film The Dark Knight Rises should have ended and footage of a cat called Venus with a black and ginger face, went viral.
Fake iPhone 5 ad

#IAC
445,940

4.5 million views
How The Dark Knight Rises should have ended

#Motamaal
195,803

2.7 million views
Venus,the two-faced cat

#20Adjectives forMaruti
*Figures denote number of followers

252,000 views
*Views from when videos were uploaded

132,394

68

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

NEW

