Na tion AKHILESH YADAV

"The UPA Has Run Out of Time"
It's been five months since Akhilesh Yadav took office. He has twin tasks before him: To deliver on the promise of his sweeping Assembly polls win and to ensure the Samajwadi Party doesn't lose momentum before the next Lok Sabha polls. His party may well be in a position to determine political fortunes at the Centre if Akhilesh delivers a bulk of the state's 80 MPs. To a question on his father Mulayam Singh Yadav becoming PM, the 39-year-old Chief Minister tells Principal Correspondent ASHISH MISRA that "anything is possible". Q. What is it like working with your father's colleagues? A. It is a matter of pride for me. Sometimes I get good suggestions from the senior leaders but eventually I have to take the call. Q. Mulayam Singh Yadav recently reprimanded ministers for

"Everyone is now preparing for General Elections. Our numbers will increase from the last elections."
AKHILESH YADAV, Chief Minister, Uttar Pradesh

their functioning. Is he still angry? A. Netaji wasn't angry. He said every minister should start at least one good project for farmers and the poor. Q. When will your promises of unemployment dole as well as distribution of laptops and tablets become a reality? A. Government preparations are complete. Unemployment dole will be distributed after September 8. We will begin kanya vidya dhan (cash reward for educating girl children) after September 20, and start distributing laptops after November 15. Q. The Centre has given the state a special package of Rs 4,500 crore. What do you think of the UPA approach towards your government? A. Kendra sarkar ka toh ab samay khatam ho chuka hai (The Central Government has run out of time). Everyone is now preparing for General Elections. The amount which was provided to the state should not be seen as package. It is the state's due. Q. Mulayam Singh Yadav has set a target of winning 60 seats in the forthcoming elections. What does your party plan to do for this? A. The public has given us a majority (in the Assembly), so expectations have increased. Decisions taken by our government benefit farmers and the poor. Free ambulances are available now. We have ended the system of hospital admission fee. Free treatment of serious and chronic diseases will be available at government hospitals. Roads are being built with publicprivate partnerships. Q. But your government's performance on law and order is weak. There has been communal violence, harassment of Dalits. A. Communal violence occurred in some areas but officials have been told to deal strictly with such incidents. The government will not allow negligence. Q. What about the many U-turns that you take? Who are your advisers? A. My advisers are in the CM's Office. I take advice from party workers too. The only decision that has been reversed was the decision to permit MLAs to buy cars from their MLA fund. Q. What are your plans to attract

Indian and foreign investors? A. The last regime didn't provide as much infrastructure as it could have. Our government is firming up a new industrial policy which will be industry friendly. Many prominent industrialists and businessmen have come to me. They feel the atmosphere has changed. Q. The state's industrial hub, Noida, is reaching a saturation point. Is your government developing an alternative industrial area? A. Work for the expressway from Agra to Lucknow is now on at full speed. New industrial hubs will automatically develop along the way. Q. What about jobs for the youth? A. I was keen to do engineering but there were no private colleges in the state. So I went to Karnataka. After that, Netaji established many private professional colleges in the state. Now our government is going to work on the IT sector in Lucknow. This will check the flow of youngsters going to other states. Q. Uttar Pradesh is undergoing a severe power crisis. Won't this affect the state's development? A. The power crisis is the gift of the BSP government. During his last tenure, Netaji established two power plants but the BSP didn't do any work in this field. It merely signed MOUs. The companies that signed the MOUs don't have any coal. I sought permission to import coal in the Assembly. Our plan is to double the capacity of generating power in the state in the next five years. Q. You blame the BSP government for signing the MOUS but your government hasn't scrapped them. A. The Centre has stopped the MOU scheme to establish independent power plants because of several inherent weaknesses. We carried on with the MOUs because if we change this, then we will have to change the whole process. That will take at least 18 months. Q. Will Mulayam Singh Yadav become prime minister? Will you ask the Left to support you? A. Everything is possible in politics. We have good relations with the Left and also with West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. Politics depends on circumstances and sometimes decisions are taken according to issues. I

A.K. HANGAL 1917-2012

The Perfect Fit
Whether as a grandfather or as uncle, the talented actor believed in extensive preparation, says Rohini Hattangadi
knew him as a professional when I started my career as an actor but got to know him better only when we worked together on IPTA's (Indian People's Theatre Association) play Hori in 1980, based on Munshi Premchand's novel Godaan. He was playing Hori and I his wife Dhania. During that time I learnt how dedicated he was to his work. He would analyse his role even during rehearsals and would stay in character throughout. He never thought of Hori as a character; he became Hori. We had about six shows at a stretch and resumed after a break of a month and a half. When we regrouped and started rehearsals, he began explaining my character to me, even though we had already done six shows together. We went on discussing for a while when I realised we were alone. Everybody had left. The others knew his INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIVE working style and had quietly slipped away rather than be drawn into a debate. I sometimes felt he was asking too many questions but later realised that's how he plays his part so well. He grew up in Peshawar and moved to Mumbai after Partition. He was a tailor but had begun doing plays as a teenager. He continued acting in Mumbai. It wasn't till he was nearly 50 that he did his first film, Basu Bhattacharya's Teesri Kasam in 1966. He went on to do over 200 films, most often playing a father, an uncle, or an old man like his memorable role of the blind Rahim Chacha in Sholay. His

I

other noteworthy movies were Shaukeen, Bawarchi, Abhimaan and Namak Haraam. He was more comfortable with Urdu than any other language and would rewrite his entire script in Urdu. Once I wanted to check something and asked him for his copy of the script. He told me I would not be able to understand it and said, "I am very comfortable with Urdu and can remember my lines better when I read them this way." The most interesting thing about him was how he was always so well dressed. He cut his own clothes as flawlessly as he acted. Unfortunately I worked with him only once. He was more active in theatre before I moved to Mumbai, so I didn't get to see much of his work in theatre. My husband Jaidev knew him from IPTA and we met socially. He was a great human being. I have heard he gave away half of what he earned towards the development of theatre. Organising plays for IPTA is not commercially viable and his dedication to it was one of his biggest contributions. The length of a role did not bother him, it was the substance. He was prepared to become the character and would say, "Agar hum uske baare mein nahin sochenge toh aur kaun sochega (If I don't think about the character, then who will?)" A.K. Hangal's work is a big contribution to serious theatre. To stick to it despite the attractions of commercial cinema is proof of his dedication.
Rohini Hattangadi is an actor

MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

46

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

SEPTEMBER 10, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

47

