Cover Story COALGATE

HAULED OVER THE
The raging heat from the Coal War has scorched the Prime Minister's integrity and exposed the rot within the heart of coal allocation in a power-hungry country
By Devesh Kumar

E

ven while Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was saving the world at the NAM summit in Tehran, confident that he had said enough in Parliament to exonerate his government in the scam swirling around the allotment of coal blocks, a group of senior bureaucrats finalised a draft report recommending cancellation of 53 out of 57 allotments made by the coal ministry during the period 2005-2009. This inter-ministerial group (IMG) was of additional secretary level, led by Zohra Chatterji, additional secretary, Ministry of Coal, set up on June 21 this year to check which companies had operationalised mining in the blocks allocated to them. The draft report, accessed by HEADLINES TODAY, revealed that the coal reserves in the 53 blocks recommended for cancellation account for Rs 1.85 lakh crore of the total Rs 1.86 lakh crore presumptive loss estimated by the Comptroller and

MANMOHAN SINGH
AFP

Cover Story COALGATE
Auditor General (CAG): Of the 53 blocks, owners of 17 have not even asked for forest clearance or initiated land acquisition. The IMG draft report has recommended that these blocks be handed over to public sector Coal India Limited which could then supply coal to the final users--the same ones who had been allocated the 53 mines for captive use. The impact of this report would not be felt immediately, but its meaning was evident to the political class in Delhi: CAG had been correct in its analysis. There was something deeply rotten in the state of coal allotments. It was underlined by the CBI decision to register an FIR against six companies for fudging facts, submitting forged documents, changing their ownership pattern illegaly or obtaining coal blocks without any experience of running them. The blocks were allocated during 2005-2009. Manmohan Singh headed the Coal Ministry from November 2006-May 2009. More FIRS are expected soon. The Prime Minister, in his statement made in the Rajya Sabha on August 27, had strongly asserted that there was no wrongdoing in the allotments. Yet IMG recommended cancellation of 53 of the 57 allotments covered by the CAG report. This was yet another puncture in the Congress's counter-offensive. Sonia Gandhi, while addressing the Congress Parliamentary Party meeting on August 28, had lashed out at BJP, observing that "holding Parliament to ransom and blackmail has become its political bread and butter". She added: "We have nothing to be defensive about." But it seems they have quite a bit to worry about. The Prime Minister's Rajya Sabha statement only highlights the contradictions inherent in the Government's position on allotment. He told the House that he took "full responsibility'' for the decisions of his Ministry, but denied any wrongdoing. For every point made by the Prime Minister, there is an equally emphatic counterpoint; PM's POINT Coal mines would be auctioned after amending the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. COUNTERPOINT But the controversial coal blocks were allocated even when it had become illegal to do so after September 2010. PM's POINT CAG's calculation of a windfall gain of Rs 1.86 lakh crore to the exchequer was "disputable" and"flawed". COUNTERPOINT The audit watchdog claims it only took a conservative estimate by calculating the difference between the average sale price per tonne and average cost of production of Coal India Limited multiplied by the total extractable reserves in the 57 blocks. PM's POINT He blamed "cumbersome processes" for delay in the adoption of coal auctions. I COUNTERPOINT But many of these hurdles could have been removed by him in his capacity as the Head of Government. After all, the ministers of power, law and justice, and environment and forests were all appointed by him, and can remain in office only at his discretion. PM's POINT The policy to switch to auctions from discretionary allotment was the UPA's initiative. COUNTERPOINT But why did the Prime

Licence TO LOOT
The Government awarded captive coal blocks to private players virtually for free

*

Who owns HOWMANYBLOCKS
NAME OFCOMPANY NO. OF MINES NAME OFCOMPANY NO. OF MINES NAME OFCOMPANY NO. OF MINES

Abhijeet Infra Usha Martin Jai Balaji Group Bajrang Ispat Bhushan Steel Electrosteel Castings Essar Power Rungta Mines Jindal Steel & Power TATA DB Power CESC Monnet Group Gagan Steel SKS Ispat
Graphic by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

5 1 3 1 4 2 3 4 5 7 1 1 1 1 1

Prakash Industries Sunflag Iron & Steel Mukand Sasol Adhunik Group Himachal EMTA Jayaswal NECO Topworth Group Aditya Birla Vedanta Godawari Ispat Sova Ispat Birla Corp Electrotherm Domco

1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 4 1 1 1 1

AES GMR Energy ArcelorMittal GVK Lanco Group Nava Bharat Reliance Energy Vandana Vidyut Bihar Sponge Ambuja Cements Lafarge India Adani JSW

1 2 3 1 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 2

Dates in brackets are mine allotment dates

* Of the 57 blocks, Parbatpur, in Jharkhand, is the only operational mine. It belongs to Electrosteel , which started commercial production of coal in 2010, five years after allocation.

Blame it on THEM
CAG
The Prime Minister says CAG findings are clearly disputable and flawed. Its calculation of a "windfall gain" of Rs 1.86 lakh crore to private players is questionable. But CAG is a constitutional body and its current head, Vinod Rai, was hand-picked by Manmohan Singh in 2008.

The Teflon Prime Minister first took "full responsibility" , and then proceeded to justify coal block allocation by shifting the blame. Who are his scapegoats and why?

LAW MINISTRY
The Prime Minister says the law ministry spoke in two voices on competitive bidding, pitching for either an administrative order or legislative action to give auctions a sound legal footing. But why did he not listen in 2006 when the law secretary made a strong case for amending the Mines and Minerals (Development) and Regulation Act, 1957?

POWER MINISTRY
The Prime Minister says the power minister insisted that the bidding route would lead to a higher power tariff. But then, once the mines were given free of cost, why did the Government not insist on immediate production of coal?

BJP-RULED STATES
The Prime Minister insists the chief ministers argued against competitive bidding. But by 2006, the BJP-ruled states had agreed to competitive bidding, with the rider that they be given a share in the auction revenue.
SEPTEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

VINOD RAI
24

Comptroller and Auditor General

H.R. BHARDWAJ

Union LawMinister,2004­2009

SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE
Union Power Minister,2006-July2012

VASUNDHARA RAJE, RAMAN SINGH
Rajasthan Chief Minister; Dec 2003-Dec 2008; Chhattisgarh Chief Minister,Dec 2003 to date

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

25

NEW

NEW

Cover Story COALGATE
Minister's Office (PMO) repeatedly put roadblocks in its implementation. Among other things, PMO asked for an opinion on the feasibility of auctions from the law ministry in 2005. After the law ministry said that auctions could be introduced by administrative order, PMO asked for a second opinion from the law ministry, which then suggested amendment of legislation, a longer process. PM's POINT In the interregnum, the Government had no option but to allocate coal blocks through the screening committees so as to meet the demands of the power sector and GDP growth. COUNTERPOINT Even this did not happen. Only one coal block of the 57 allocated is operational, that too five years after allotment. Large parts of the country continue to remain in darkness, and power outages have become routine. PM's POINT The process employed by the screening committee in awarding coal blocks was transparent. COUNTERPOINT In many cases, it was opaque. On October 18, 2005, for instance, 17 firms got coal blocks even though they failed to appear before the screening panel. PM's POINT The state governments were to blame for failure to build a consensus on bidding. COUNTERPOINT Yet the first step to get the states on board, admitted the Prime Minister, started only on July 25, 2005. States had given up their reservations by 2006. Nothing was done for three more years; 31 coal blocks were allocated in this period. PM's POINT He asserted there was no wrongdoing in the allotments. COUNTERPOINT But he acknowledged 25 paragraphs later that the Government had initiated action against those who had not initiated any mining. According to the IMG report, 17 of the blocks hadn't even sought forest clearance, a preliminary step. CBI, he added, was looking into the criminality involved in the allocations. CBI is now probing the bonafides of 58 beneficiaries. PM's POINT The CAG report was based on selective reading of the law ministry's opinions. COUNTERPOINT The fact is that the law ministry gave two separate opinions, one suggesting that administrative action was the right way to introduce auctions and the other saying that legislative changes were the right way. The Prime Minister opted for the latter. The bill was drafted in 2006, but could be passed only in 2010. The auction rules were notified only in February this year. The Prime Minister did not explain why there was a delay.
RSS plan. On August 24, RSS leader Ram Lal, who is also the secretary (organisation) in BJP, held a meeting with senior party leaders, state prabharis (officials in charge) and conveners of various units, asking them to pan out in the states, organise rallies and burn the Prime Minister's effigies. "People like Hansraj Ahir (MP from Chandrapur) have worked day and night collecting data on coal allocations. We are working methodically. It is not just about throwing tantrums in Parliament as the Congress would like people to believe," says BJP spokesperson Nirmala Sitharaman. But have they lost the moral high ground by not allowing the Prime Minister to speak in Parliament? Jaitley disagrees: "Suggestions that the issue should be debated only in Parliament will put a lid on one of the greatest scandals in Indian history. We are not interested in merely the issue being talked out through a one-day debate in Parliament. If a debate is being used today to put a lid on accountability, then an alternative strategy is necessary. In the rarest of rare cases, obstructionism also brings its dividends." "The Congress, in the past two-three years, has failed to reach out to the Opposition. The gridlock in Parliament must be resolved," says author and columnist Ramachandra Guha.

(FROM LEFT) ADVANI, JAITLEYAND SWARAJ AT A MEETING IN PARLIAMENT ANNEXE ON AUGUST 28
PTI

BJP WANTS TO TAR CLEAN FACE OF

Congress

Team BJP knows it's now or never. It's taking protests from the House to streets.

A

"If the bidding process had been initiated, there would have been greater transparency. We tried to introduce it but states aggressively opposed it."
SRIPRAKASH JAISWAL Coal Minister, on August 22

t a meeting on August 20 at L.K. Advani's 30, Prithviraj Road home in Delhi, after over four hours of discussion and planning, BJP's top leaders decided they would go for the UPA Government's last bastion of integrity: Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. BJP President Nitin Gadkari, Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha Sushma Swaraj, her Rajya Sabha counterpart Arun Jaitley as well as senior leaders Murli Manohar Joshi, Rajnath Singh, Venkaiah Naidu, Jas-

want Singh and Ravi Shankar Prasad decided to disrupt both Houses of Parliament. They would not back down, they said, even if the Government assured a Joint Parliamentary Committee or an inquiry by the Public Accounts Committee on the CAG report on coal scam, as in the 2G case. It was not a completely calibrated strategy, but BJP jumped into it headlong. Changing as it goes along, BJP has now evolved a two-pronged approach--continue obstruction of Parliament and simultaneously organise street protests. Jaitley and Swaraj are at the helm of protests in Parliament. "Advaniji is close to both of them. Aware of the animosity between the two, he has clearly earmarked their roles," reveals a senior party leader. So as Jaitley prepares a strong case against the Government and justifies BJP's stand on stalling Parliament to the chattering classes, Swaraj ensures that the party is heard in the streets. Her

statements like "the Congress made `mota maal' (a fat sum) from coal allocation" are aimed at the masses, and intended to spark chatter. "They know that it is now or never for BJP," says a party leader. There are daily meetings, sometimes twice a day, at Advani's office in Parliament. Gadkari, away on a family holiday in Canada at such a crucial juncture, is in regular touch with other leaders. For BJP, there could not have been a better stick to beat the Government with. The coal scam tars the Prime Minister personally; revolves around corruption, an issue it seemed to have ceded to the India Against Corruption movement; and it gives them a potent issue for forthcoming Assembly elections in Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat, crucial states the party wants to retain. Now that BJP has ratcheted up the protest to a point of no return in Parliament, the next phase will take the protests to the streets. It was part of the

by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

T
T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

he Prime Minister was the coal minister between July and November 2004, and, again, between November 2006 and May 2009. The junior minister in the department was, curiously, always a Congressman. While Dasari Narayana Rao manned it from May 2004 to April 2008, Santosh Bagrodia, a Kolkata-based businessman with no qualification to hold the charge, replaced Rao as the minister of state for Coal on April 7, 2008. The General Elections were held exactly a year later. As many as 35 coal block allotments, by Coal Minister Sriprakash

Jaiswal's own admission, were cleared at the last meeting of the screening committee in 2008. The model code of conduct enforced by the Election Commission, according to the coal minister, came into force soon after. Almost all the private sector beneficiaries singled out by CAG in its reports were awarded coal blocks during the period 2005-2009. The draft report destroyed a carefully constructed Congress defence. On August 24, Finance Minister P. Chidambaram said at a press conference, echoing Telecom Minister Kapil Sibal's infamous zero-loss theory on 2G, that "if coal is not mined, if coal remains buried in mother earth, where is the loss?" Five days later, Sibal said: "We cannot can-

cel the licences. It will lead to wastage of crores of rupees. Many banks are involved and the decision will affect the power sector badly." Unlike Chidambaram, the Prime Minister did not contend that there has been zero loss. He seemed to openly make the case for the quantum of losses being less than Rs 1.86 lakh crore. There are indeed some flaws in CAG's calculation--it has not discounted the net present value of future income stream from the blocks, which lend the calculation an upward bias. However, nothing in the Prime Minister's rebuttal makes the case for zero loss, which is the only way he can exonerate himself from wrongdoing. The Prime Minister's statement invited an immediate rebuke from BJP.

"It's a defiance of ethics in governance and polity. Step by step, he has transferred responsibility to other agencies," asserted Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Arun Jaitley. The Prime Minister's line of argument has been debunked not just by the Opposition, but also by some of his allies. When A. Raja, former telecom minister, heard the Prime Minister's clarification on Coalgate in Chennai, his first reaction, it is learnt, was of disbelief. "But this is exactly what I said two years ago," he is said to have muttered. "There is a feeling that there are two accountability benchmarks. One for the Congress and the other for allies," said a DMK leader. Raja gave the same set of clarifications as was

now being done by the Prime Minister. Like Manmohan, even Raja had questioned CAG's methodology. And like Manmohan, even Raja had contended that his mandate was not to create revenue but to meet an infrastructure need--that of mobile penetration in Raja's case, and that of generating power in the case of Coalgate. The allies, for the moment, have assured the Congress that they would not team up with BJP in its attack on the Prime Minister, who is facing the biggest credibility crisis of his public life. But the one party the Prime Minister is not sure of is his own. Not surprisingly, it was a Samajwadi Party leader who set the cat among the pigeons. Mohan Singh created a buzz when he said on August 29

NEW

NEW

Cover Story COALGATE
MAN WHO TOOK ON

Manmohan

Hansraj Ahir was instrumental in putting UPA on the backfoot on coal. He isn't finished yet.

NUMBERS Crunched
CAG's work is as painstaking as it is ground-breaking

ansraj Gangaram Ahir, the BJP MP from Chandrapur, Maharashtra, blew the loudest whistle in recent times when he accused the UPA Government of awarding captive coal blocks to private players "free of cost". Certain of his facts, Ahir petitioned both the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) and Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) to investigate. His complaint to CVC has led to a CBI probe. "The Government did not even bother to encash their bank guarantees, rather, it offered safe passage by allowing them to withdraw their guarantees," Ahir told INDIA TODAY. The unassuming parliamentarian is busy unearthing more dirt. "Even after the notification of amendment to the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, three more blocks were given to private players," he says. Ahir's latest target is Coal Minister Sriprakash

H

"Coal blocks were being allocated to private firms free of cost. It was then that I decided to dig deeper into the issue."

Jaiswal, whom he has accused of handing out 35 blocks after May 2009 without even getting them cleared by the screening committee. The third-time MP, whose constituency is home to several coal blocks, wants cancellation of all 196 blocks allotted till now, to both private firms and government entities "free of cost, and in a completely arbitrary manner". The fact that he has been a member of the standing committee on coal and steel since 2004 helped. "During one of the meetings in 2005, a coal ministry official said Coal India had failed to meet its capacity and private players would be brought in to bridge the gap. But the coal blocks were being allocated to private firms free of cost. It was then that I decided to dig the issue deeper," he says. On December 26, 2006, Ahir shot off his first letter on coal allocations to then finance minister P. Chidambaram, with copies marked to the Prime Minister and Planning Commission Deputy Chairman Montek Singh Ahluwalia. "I asked whether the beneficiaries had been asked to pay sub-tax and royalty for the captive coal blocks," he HANSRAJ AHIR, says. Ahir wrote his first BJP MP letter to CVC in 2009, seeking a probe into the allotments of 196 coal blocks. On November 16, 2010, he took the battle to the CAG office, demanding that it audit the allocations. "I followed it up by forwarding a letter signed by 40 NDA MPs, demanding a probe into the case," he says. Ahir has lost count of the number of letters he has written to the Prime Minister on the subject. "I have a record of 13 letters, but there's more."
by Devesh Kumar
RAMESH SHARMA

he building that houses the headquarters of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India on 9, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg in the Capital does not look like a typical government office. Built of pink Dholpur stone, it is an imposing structure where 500 officers work diligently, poring over accounts and reports sent by the field staff. Over 43,000 CAG men are working all over the country, auditing accounts of ministries, sectors and affiliates of the Government of India, as well as the states. Getting cooperation from the ministry or department being audited is no mean task. "Some of the ministries are outright hostile and non-cooperative,"

T

says a CAG official. CAG has an annual budget outlay of Rs 2,558 crore. As Prime Minister Manmohan Singh questioned the auditor's report on coal, terming it as flawed and called allegations of impropriety baseless and disputable, CAG Vinod Rai refused to join issue. It was Manmohan who had hand-picked Rai as CAG in January 2008. While he chooses not to respond to the Prime Minister's criticism in public, Rai is all set to seek cancellation of most of the 57 coal block allocations during his presentation to the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament next week. Sources say he will cite lack of transparency and impropriety in the allocation process as the reason. Rai's deputies have learnt to take criticism in their stride and expect it after every controversial report. "We got flak for our report on Commonwealth Games, 2G spectrum allocation and now for coal.

The Government kept disputing all facts and figures until they were endorsed by the Supreme Court," says the official. Even in the coal block allocation case, CAG officials explain how it is not a case of "zero loss" as the Government claims. "It is not a question of whether anybody has started mining or not. The issue is that the Government has no control over the resource anymore, having given it away arbitrarily," says an official. He explains how CAG calculated the figure of Rs 1.86 lakh crore. The auditing team, under Deputy CAG (Commercial) A.K. Patnaik, painstakingly collected the cost of different kinds of coal, controlled by Coal India Limited (CIL). CIL controls 81 per cent of all coal mined in the country. "We took an average of CIL coal price and derived the figure of Rs 1.86 lakh crore. It is the most conservative estimate. There were two other options: To calculate on the basis

of e-auction price or the price of imported coal. Taking the e-auction price would have taken the loss up to Rs 11 lakh crore and import price would have given a figure of Rs 18 lakh crore. The intention is not to sensationalise or create scams. It is simply to bring public money to account," the official says. There is a lot of other work that CAG is doing which does not get as much attention as the scams. It has done performance audits of government social schemes, found several holes, and suggested ways to improve. Now, to give cutting edge to its own functioning, CAG is in the process of recruiting experts and technocrats in the specialised fields of power, space, oil exploration and mining. "Our auditors are doing a wonderful job. It is time to give them more teeth now," the CAG official adds.
by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

that "some people from inside Congress want to remove Manmohan Singh and bring in the Yuvraj (Rahul Gandhi). I wonder if this (BJP's demand for the Prime Minister's resignation) is being played out from within Congress". Although Congress General Secretary Janardan Dwivedi rushed a denial, Mohan Singh's comments set the whisper brigade wagging. As a Congress MP from Andhra Pradesh said, "Yes, of course, we don't want to face the next elections under his leadership. But at the same time, there is no way we can remove him now. How can we be seen as giving in to BJP?" BJP's belligerence has only served to strengthen Manmohan's position. For now. "Whether we will go for the 2014 polls with him as a leader is now under grave doubt. The Coalgate stain is not going to wash easily," says a Cabinet minister. What is worrying the Congress is that in the next three state elections where there is a straight fight between the Congress and BJP--Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka, Manmohan's image could become an issue. This is one reason why Congress President Sonia Gandhi has gone on the offensive and instructed her party to take on BJP, both inside Parliament and on the streets. "It's an inconvenient time for

THE CHORUS OF

Denial

The Prime Minister's argument of no wrongdoing was echoed by his colleagues in party and government

`` `` ``

We cannot cancel licences. It will lead to wastage of crores of rupees. Many banks are involved and the decision will affect the power sector badly."
TELECOM MINISTER KAPIL SIBAL, on August 29

We have nothing to feel defensive about. We will not be deflected by intemperate Congress-bashing by the Opposition. Let us stand up and fight."
CONGRESS PRESIDENT SONIA GANDHI, on August 28

``

I believe there is ample transparency in the manner in which coal block allocation happened... We haven't made a mistake."
LAW MINISTER SALMAN KHURSHID, on August 21

We cannot cancel licences. It will lead to wastage of crores of rupees. Many banks are involved and the decision will affect the power sector badly."
FINANCE MINISTER P. CHIDAMBARAM, on August 24

the Prime Minister to be away on a foreign trip. As the leader of the Government, he should at least be seen as taking charge," the Cabinet minister added. When he returns to Delhi on August 31, the Prime Minister will have to study the IMG report which has laid the ground for cancellation of 53 allotments. If he chooses to accept its recommendations, he could regain some of his lost aura. The cancellation of licences and the resignation of the Prime Minister are BJP's two demands. Manmohan could meet BJP halfway. However, accepting the recommendations of the group of senior bureaucrats is not without risk. Two of the Prime Minister's most argumentative lieutenants have staked their credibility on a zero-loss theory, at the least a scenario in which there was no mala fide intent by the Government in allocation. Their arguments would be shattered--again. For a Government tainted by a series of scandals, there is hardly any defence left in the raging Coal War.
with Shravya Jain, Priya Sahgal and Mayur Shekhar Jha

SEPTEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

NEW

NEW

