SIMPLY DELHI

Inside

COVER STORY

T ec h th i s Ou t

s-4

SIMPLY DELHI brings you the hottest sets of wheels and hi-tech gizmos
BUZZ

I n t he C i t y

s-12

A checklist on where to eat and what to shop for
DESIGNER SPEAK

Ramp Diaries s-22
Designer bytes straight from the ramp. SIMPLY DELHI chats up some fashion stalwarts at the Delhi Couture Week
FASHION

Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie Chief Executive Officer Ashish Bagga G Editorial Director M.J Akbar Assistant Editor Insiyah Vahanvaty Editorial Team Rewati Rau, Ekta Alreja, Sibi Arasu, Shilpa Mehta, Ekta Marwaha, Marcia Rodrigues Photo Editor T Narayan Photo Department Reuben Singh (Deputy Photo Editor), Vikram Sharma, Vinod Singh Design Associates Madhu Bhaskar, Vandana Nayar Production Surinder Hastu (Chief of Production), Harish Aggarwal, Naveen Gupta Layout Execution Ramesh Gusain, Ravishanker Singh, Rajesh Kumar Rawat G Group Business Head Manoj Sharma Associate Publisher (Impact) Anil Fernandes G IMPACT TEAM Senior General Managers: Kaustav Chatterjee (East) V. Somasundaram (Chennai) Jitendra Lad (West) Head (North): Dipayan Chowdhary

All that Glitters s-28
SIMPLY DELHI brings you the highlights of the recently held PCJ Delhi Couture Week

OUR PICK of the month
View from the Top
October 26 and 28 This October, head out to the Himalayas to experience the thrill of skydiving with the majestic Mount Everest in the backdrop. The group Road Less Travelled (RLT) will be organising Everest Skydive--an adventure trip open to Delhiites. On the skydive, you will leap from a height of 29,500 feet, free falling for a few seconds before landing on the highest drop zone in the world. The management staff and crew give you a crash course on the procedures to be followed for the jump before the actual

dive. Treks to Tengboche, Lobuche, Lukla and Pheriche also feature in the itinerary. Cost Rs 8,00,000 per person for an 11 day sky diving and trekking package. For more details log on to rltgo.com Tel 9910189191

Want to tell us about an event?A new store? A restaurant?People doing interesting things?Anything newsworthy? Please email us at: simplydelhi@intoday.com

