Mail

Mumbai on the Brink
SEPTEMBER 03, 2012

Twenty years after Ayodhya, India's commercial capital is riven again by fear and communal violence.

N A L I N I V I J AY A R A G H AVA N ,

Vote-bank Politics
The eruption of communal violence in Mumbai or Assam does not augur well for secular India ("Mumbai on the Brink", September 3). People using cyberspace to disseminate abhorrence towards a minority group add fuel to the fire. Besides, it also reflects the inability or unwillingness of the state and Central governments to take control. India must guard against and apprehend such troublemakers at all cost. If communal violence is an ugly offshoot of India's diverse religions, one hopes with the concerted efforts of the authorities this offshoot does not blossom anymore.
SANJIV GUPTA, Australia

Loan Trouble
In the name of social upliftment ("Pass the Loan or Face the Bullet", September 3), populism of the worst kind has been resorted to--first allowing soft loans and then permitting waivers. This has placed the field-level functionaries of the financial institutions in the proverbial `between devil and deep sea' situation. Besides, the monetary loss is a drain on the economy. The way out is to allow permissions of such loans by officials placed at sufficiently higher level and replace the manual transactions by electronic medium.
AMITABH NIGAM, New Delhi

Instead of Mumbai on the brink, it may be India on the brink because the secular fabric of India is

One of the main objectives of nationalisation of banks was to develop the agricultural sector. Rural branches were opened with the sole aim to make available loans on priority basis to farmers. Since then, many frauds took place. Even today, Bihar known for its `goonda banks'.
R.D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 17, 2012

NEW

``

``

The omnipresent social media has served as a handy tool for anti-India elements to woo and instigate moderate Muslims and gullible youngsters into violent protests.
Thiruvananthapuram

slowly crumbling into pieces and communal feelings are creeping in among the people. Unless this is checked, there will be chaos and communal clashes all over the country. Politicians should stop inciting people against each other or the outcome will certainly be disastrous. Politicians should not play with people's sentiments and refrain from disturbing communal harmony.
RANJIT SINHA, New Delhi

The narration of events was heart-rending. The simmering tension between different communities in India on account particularly of religious faith is often largely promoted by political parties to consolidate their vote banks. A soft-pedalling approach of the Government towards Pakistan, a source of all

Mail
evils in India, is at the root of tribulations we have been forced to bear. Thousands of innocent lives have been lost because of the insensitive and indifferent attitude of any party in power.
GAUTAM KANTHARIA, Ahmedabad

35
Unfortunately some women, who prefer to have money and borrowed power at any cost, are willingly trapped into such manipulative tactics of men. These illegitimate relationships which shower money and luxuries on women and their families flourish without any objections from either end. However, the situation takes an ugly turn when the expectations exceed beyond a point, leading to a tragic end to the tale. Women have to remain conscious and careful before entering such relationships.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

of the archives.
M.M. KALE, Manipur

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
O CT O B E R 1 6 - 3 1 , 1 9 7 7

Breathe Easy
The rat race for supremacy ("How Healthy is India Inc?", September 3) has brought stress to Indian corporate executives beyond words. The country is witnessing an unprecedented rise in diseases. Faulty lifestyle, food that is not nutritious, spraying of insecticides on every crop, pollution, and too much stress are taking a toll on their health. They need to de-stress themselves through yoga, meditation and regular excercise. Eating and sleeping habits have to be modified to function effectively in this highly competitive environment.
V.K.TANGRI, Dehradun

Stability Once Again
After almost eight months of political turmoil, calm has returned to the 300-odd South Pacific islands of the Fiji group. When Fiji went to the polls for the second time this year late in September, it was widely recognised as the most crucial election in the history of this multi-racial society, particularly for the little more than half (272,000 out of a total of 535,000) of its population who are of Indian origin. The election results, announced to a tense nation on September 26, gave the ruling Alliance Party a landslide majority of 36 seats in a 52strong house of representatives. The opposition National Federation Party (NFP) had split down the middle between two warring factions, fielding rival candidates. This predominantly Indian backward party saw its previous strength reduced to 12 seats for one faction and three for the other. There was one independent in the new Parliament. A sigh of relief went up all around, as the region's leading daily, the 116-year-old Fiji Times, said in an editorial: "This should mean, at least, five years of political stability." A Westminster-style parliamentary democracy, Fiji has a complex voting system designed to guard against the domination by any particular racial group merely because of greater numbers. Of the 52 members in the Lower House, 12 Fijians (the indigenous people of Melanesian stock), 12 Indians and 3 General Electors (Chinese, Europeans and other races) are chosen through communal voting.

Stop the Blackmail
Blackmail system of alliance politics ("Minister for Eastern Railways", September 3) is fast ruining our country's economy. The Prime Minister is forced to dance to the tunes of regional allies such as Mamata Banerjee, thus undervaluing his post. Even the most bitter critics of price hike opposed Banerjee's diktat against a hike in rail fares. Things can and must be improved if blackmail alliance politics is to be effectively checked. The rule should be to appoint persons who have not contested any election in the last six years as ministers. This will eliminate the influence of domineering leaders of alliance parties, giving real power to ordinary parliamentarians.
SUBHASH C. AGGARWAL, Kanpur

Taint Again
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh spoke on expected lines again ("Coal Scam Tars Prime Minister", September 3). The great democrat that he assumes himself to be, he said he had bowed to the wishes of Opposition-held states but failed to mention Congressruled states would also benefit from the act. He defended his actions under the plea that coal block auction would be time consuming and the delay would result in the projects getting delayed for want of coal. Strangely, there is no progress in any of the blocks till now. Had the UPA tried, the auctioneers would have started work by now. The Prime Minister's speech is pure rhetoric and worthy

Wasseypur Strikes
Revenge is the central theme ("The Real Gangs of Wasseypur", September 3) in Anurag Kashyap's two-part film Gangs of Wasseypur. Through the article, it is clear that Wasseypur and its neighbouring areas have seen their fair share of violence and the movie helped in bringing it to notice for the world to see. Urbanisation, with its advantages, seems to cast a dark cloud over Dhanbad. It also seems to be the reason for the gang fights over generations that take place in the city.
MAHIMA CHOPRA, Pune

Dangerous Liaisons
It has been observed since ages that few people such as Gopal Kanda, equipped with power and money, succeed in exploiting women physically and mentally ("Call of the New Sirens", September 3).

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

RATU SIR KAMISESE MARA

SEPTEMBER 17, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

NEW

