National Rural Health Mission, Assam

Reaching Hope and Healthcare to ote corners,
Within seven years of its implementation; National Rural Health Mission(NRHM), Assam has successfully reaped the benefits of the Mission and has fared creditably. It has witnessed an unprecedented increase and improvement in outpatient services, institutional deliveries, immunization services, diagnostic, emergency and ambulance facilities, family welfare services, and an overall faith in the Public Health System. And all these have been possible because of the vision and stewardship of Chief Minister, Assam, Shri Tarun Gogoi and the dynamism of Minister of Health & Family Welfare, Dr Himanta Biswa Sarma along with a dedicated team of NRHM, Assam.
Assam, today, can boast of the advances it has made in its health sector. The Maternal Mortality Ratio has dropped 99 points to 381 (AHS 2010-2011) from 480 in 2005-2006, Infant Mortality Rate has dropped to 58. Around 4,64,581 women in Assam had their deliveries in hospitals in the year 2011-12, compared to only 1,49,003 in 2005-06. Institutional deliveries which had recorded an increase of only 39% from the period 2001-02 to 2005-06, jumped by 212% from 2005-06 to 201112. The total fertility rate has come down to 2.5. The focused areas of intervention of NRHM Assam are:(1) Maternal Health, (2) Child Health, (3) Human Resource and (4) Infrastructure. · Maternal Health (MH): One of the major areas of focus was augmenting Institutional Deliveries. Through the schemes of Janani Suraksha Yojna (incentive of Rs. 1400 per delivery) and Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA), pregnant women have been incentivised to go to hospitals for delivery. ASHA is a Voluntary Lady Health Worker in the Rural Areas who facilitates utilization of Public Health Services by the pregnant women in the villages. She acts as a bridge between the Public Health

AnlfflP
Facilities and the beneficiaries. She motivates pregnant women to go to the Health Institutions for Antenatal Checkups (ANC) and also for delivery in hospitals. She motivates mothers to get their children immunised and for all these efforts, she is adequately incentivised. An army of 29836 ASHAs are working across the State today. To facilitate conduct of Antenatal Checkup (ANC) of pregnant women, camps are organized in Anganwadi Centres and prominent areas of villages. Each of these camps are called Village Health Nutrition Day (VHND) sessions. Organized every Wednesday, the state witnesses 281920 VHND sessions on any Wednesday spread all over the State. ANC facilities are also available at 4604 Sub-Centres and 1113 higher level hospitals. Around 900 facilities have been created across the State where the pregnant women can deliver. In case of complications, 39 Health facilities called First Referral Units (FRU) have been set up where Caesarian Section surgeries can be performed. This is in addition to the District Hospitals and the Medical Colleges which also provide the same facility. A total 66 Health Facilities have been thus created where Caesarian Section Surgeries can be conducted. · Child Health (CH): Immediately after birth, some of the new born babies might require special attention while a few of them might also require intensive care and attention. In order to provide such essential care for the new born, 545 New Born Care Corners (NBCC) have been provided in the hospitals conducting deliveries. Each such NBCC provides essential newborn care facilities like Radiant Warmer to prevent fatalities due to Hypothermia, Ambubag and Mask to prevent death due to Asphyxia. 116 Neonatal Stabilization Unit (NSU) which have an added facility of Phototherapy Unit to prevent death due to Jaundice have also been set up across the state. 13 Special Newborn Care Units (SNCU) have been set up in District Hospitals to provide all kinds of intensive care to a new born. Another 14 of SCNUs are likely to be completed within the next 6 months. In order to address problems of severe malnutrition, 4 Nutritional Rehabilitation Centres(NRC) have been set up for providing in-patient care. An elaborate immunization regime providing free of cost vaccines has been put in place to help the infants fight preventable diseases. · Human Resource (HR) - NRHM, Assam has so far provided 87 Specialists viz Gynecologists, Anesthetists etc., 699 MBBS Doctors, 407Ayush Doctors, 39 Dental Surgeons, 2705 staff nurses (GNMs), 4878 ANMs and 907 other paramedical staff. To address the acute shortage of Specialists, NRHM, Assam has taken up special initiatives for starting of 2 years Diploma Course for producing Gynecologists, Anesthetists, Radiologists etc and as such 71 Doctors are being trained in the State Health University, namely, Srimanta Shankardeva

CTleature

University of Medical & Health Sciences. Another 46 will be trained during the next year. With plans for 200 doctors every year thereafter. To address the acute shortage of GNMs, 73 ANMs are being trained to upgrade their skills to that of a GNM, with another 200 in the pipelines with an eventual target of 273 numbers annually. · Infrastructure Development: One of the major initiatives required to provide accessible Health Care is provision of hospitals of different types close to the living places of the citizen. As such, NRHM, Assam period has witnessed construction of five 200 bedded District Hospitals, five 30 bedded hospitals and 150 other hospitals and 770 Sub-Centres. These also include 50 Riverine PHCs, which provide for health care facilities in the inaccessible Char Areas. 71 USG Machines, 96 Cardiac Monitors, Hospital Beds, 1276 radiant warmers, 728 phototherapy units and warmers which are some of the equipments that have been provided under the aegis of NRHM, Assam. RURAL HEALTH PRACTITIONERS One of the major obstacles faced by the Health sector in the state is an acute shortage of doctors in Assam. In order to provide proper health care services to the people of rural & remote areas and to ensure good health of pregnant women and their safe motherhood, Govt of Assam started its path breaking 3 years diploma course known as "Rural health Practitioner (RHP)". Till this day, Assam stands as the only successful state in the country to have taken such an initiative. Till date 266 RHPs have been trained and posted in remote Sub Centres. These RHPs are providing OPD services at the Sub Centres and conducting deliveries. RHPs have also been found to be very effective against malaria, diarrhoea etc. Upto July 2012, a total of 7464 deliveries have been conducted, and a total no of 12,69,186 OPD patients treated by the RHPs at the Sub Centres. At present RHP course is being provided only at Jorhat Medical Institute which has the capacity of 92 per batch. Keeping in view the success of RHPs and to cover all Sub Centres with one RHR Govt of Assam has proposed to introduce two more such Medical Institutes at Barpeta and Cachar. Following the noteworthy example set by the Govt of Assam, Govt. of India is also likely to roll out a similar plan for the entire country. Assam Bikash Yojna ·. Complimenting the efforts of NRHM, the State Government has also come up with innovations financed by its own funds. Assam Bikash Yojana is one such banner under which many pioneering endeavours in the health sector have been introduced. Mamoni ·. A first of its kind scheme, "Mamoni" provides for necessary nutritional support to pregnant women. At each of the 2nd and the 3rd AnteNatal check-ups, an account payee cheque of Rs 500 is given on the spot to the

X"

R'9W

<° Left- Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogo/, Assam Health Minister Or Himanta Biswa Sarma and MD NRHM Assam Prateek Hajela.

pregnant woman for nutritional support. Till date 18,15,074 pregnant women have received Mamoni payments. Majoni ·. The scheme has been introduced for social, educational and economic development of the girl child. Under this scheme, a girl child born in any Government health institution is provided with a fixed deposit of Rs. 5000 (for couples following the two-child norm) and on her 18th birthday, the girl will be able to en-cash the fixed deposit. In case she is married before attaining 18 years of age, the fixed deposit stands forfeited. Under this scheme, so far a total of 2,07,051 Fixed Deposits have been issued. Mamata ·. The scheme seeks to reduce IMR and MMR, by insisting on a postdelivery hospital stay of 48 hours for the mother and the newborn. Any complication that may arise during this period is addressed by skilled doctors available at Government Health Institutions. The mother is provided with counseling on initiation of breastfeeding. At the time of discharge from the hospital, the mother receives a gift hamper called the 'Mamata kit', which contains all the essential products required for the newborn viz. baby powder, baby oil, baby soap a mosquito net, a flannel cloth etc. Since inception till June 2012,4,56,337 beneficiaries have received the Mamata Kit Under this scheme. Morom ·. The Momm scheme provides financial support to indoor patients at Government Health Institutions for supplementary nutrition and compensation for wage loss caused during hospitalization and post hospital expenses. Indoor patients receive Rs. 75 per day for Medical Colleges, Rs. 50 per day for District Hospital and Rs. 30 per day for other hospitals. So far 651,152 patients have been provided the benefit under the scheme. Sushrusha ·. Launched on August 23,2010, the scheme was introduced to provide financial assistance to people who have undergone kidney transplantation. Under the scheme, an amount of Rs. 1 lakh is granted as financial assistance to people who undergo kidney transplantation after April 1, 2010. So far 146 patients have benefited. Operation Smile -. In collaboration with Operation Smile, 6500 patients have undergone cleft correction surgery so far. January 2010 saw Assam hosting the largest mega camp ever held anywhere in the world where 266 volunteers from 20 different nations came together to perform 1564 surgeries spread over a span of just 3 weeks. The year 2010 also witnessed establishment of a

Permanent Comprehensive Cleft Care Centre at Guwahati established for conducting cleft surgery. With the establishment of the Centre, people of Assam can avail State of the Art cleft surgery facilities throughout the year. FREE TREATMENT SCHEME FOR CHILDREN WITH CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is a defect in the structure of the heart and vessels which can be present at birth. Heart defects are among the most common birth - defects and are the leading cause of birth- defect related deaths. Approximately 9 children in every 1000 are born with a congenital heart defect. The cost of treatment being very high, Government of Assam initiated a scheme for free treatment of such children at Narayana Hrudyalaya Hospitals at Bengaluru and Kolkata. Under the scheme, the government bears to and fro air-fare between Assam and Bengaluru/Kolkata for the patients and the guardian, and also takes care of all the medical expenses incurred in the Hospital as well as boarding and lodging expenses incurred during treatment. So far 979 children with congenital heart disease have been sent for surgeries. Asha Kiron The Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) are community health workers which were instituted as part of NRHM. To recognise and honour the sense of duty, sincerity and dedication of the ASHA workers who have taken up the role of health sentinels in Assam's villages, Asha Kiron scheme was launched by the State Government. The scheme was primarily instituted to provide financial security to the ASHA workers. In the unfortunate event of death of any ASHA worker, her next of kin will receive a compensation amount of Rs. 1 lakh. Also every ASHA worker will be eligible to receive a reimbursement of Rs. 25000 every year, for treatment of specified diseases. INITIATIVE TO REACH TO UN-SERVED, UNCOVERED, RIVERINE AREAS Amongst the first in the country to start 108 services, Assam started the Mrityunjoy 108 Emergency Management Service in 2008. Later, four boat ambulances also joined the fleet to provide services in the riverine areas of Majuli, Dhubri, North Guwahati and Dhemaji. The State today has 280 state-ofthe-art Ambulances (of which 100 have been replaced to keep the fleet young at 3 years), 50 Mobile Medical Units each with a doctor, facilities for X-ray, USG and other laboratory testing facilities are also provided in remote and rural areas. A total of 23,60,174 patients have been treated so far in 17,848 nos of camps organized by these MMUs, since its launch in 2007. Sarathi 104 Health Information Help Line is another initiative continuously providing its services.

With a total 25,46,264 calls received since its inception in November 2011. the service provides telephonic counseling on health related matters. Lives of 37 people who had developed suicidal tendencies were saved through telephonic counseling. Assam is one of the first States to provide for a complaint telephone number to the citizens to complain against any service of the Health Department. Later, additional Services like ASHA Help Line also got added to the 104 basket of services. Rashtriya Swaysthya Bima Yojana This scheme was initiated to help BPL families, helping them with easier access to health care facilities. The first phase of the scheme covered five districts of Jorhat, Dibrugrah, Kokrajhar, LakhimpurandKamrup. Under the scheme, the cost of treatment of the BPL patients is borne by the insurance company and patients admitted at the RSBY registered hospitals can avail of the benefits of the scheme. A biometric card is also issued to every BPL family in the designated areas for availing this scheme. The yearly amount insured for a family is Rs.30000 and so far 2,02,596 families have been enrolled under the scheme. HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT UNDER NRHM SL.NO. NAME OF THE SCHEME 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 District Hospital Model Hospital Up gradation of CHC to IPH Standards Construction of New PHC Construction of Riverine PHC Rural Health Block Pooling Complex Doctors'& Nurses Quarters BSc Nursing College & Hospital GNM School & Hostel Sub Centre Neo- Natal Stabilization Care Unit (NSU) Special New Borne Care Unit 6 61 103 100 50 78 114 2 4 2250 402 23

JSSK (Janani Sishu Suraksha Karyakram) Enthused by the phenomenal success of its safe motherhood incentive scheme, JSY, another major intervention- Janani Sishu Suraksha Karyakram was launched earlier this year to eliminate out-of-pocket expenses for both pregnant women and sick neonates. The scheme provides free treatment, free diagnostics and tests, free medicines, free diet, free surgeries and also provides for free to and fro transport between home and hospitals. Sick newborns are being provided with all treatment free of cost upto 30 days after birth. Under JSSK, free Nutritional supplement, Mother's Horlicks is being provided to the mothers at the time of discharge and a free drop back to home through the "Adarani" Vehicle. IEC INITIATIVE OF NRHM, ASSAM To create awareness amongst the masses, NRHIVI, Assam has full fledged Media Cells at State and District levels for developing media messages, and their dissemination to the community and for creating awareness at grassroots level. Such a huge health initiative requires lots of Information, Education, Communication (IEC) initiatives. Multimedia initiatives Print, Television, Radio, Hoardings, posters, leaflets, local folk media, interpersonal communication help creating the right awareness among people. TELE-RADIOLOGY SERVICES The demand for diagnostic and image interpretation services in radiology is growing rapidly. However, this demand is not being met due to acute shortage of Radiologists. Whereas, availability of equipments can be met by procurement which can be installed anywhere, it is a big challenge to make Radiologists available in smaller towns. These problems, however, can be largely overcome by utilizing robust communication and image transfer systems to draw on the expertise of distantly located radiologists. This process is termed Tele-radiology. The State had started a pilot project in this field at Haflong which is the district headquarter of a hill area district considered remote by state's standards and another at Mangaldoi. This has been India's first Tele-radiology initiative in Govt. Sector being started on 7th September 2011 at Mangaldoi and 16th September 2011 in Haflong. Under this project, images captured at the primary centers are transferred to the State Server located at Chennai, Delhi, and Hyderabad etc. for reporting. So far 272 cases at Mangaldoi and 490 cases have been reported upon through this method of using radiologists at Guwahati providing 24x7 reporting on CT scan & X-ray. Emboldened by this success, Assam will be the first state to expand the scope of tele-radiology services to cover another 11 districts. ON THE ANVIL · 100 additional 108 Ambulances of smaller vehicles providing for transportation of patients from those areas where the large ambulances are unable to reach. · 100 Nos. of "Dolies" to transport pregnant women for delivery from their homes to a nearby place where an ambulance can carry her further to a hospital. · 450 GPS fitted Ambulances for transport from a Hospital to a higher level Hospital. · 100 bedded Mother & Child wing in 14 District Hospitals · 55 new CHCs, 65 new PHCs, 626 new Sub Centres & 60 nos. new doctors and nurses quarters Mission Director, NRHM, Assam, Prateek Hajela, held that as NRHM, Assam is entering a new era of diminishing returns, the second phase /· of NRHM (2012-2017) would demand much more commitment wAS dedication from all quarters with emphasis on quality so that /. Assam is able to achieve the targets set for the year 2017. He admits that the zenith is still far, but if the present scenario is something to go by, Assam will shortly be one of the healthiest states in the country.

in r»?-p
ill P.. 1

Bongaigaon District Hospital

