Soc iety PAIN MANAGEMENT
7 million

POWER OVER

Indians live, work and fight with debilitating pain every year.

PAIN
An explosion of new research, treatments and therapies is changing the way pain is understood and managed
By Damayanti Datta

40%
chronic pain sufferers find it difficult to sleep, 30% to work.

99%
Indians get lower back pain at least once during their lifetime.

16-20%
is the rate at which the use of painkillers is rising.

ook at the irony of it. I have a broken back, broken knees, I have torn my shoulders six or seven times and I'm playing a superhero." That's 38-year-old actor Hrithik Roshan's way of poking fun at his intimate enemy of 27 years: Constant and relentless pain. "I don't remember those days when I did not have any pain." He was just 11, when his knees hurt and a "strange, shooting pain" often hit him like a knife up the spine. At 19, he ended up with a herniated disc, excruciating pain and a long list of can'ts and don'ts. That was also the first time he heard the words: "You should not be an actor." He proved his doctors wrong. But at BOLLYWOOD STAR 33, when he was put on crutches for six HRITHIK ROSHAN, 38, months for arthritis on his right knee, he de- STRUGGLED WITH spaired. "The pain was unbearable. There CHRONIC PAIN FOR was hardly any cartilage left. That's when 27 YEARS. HE IS FREE OF IT NOW, THANKS fear set in and made me imagine the worst." TO CUTTING-EDGE His journey captures the story of seven TREATMENTS THAT million Indians, who live, work and fight SPELL NEW HOPE with debilitating pain every year. Modern FOR MANAGING medicine has conquered many diseases and SUFFERING.

L

55%
patients of chronic pain are prescribed inappropriate sedatives.

28%
pain patients say relatives do not understand their suffering; 23% say the same about colleagues.
Source: Management of Neuropathic Pain: Emerging Strategies, by Dr R. Malhotra, professor, Department of Orthopaedics, AIIMS; International Association for the Study of Pain; Unbearable Pain: India's obligation to ensure palliative care, by Human Rights Watch 2010-11.

"Right after Jodhaa Akbar, arthritis set in on my right knee.I was sporadically on crutches. The pain was unbearable.I thought I would have to say goodbye to movies."
68
INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 17, 2012

HRITHIK ROSHAN
69

SEPTEMBER 17, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

Soc iety PAIN MANAGEMENT
halted others, but attitude towards patients in pain--even the terminally ill--has largely remained primitive. Roshan, however, is free of pain now. He happens to be a beneficiary of the new emerging science of pain. After decades of slow progress, an explosion of new research, treatments and therapeutics is changing the way pain is understood and managed. There is new hope in what scientists have learned about how pain works: That it's not the reality of your injury or illness, pain is how unwell your brain thinks you are. Is a pain-free future on the horizon? Roshan, for one, certainly thinks so. He has gone through cutting-edge treatments--from functional manual therapy to myofascial tissue massage--that would have been impossible even a few years ago. Now Indian scientists have come up with a new drug that can target cells at the level of molecules and stop the brain from responding `emotionally' to what it perceives to be damage to the body-- or pain. Now waiting for global patent, it is the only reported such pain molecule in the world to have gone through clinical trials. Pain hit the headlines this year with a vengeance, as Bollywood's glamorous stars went in and out of hospitals. Amitabh Bachchan blogged in April about his "horrendous pain" that made it difficult for him to "walk, stand, sit or lie down". Shah Rukh Khan wrote on Facebook in January about pain in his ribs: "Hurts only when I laugh or breathe." Salman Khan complained of "unbearable pain" in his jaws and cheeks, a recurring issue. Roshan went public about his condition after completing 85 days of "non-stop, hardcore action" for his forthcoming science fiction film, Krrish 3: "Hanging from a harness 100 feet off the ground is probably the worst thing for any spine." It hasn't quite made the headlines but the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) is organising lectures on pain management for MBBS students this year--the first such in India. "For years, chronic pain has been neglected by doctors," says Dr Sushma Bhatnagar, anaesthesiologist with the cancer centre at AIIMS. "Most treat it as a symptom of other diseases and not as a disorder that should be targeted in itself for relief." The Medical Council of India recognised it as an MD specialisation in 2011, after global NGO Human Rights Watch revealed in its report the lack of basic knowledge among Indian doctors about pain management. The God is in biology. Way back in the 1990s, when behavioural neurologist V.S. Ramachandran experimented with mirrors on a patient tortured by "phantom pain" in an amputated arm, it led to the most exciting story in all of pain science: That chronic pain has more to do with the way the brain rewires itself after mining all its data--thoughts, feelings, beliefs, expectations, memories and genetics. "It was a radical shift in opinion," says Ramachandran, now the director of Center for Brain and Cognition at University of California, San Diego, US. "We have been urging the new view that something like chronic pain is caused by a shift in equilibrium in

NEW SCIENCE OF PAIN
It is no longer just a symptom. The best treatments are now targeted at preventing pain as a disease.

THE EMOTIONAL BRAIN
Old view: Pain is always caused by tissue damage. The new science: Not necessarily. Pain is how unwell your brain's emotional hub, the limbic system, thinks you are.

WHEN PAIN REFUSES TO GO AWAY
Chronic pain was thought to be any pain lasting longer than 12 weeks. Now it's believed to be triggered by a `false alarm' that confuses the nerves.

THERMOMETERS ON THE SKIN
Discovery of a class of molecules on the skin that acts as `thermometers' , by detecting heat due to injury or infection and communicating the sensation to the brain.

HOWTO MEASURE PAIN
New ways of measuring pain now allow patients to choose their own pain level: The verbal, numerical, facial expression and visual analogue scales.

CLINICS TO THE RESCUE
Armed with bleeding-edge technology, wonder drugs and star facilities, patients are now flocking to new clinics hoping to be treated in style and comfort.

NEW GENERATION DRUGS
Old pain relievers have limited impact and potential for addiction. New compounds that target pain at the level of molecules are coming up.
GETTY IMAGES

the brain. Often, you just need a reset button to shift it back with very simple procedures." A decade-and-a-half of brain imaging has proved that. Imagine this: You get hurt. Your cells start oozing enzymes, signalling white blood cells to come over and heal. The heat produced in the rush upsets little `molecular thermometers' located on the pain receptors of your skin. They communicate electrical impulses about what is happening in your body's environment through the spinal cord to your brain. The brain immediately sends it to various units to interpret the signal: Where does the pain came from? What is it like? How does it compare with other pain it knows? The emotional hub, the limbic system, is the final interpreter. Depending on how it decides to `feel' the pain, you yell, cry, break out in sweat, or your heart starts racing. All within a fraction of a second. What if there is a drug that can stop the little `thermometers' from communicating with the brain? That's exactly what a team of 60 scientists is trying to do at the sprawling Novel Chemical Entities lab of Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Ltd at Mahape in Navi Mumbai. A world of biotech is gathering momentum here since 2007 on pain therapeutics. Scientists are designing novel molecule structures and making new compounds. "The new science shows unique pain pathways," says chief scientist Neelima Joshi. The molecule they have discovered, GRC 15300, can act on one such pathway, `molecular thermometer' TRPV3, and block it from transmitting signals to the brain. "No

HEALING TOUCH

What happens to the body's alarm system when it is in pain? How do you measure it? These are questions to which doctors now have answers. DR RAJESH MALHOTRA Orthopaedist

DR V.S. RAMACHANDRAN Neuroscientist

"Pain is an opinion on the organism's state of health rather than a mere response to an injury.There is no direct hotline from pain receptors to the brain."
70
INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 17, 2012

"In chronic pain, the body's alarm system breaks down. Nerves continue to fire pain messages to the brain even without any real threat to the body."

DR GERD MUE LLER Orthopaedist "Treating chronic pain now involves addressing all the dimensions of a person's life, from physical to even psychosocial factors."

DR SUMIT SINGH Neurologist "Measuring pain is the biggest challenge to doctors. Most rely on patient narrative and the four vital signs: Temperature, pulse, respiration and BP."

DR SUSHMA BHATNAGAR Anaesthetist

"For years, chronic pain has been neglected by doctors. Most treat it as a symptom and not as a disorder that should be targeted in itself for relief."
SEPTEMBER 17, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

71

Soc iety PAIN MANAGEMENT
pharma company in the world has been able to discover and develop a TRPV3 molecule and take it to clinics," she adds. "There has been little breakthrough in pain therapeutics in the last 80-100 years," says Glenn Saldanha, chairman and MD of Glenmark. "Old pain-relieving options like opioids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) have limited impact, addiction potential and safety issues." But the market for painkillers is going up by 16-20 per cent a year, as chronic pain--lowerback pain, arthritis and headaches top the list--keeps 30 per cent of Indians from enjoying life, according to data compiled by the Delhi Pain Clinic. Moreover, with few or no drugs available for excruciating pain linked to cancer, osteoarthritis or neuropathies, there is a large unmet need for pain as an area of treatment. So what goes wrong in chronic pain? Shouldn't the pain stop after an injury or damage heals? "In chronic pain, the body's alarm system breaks down," says orthopaedic surgeon Dr Rajesh Malhotra of AIIMS. "There is no threat to the body, yet nerves continue to fire pain messages to the brain and that becomes the pattern." But why do some patients develop chronic pain while others don't? The answer is likely to be genetic, he says. That raises another sticky issue: Is it possible to measure pain? "Most physicians work largely in the dark," says neurologist Dr Sumit Singh of Medanta--The Medicity in Gurgaon, "relying on patient narrative and the four vital signs: Temperature, pulse, respiration and blood pressure." But new ways of rating pain, allowing patients to choose their pain level, are being devised: From verbal to numerical, facial expression to visual analogue scales. New treatment approaches are pouring out of clinics and hospitals. Hip-replacement surgeries are often being substituted by a newer alternative, visco-supplementation, a relatively painless procedure where a liquid is pumped into the joint for temporary relief for arthritic pain. Skin patches that deliver painkiller

WHEN IN PAIN
Words give vital clues to doctors. For nerve pain, patients tend to use "severe" , "shooting" ,"sharp" or "burning" . For muscle and bones, common words are "dull" and "achy" . Here's how Bollywood's top stars described their painful conditions this year:

SHAH RUKH KHAN, 46
With acute pain in the back, knees and shoulder, he has gone through several surgeries. In January 2012, he hurt his ribs while playing football. "Hurts only when I laugh or breathe," he wrote on Facebook.

SALMAN KHAN, 46
Complained of "unbearable pain" in his jaws and got operated for trigeminal neuralgia in 2011. Known to be one of the most painful conditions known to mankind, the nerve disorder can be triggered even by brushing one's teeth.

AMITABH BACHCHAN, 69
Suffered life-threatening neuromuscular ailment, myasthenia gravis, 30 years ago. Has recurring abdominal condition. He blogged about his "horrendous pain," that made it difficult to "walk, stand, sit or lie down" .

drugs are also being used to treat back-neck-shoulder pain due to a sedentary lifestyle, or chronic arthritis and muscle pain. Botulinum toxin A, a wrinkle-fighter, is gaining currency as a tool for fighting headaches. Botox blocks a neurotransmitter that sends messages from brain to muscles to clench. The new approach to pain management is making seasoned hospital entrepreneurs to look for an edge in marketing healthcare in a new avatar: The pain clinic. Dr Gerd Mueller's brand new pain boutique, ActivOrtho, in Vasant Vihar, Delhi, is one such. An orthopaedic surgeon and expert in pain and sports medicine, Mueller has been running centres in Germany. But the continuous flow of patients from India led him to the idea of creating a broader pain management clinic in Delhi. "We are bringing in the idea of European Rehabilitation focused on a multidisciplinary approach towards chronic pain," says Mueller. That means addressing all the dimensions of a person's life to treat pain: Structural issues (is there any problem with the spine or bones?); functional (are the muscles in order?), social (what sort of lifestyle and social support does the patient have?) and psychological (is the patient suffering from anxiety and depression?). Clinics like Mueller's show how quickly pain treatment is changing. As a student in the 1970s, Dr Rajesh Malhotra remembers how little was understood about the processes behind pain. "Most of the neurotransmitters were not known," he says. Can pain be conquered? "I certainly think so," he says with infectious optimism. Roshan still gives himself an hour a day to stay out of pain, but that old fear of mortality is gone. He can play with his children, act and lead an active life again. And he certainly does not have to say goodbye to dance or to his movies. "If I believed what was told to me by my doctors, I would have given up very early in life," he says. "But I've always believed that nothing is impossible. And here I am."
with Shilpa Mehta

72

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 17, 2012

