SIMPLY DELHI

Elsewhere

Out and About

HEADING OUT OFTHE CITY? TRYTHESE PLACES

BANGALORE The Orange Bicycle
A one-stop shop for all things quirky, kitschy and colourful, The Orange Bicycle is the place to let your wild side free. A bungalow that has been converted into a shop, the place has a laid back feel to it and is highly conducive for lazy browsing through the quirky collections for hours. On offer here are jewellery, bags, clothes, shoes and soft furnishings among other knick knacks like stationary and fridge magnets. Selections here include serving trays with fun messages printed on them, large beaded lights in bright orange and fuchsia and old-style trunks made new with a fresh coat of paint and funky designs. Cost Starts at Rs 100 for a magnet At 3353, 5th Cross 12th A Main Hall, 2nd Stage Indira Nagar, Bangalore Tel 080 41255242

SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

Le Cristaal
Le Cristaal is Bangalore's hip new joint for great continental cuisine. This chic all-day deli has been designed to look like a Parisian cafe with dramatic red floors, stark black high gloss furniture and decals of chandeliers on the walls. Stop by in the morning for a sumptuous breakfast comprising eggs, pancakes

and waffles served with maple syrup, honey and fresh fruits. For lunch or dinner, we recommend you try the penne arrabbiata, spinach ricotta ravioli or seafood risotto with saffron and roasted bell peppers. Average meal for two Rs 1,000 plus taxes At 36, Vittal Malaya, Bangalore Tel 080 41462747

s-16

SIMPLY DELHI N SEPTEMBER 2012

SIMPLY DELHI

Elsewhere Bidri
The dimly lit short passage that leads to Bidri aims to prepare you for the sensory delights that lie ahead. You see inspirations from the traditional craft of Bidri, a silver inlay work, native to the region of the same name in Karnataka, adorning the restaurant all over. Recently revamped, the restaurant known for its Hyderabadi cuisine now includes not just local delicacies but also Mughlai cuisine treats. So whether it's finely prepared roganjosh in Kashmiri style or the kachche gosht ki biryani from Hyderabad, a meal here promises to be a mouthwatering experience. Average meal for two Rs 2,500 At Hyderabad Marriott Hotel and Convention Centre, Tank Bund Road Tel 040 27522577

HYDERABAD

A PRABHAKAR RAO

Kangan
A far cry from the typical Indian restaurant, Kangan is where you will find a stylish blend of the traditional and contemporary. The many rows of bangles catch your eye as soon as you enter the eating joint which has anotherwise simple, no-frills décor. Dishes like galwati kebab (clove smoked patties with caramelised onion pate straight from the kitchen of the Lucknowi Nawabs), nalli roganjosh tempered with Kashmiri chili, safed murgh ka salan cooked with sesame seeds, almonds and coconut gravy are show stoppers here. A plate of kulfi or angoori rasmalai are good ways to wrap up your meal. The service is efficient and hospitable. You can even get a few bangles made for yourself by the lacquer bangle artisan who'll be more than happy to indulge you. Average meal for two Rs 2,200 plus taxes At Westin Hyderabad Mindspace, Raheja IT Park, Madhapur Tel 040 67676767

CHENNAI The High
If you're jaded by the usual clubbing scene in the city with predictable music and crowded bars, then the High at The Raintree, Anna Salai, could provide some much needed respite. The view of the cityscape from this eleven floor-high sky lounge is breathtaking, with many city landmarks such as the newly built State Secretariat glimmering against the night sky. Try their cocktails such as the High Kaffir Lime Martini--a signature drink with a confluence of premium vodka, kafir lime leaf, lemon juice and sugar syrup, besides international classics like Manhattan, Rob Roy and Bloody Mary while here. If you're feeling peckish, we suggest you try their mezze platter with pita, lavash, hummus, muhammarah and tabouleh or paprika spiced fish fingers with tartar sauce. Average meal for two Rs 2,000 plus taxes At The Raintree Hotel, 636, Anna Salai Tel 28309999

s-18

SIMPLY DELHI N SEPTEMBER 2012

HK RAJSHEKHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

SIMPLY DELHI
PUNE

Elsewhere Out of the Blue
The famous Mumbai restaurant Out of the Blue, has recently opened an outlet in Pune. If in the mood for a creamy cheese fondue, risottos or pastas, head to OOTB. The pastas in a variety of sauces and DIY sizzlers remain the highlights. End your meal in true OOTB style, with some delectable cheesecake and chocolate pastries. Like its Mumbai outlets, the new OOTB will also host events like bazaar nights. Housed in the E-Square mall at the lobby level, the restaurant, however, doesn't have the lazy charm of its original Mumbai outlet. Average meal for two Rs 1,200 plus taxes At E-Square Mall, Ganeshkhind Road Tel 020 66044247

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

KOLKATA Machchan
Machaan is the city's only jungle-themed restaurant and behind its glass doors is a replica of a wildlife park replete with lifesize figures of a baby elephant that trumpets intermittently, a giraffe, a monkey, a snake and a flock of birds chirping from various corners. The dimly lit interiors are laid out with artificial greenery and the wooden tables with uneven edges and the leafshaped backrests for the chairs only add to the experience. The menu is North Indian all the way. Try the soft lentils of dal Machaan, the baby potatoes of bhatti ka aloo, the succulent fish of ajwaini tandoori bekti and the pickle-spiced jumbo prawns of ambi ka jhinga with an olive chili naan. Fine touches in keeping with the theme of the restaurant are the leopard-print shirts that the waiters sport and the cutlery items with their handles resembling forked branches of trees. Average meal for two Rs 1,200 plus taxes At Mani Square Mall, 4th Floor, 164/1 Maniktala Main Road, EM Bypass Tel 033 65364680

Flambos
Flambos is the newly opened restaurant by Anita Lazar that promises a Latin-European feast. So expect great cuisine from Brazil, Italy and Portugal along with some French and Spanish delicacies thrown in. The kitchen and menu are designed by celebrity chef Christopher Salim Agha Bee, the man behind Sublime in Goa and The Sunset Ashram in Ibiza. In keeping with its Brazilian leanings, the café serves free range meats and well-done steaks, with the Steak with Blue Cheese being a hot seller. Make sure you don't miss the wasabi prawns, rosemary lamb chops and the Californian filo pastry. Average meal for two Rs 1,600 plus taxes At G 4 Metropole, Near INOX, Camp, Bund Garden Road Tel 67265806

s-20

SIMPLY DELHI N SEPTEMBER 2012

