The growth story of up market housing segment is not just about splendid living, it also includes a chapter on golf-centric homes. Indiabulls' Golf City is one such project which offers its residents charming apartments in a Spanisharchitecture style

1

magine waking up on a Sunday to the rousing sheer of a golf match, in close vicinity! Or watching a golfer playing his shot with grace and elegance every morning, right from your balcony! Most aspiring home owners are looking for the perfect blend of luxury, convenience, entertainment and recreation from their residential complex, and these desires are no longer dreams. A rage that is catching up these days in the metropolises of India is the concept of residential complexes built around golf courses or in close proximity to them. The golf being one of the most peaceful games, involves people, who get stressed after their daily work at office, enjoy playing golf as a part of their leisure or watching it to relax their minds. When golf itself is associated with everything premium and luxury, it's obvious that golf course projects have to become the new lifestyle real estate destination for the urban elite. These golf projects are environment friendly and bring you closer to nature providing a refreshing break from the regular residential developments coming up everywhere. The art of living green has truly transformed the mindset of the masses to have a home that overlooks a magnificent golf arena from their windows and highly recommended preference of the realty domain. It enhances the game of golf along with the luxurious homes. Today every one seeks for a splendid living, captured in the natural green. One tremendous advantage of golf centric projects is that they would evolve around a lifestyle theme with individual units have a panoramic view of manicured greens and the view is 'for keeps', due to the minimal probability of the golf course being superseded by other developments - unlike other property developments in non-golf course facing areas, where the developer can neither predict nor control what comes up in the immediate vicinity of his project. Keeping the trend and the rising demand in mind, developers across India's metropolises are now developing golf-centric projects. They are targeting for more luxurious and environfriendly homes to cater to the elite class. One such developer is Indiabulls Real Estate Developers, who are designing their new township, Indiabulls Golf City, at Savrolli, adjacent to the Khalapur toll naka, a mere 20 minutes from Panvel, close to Mumbai. Indiabulls Golf City will offer its residents charming apartments in a Spanish-architecture style. These apartments are being built on a natural rise bordering the golf course. What sets this township apart is its lavish 18 hole golf course designed by the legendary Phil Ryan. He will also look after at the environmental protection of the site as closely as he will look at factors like payability, safety, maintainability, driving range, putting course, warm up course, and remodelling. And with all this there is also a long list of amenities that include an access to a very special Club, a luxurious club house overlooking the vast Golf Course offers a pro-shop (a speciality golf store), fitness centre, state-of-the art gym, spa, relaxation pool, multi-cuisine restaurant, bar and cafe, banquet and party halls, business centre, library and reading lounge, card room, yoga and aerobics centre. All the amenities here have been carefully conceived to offer exclusivity. To tell more about this township, Indiabulls Golf City is a lot more than golf. Every resident at Golf City will find something special designed for him or her. One can enjoy the most heavenly rounds of golf. However, there is a lot else going for all age groups. A separate children's play area is provided for the tiny-tots. Landscaped gardens and specially designed activity areas allow for leisurely walks, meeting areas and invigorating relaxation. There are interesting seating arrangements for parents and grandparents where many an early morning or late evening can be spent in sheer bliss. In short, Indiabulls Golf City is a beautiful, self-sustained township where living moves up. From wanting to having it all, from being hurried to being leisurely and from chasing to calming, we call it the evolved course of life. Hence, at Indiabulls Golf City you don't just buy a home, you buy 100 acres of exquisitely landscaped golf course and gardens. To add more, Indiabulls has also introduced their special 20-80 no worry scheme through which one can reap full appreciation on the constructed apartment by paying just 15% on booking, no EMI - no interest for the next two years and just 5% on possession. SALES OFFICES: Kon Salve Road, Opposite Honda Warehouse, Village Kon, Panvel - 410 207 One Indiabulls Centre, Tower 1 Atrium, Lower Parel, Mumbai - 400 013 Hotel Fortune Select Exotica, Next to Palm Beach Galleria Mall, Plot No 16, Sector 19-D, Vashi, Navi Mumbai - 400 705

A

