FOREIGN WIT
By Heather Timmons

It's Not in Their DNA
Unlike Barack Obama & Co., Indian politicians just can't take a joke
s a transplanted American, I find it more and more difficult lately to resist the urge to crack a joke or two when we talk about politics in India. After all, politicians where I come from are regularly skewered and impersonated on late night television. American politicians even crack jokes themselves, mocking not just their opposition but their allies. Sometimes, they're actually funny. ("Four years ago, I was locked in a brutal primary battle with Hillary Clinton," Barack Obama said at the last White House Correspondents dinner. "Four years later, she won't stop drunk-texting me from Cartagena.") Sometimes, I secretly suspect all this joking around comes because America is cleaved into two major political factions which hate each other, and because we have lots of guns. Eliminate the humorous jabs, the satire and other nonphysical ways of letting off steam, and we'd have an old Weststyle shootout on our hands. Still, a relative absence of guns in India doesn't begin to explain the serious humour deficit that seems to have afflicted India's politicians lately. They have managed to be offended by everything from cartoons about wolves to parody Twitter feeds with goofy names. In trying to decipher why India's politicians seem to be unable to take a joke, I came across a few recurring theories:  They are too old. Much has been made of the age gap between India's Cabinet ministers and the average Indian citizen, which, at 40 years, is larger than any other major country. Jawaharlal Nehru famously had a great sense of humour, coupled with a thick skin, when he was in office, demanding of cartoonist Shankar, "Don't spare me". That's perhaps because he was a spry not-yet-60 when he took the prime ministership. Manmohan Singh, on the other hand, is now almost 80. (A side note: There is no available evidence that even as a younger man Singh SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com ever had a sense of humour.) Yet, as anyone reading this who has ever had a grandfather with a penchant for puns or flatulence jokes (come on, who here is with me?) knows, age doesn't impact one's ability to laugh, just lowers the bar for the quality of jokes one enjoys. "Why shouldn't I play God?" comedian George Burns said at 93, referring to his late-in-life movie roles, according to his obituary in The New York Times. "Anything I do at my age is a miracle."  An appreciation of satire and biting humour, as well as the ability to laugh at oneself and one's elders, is somehow un-Indian. Not my idea, I

a

hasten to say, but one that has been offered to me by many smart people. "There is a particular type of humour which is based on startling accuracy of observation or analysis," according to a sharp writer. "This form is rare in India, not only among politicians but also others, including writers and actors," he said. India's dominant form of humour is "of the lowbrow variety, which involves word-play and puns", he said. Comedian Anuvab Pal, who after leaving journalism said his job consists mainly of "making Punjabi ladies laugh", explains the "Indian sense of humour" this way: "I have been asked this, whether we know how to laugh at ourselves. The pedantic, humourless answer is yes. If you go for any comedy show in India, someone is talking about Gujaratis being thrifty or Punjabis being hot-headed, and people laugh. I don't think by and large we get English irony, so if you said to someone, `Sorry I'm late. I had to murder a few people because of the traffic,' the response would be, `You murdered someone?'"  India's politicians are asexual. Again, not my idea. For this one, we turn to Sigmund Freud, who theorised that making jokes, and sometimes even enjoying them, was a way to release repressed energy, often of the sexual nature, which was not acceptable to release in normal society. Considering that political sex scandals (at least on a state level) are a regular occurrence, including an incident recently where several politicians actually appeared to be viewing pornography in a state Assembly, I think we can quietly throw this one out and move along.  The cognitive and linguistic abilities of India's politicians are somehow "unevolved". According to Rod A. Martin, a professor of clinical psychology and the author of The Psychology of Humour: An Integrative Approach, humour serves a useful function in modern society: "As humans developed greater cognitive and linguistic abilities, complex patterns of group interaction and the ability to infer the intentions and mental states of others, humour and laughter, while originating in roughand-tumble social play, came to be used for additional purposes relating to social communication and influence, tension relief and coping with adversity." Err... maybe?  The cartoonists, humour writers and satirists at play in modern India just aren't that funny. Nah. Impossible.
Heather Timmons runs India Ink, The New York Times' Indian journal, from New Delhi

26

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

