GLASS HOUSE

by PRIYA SAHGAL

AKHILESH'S STATUE DIPLOMACY
lways have a spare ready. That seems to be one political mantra working for Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav. After some local goons broke a statue of Mayawati in Lucknow, Akhilesh was quick to replace it with a spare bust procured from the government's godown. The move earned him much goodwill with BSP leaders S.P. Maurya and Naseemuddin Siddiqui, who thanked him for the quick replacement. But even Maurya and Siddiqui smiled when they heard Akhilesh's question: Do you have another spare? The private joke being

A

that with such attacks likely to be repeated, the Akhilesh government needs a stock of Maya spares. Akhilesh is certainly getting to be good with words. When asked at the India Today Mind Rocks Youth Summit about Behenji (Mayawati), the young Yadav quipped,"She is behenji to the older lot. To us, she is buaji (aunt)."

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

OF THE

WEEK

Michelle Obama has a future in US politics after Barack completes his second term. --Digvijaya Singh on September 4. . Looks like he is promoting dynasty not only in India, but also the US.
PTI

DISASTER TOURIST

CABINET HOPEFULS
s excitement within Congress rises from bubble to boil at the prospect of a largescale Cabinet reshuffle, hopes are high among both those who have not tasted the power of office under UPA and those who think they deserve better.There is much talk of Muslims being inducted to appease the one community whose loyalty has catapulted Congress to office.The ageing Mohsina Kidwai is a frontrunner, while K. Rahman Khan, former deputy speaker in the Rajya Sabha, cannot understand why he is not a natural choice for minority affairs. Rajeev Shukla, in the meantime, hopes to be promoted to the Cabinet with charge of either of the mouthwatering portfolios--civil aviation or parliamentary affairs. Incidentally, both these portfolios are also being eyed by Ghulam Nabi Azad who is also lobbying for an upgrade from the health ministry.

H

aving just returned from yet another undisclosed week-long holiday abroad, Congress General Secretary Rahul Gandhi returned to Indian politics with a bout of disaster tourism: The relief camps of riot-hit Assam on September 11 and his election-ravaged constituency on September 13-14. The Opposition is wondering which of the two was a bigger tragedy for him. Rahul's holiday destination remains a mystery. No one knows where he went, and no one dares to ask.

A

RAHUL (LEFT) WITH TARUN GOGOI IN ASSAM

12

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

GLASS HOUSE
U-TURN ON PATIL
s long as Pratibha Patil was President, Shiv Sena chief Bal Thackeray took credit for supporting a Maharashtrian. But now that her totally lacklustre tenure is over, Thackeray is distancing himself from Patil. In an interview to party mouthpiece Saamna on September 9, he stated, "I had said no to Shivraj Patil's nomination. However, since Congress was insisting on a Maharashtrian president, I extended support to whoever their nominee would be. I had no idea it would be Pratibha Patil." . Indeed, there are no takers for failures.
YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

SHINDE

THE NEW MAN

A

R

PTI

MINISTER FOR GAFFES

W

PATIL

hat's with Congress home ministers and their obsession with intelligence gathering agencies? First it was P. Chidambaram, former home minister, who pushed for a National Counter Terrorism Centre. While that project is yet to take off, his successor, Sushilkumar Shinde, is asking for a brand new agency. He said as much at his first press conference on September 10. The catch is that the announcement came as a surprise not just for the media but also for his own officials. Hardly surprising then that Shinde refused to divulge any more details. There aren't any. Shinde was initially reluctant to present a monthly report card to the media. His officials now agree with him.
YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

ahul Gandhi's point man in Amethi has changed. His new aide is a former Rajasthan cadre officer, Man Singh.The old one, K.L. Sharma, has been hijacked by sister Priyanka to look after Rae Bareli.The replacement was suggested by Rahul's trekking buddy and Minister of State for Home Jitendra Singh. The diligent, young Man Singh has spent the last month familiarising himself with local problems. Which only makes one wonder, why did Rahul opt for an outsider over a local to manage his constituency?

DINNER
O F T H E W E E K

NATH'S PRESUMPTIVE HUMOUR
ith Kamal Nath, always look for the punchline. Recently, while his Government was under attack by CAG, he surprised his colleagues by lauding it as "an important constitutional authority". However, minutes later came the qualifier. Talking about the Government decision to legalise 1,640 unauthorised colonies in Delhi, he said, "The decision was based on ground realities. But CAG could argue that this is presumptive loss to the exchequer." After the spectrum scam and Coalgate, Nath shouldn't underestimate the power of presumption.

NATH

W

Delhi's political chatterati, from Montek Singh Ahluwalia to Amar Singh, turned out in full face at Salman Khurshid's dinner for son Zafar.The invite said : Zafar is off to London to visit the Queen. And study law.

"After incidents in Mumbai, Bhubaneswar and now J&K, it seems police brutality is quickly being substituted by brutality against the police."
AMIT KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

MILIND DEORA Minister of State for Communications and IT

"I am appalled when I am told that terrorism "I have received many blessings continues to be an issue. Look at the Mumbai ter- for the ban on gutka in the state. ror attack trial realistically and not emotionally." Like that I plan to make the state free of the Congress." HINA RABBANI KHAR Pakistan Foreign Minister

NARENDRA MODI Gujarat Chief Minister
with KIRAN TARE AND BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA

14

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

NEW

