Nation

2G SCAM

RAJA SAYS COAL SCAM ECHOES 2G
Former telecom minister stops short of saying Prime Minister should be questioned
INDIAN EXPRESS/PREM NATH PANDEY

A. RAJA

ormer telecom minister A. Raja says that there are similarities in the Coalgate scam and the 2G spectrum allocation case, in which he is an accused. On being asked by INDIA TODAY if the coal mine allocation case and the 2G scam were similar, Raja said, "Yes, they appear to be." So shouldn't the Prime Minister be questioned in the coal case? All that Raja was willing to say was, "How can I comment about the Prime Minister?" Raja was speaking outside the court of Special CBI Judge O. P. Saini on September 11, as he was accompanied by one of his lawyers on a coffee break. Raja, out on bail since May 2012, is cross-questioning former Department of Telecom (DOT) deputy director general A. K. Srivastava in court. Prodding his team of lawyers, he was seen constantly whispering in the ear of senior lawyer Ramesh Gupta. Raja, a qualified lawyer, was all modesty as he told INDIA TODAY that he was only

F

"helping out" his legal team. "They are doing a fine job," he said. Raja spent 15 months in Tihar on charges of corruption in the grant of 2G spectrum licences. With the media interest shifting to the coal mine allocation scam, the courtroom was almost deserted as a dozen lawyers crowded around Special Judge Saini's podium. Raja, wearing half-moon spectacles, stood with the lawyers, poring over the thick case file. Wearing a crisp white shirt and navy blue trousers, he could have passed off as a lawyer himself. Only the customary black jacket was missing.

ON BEING ASKED IF THE COAL MINE ALLOCATION CASE AND 2G SCAM WERE SIMILAR, RAJA SAID,"YES, THEY APPEAR TO BE."

At one point, when Srivastava talked about movement of the file on Unitech Group's application for Unified Access Service (UAS) licence, Raja urged his lawyers to ask Srivastava to show where this was recorded as per government rules. Srivastava had deposed that Raja, being the then telecom minister, was the "final authority" to take decisions on policy matters in DOT. He had also said that Raja had communicated to the Prime Minister about the policy for distribution of licences "at his level" and the issues involved in it were not processed by DOT formally. It was almost like Chinese whispers at times, as Raja whispered in Ramesh Gupta's ear, who in turn whispered to senior counsel Sushil Kumar, who was seated while actually conducting the cross-questioning. Raja and his team of lawyers tried to prove that Srivastava was falsely deposing under pressure from the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). Srivastava had earlier deposed that R. K. Chandolia, then private secretary to Raja, had asked him to stop receiving new applications for 2G licences once the Unitech Group's firms had submitted theirs. Sushil Kumar said, "In your statement before this court dated August 1, 2012, you had stated that `Chandolia asked me whether applications of Unitech Group have been received'. However, this does not figure in your statements to CBI recorded till March 4, 2011," Kumar said. The lawyer asked him why he had not told CBI earlier that Chandolia had asked him if the Unitech Group's applications had been received by the department. Srivastava denied that he had deposed falsely. At the end of the day, Raja's legal team felt they had managed to dent the credibility of Srivastava. "I am satisfied with the proceedings," he said.
by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

73

