ESSAY
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Laughter Lost at the Gate of Power
The British were witty at home, but the Raj froze laughter between the ruler and ruled
By M.J. AKBAR
etween the old world of Raja Birbal and the his normal clothes. He went home, changed into finery, renew age of Mahatma Gandhi fell the shadow of turned and found he was offered the best food. He dipped the British Raj; and its stiff upper lip silenced, for the bottom of his fur coat into gravy and cried, "My dear coat, a century and more, a creative bridge between eat! This food is for you, not me." The more powerful the monarch the greater seemed the ruler and citizen, humour. The bridge was need for a figure who could keep him close to earth. Muslim unequal, but it existed. The witty Brahmin, Birbal, was dining with his rulers were reminded of an Arab saying, attributed to the emperor when Akbar the Great sniffed at a plate Prophet, "Humour is to speech what salt is to food." Wit was of brinjal. Brinjal, thundered Birbal, was a vegetable from classless, but it had to be delivered with grace. As that great hell, unworthy of a monarch who was the shadow of divin- raconteur and journalist Abdul Halim Sharar notes in his imity on earth--how dare the royal kitchen serve such junk! mortal tribute to Awadh, Lucknow: The Last Phase of an Flay the chef! A few weeks later, at another meal, Akbar Oriental Culture, "The greater a person's wit, the more he found a dish of brinjal delicious. Birbal went into raptures will be appreciated in literary and social circles." It is that excelled one another in metaphor and rhapsody. Akbar axiomatic that wit needs a target, but it must always wear reminded Birbal of his previous views. "Sire," replied Birbal, the antidote of discretion. Raja Bhoja of 11th century Malwa had a lower caste `Teli' as his foil, but if the latter lives on in "this brinjal is not my emperor. You are." memory it is because he used a pinprick, not a sword. Anyone who thinks sycophancy is the point of Wit is a reminder, not a rebellion. the story misses the point. The punchline puncThe meaning of servant changed with the tures, if lightly, the ego of kings with a verbal The arrival of the British, as did the meaning of stiletto. Birbal is the eponymous people's more powerful master. Pride of service was replaced by hero because his anecdotes are comfort the monarch, the dry obedience. Nawab Asaf ud Daulah of food on the table of power. Birbal is the greater seemed the Awadh hired a cook who only made most famous of an eastern tradition of lentils at the astonishing salary of Rs 500 a courtiers and citizens, across kingdoms need for a figure month. The Nawab always had to comply and centuries, who challenged the who could keep with a service condition, that he eat the dal claimed omnipotence of rulers with the him close to as soon as it was prepared. Some weeks salutary barb of wit. earth. later, the cook produced his first plateful, They used jest, but were not jesters; Birbal placed it on the dastarkhwan, and told the was one of Akbar's finest military commanders Nawab, who was chatting. When after two reminders who is believed to have died during the wars in Afghanistan. The stories around these popular icons, many the Nawab did not appear, the cook emptied the dal on a apocryphal, were often moral fables or pungent reminders withered tree and walked out, never to be seen again. of a power beyond the realm of kings. Sultan Haroun al Money was no substitute for honour. Hilton Brown, whose anthology The Sahibs: The Life and Rashid, the mightiest of Baghdad's Abbasid dynasty, had a celebrated alter ego, Luqman, who was once seen rushing Ways of the British in India as Recorded by Themselves was away with a log in flames. Luqman explained that he was published in 1948, when the many odours of the Raj were going to hell. Why carry fire to hell, asked Haroun; there was still wafting through live memory, notes that "Before he had enough fire there already. Wrong, replied Luqman: Each one servants--this is a thing one is apt to forget--the Sahib had of us carries his own fire to hell. The Turkish lands of Asia slaves..." and that a great deal of "solemn discussion" from had Hodja, who laughed at wealth and authority. He was Waterloo (1815) to the Mutiny (1857) between Europeans in once invited to dinner by a rich man in the city of Aksehir, India dwelt on "how far it was permissible, and indeed and found no one paid attention to him because he was in advisable, to beat one's domestic staff for next to nothing".

b

18

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

19

ESSAY
The diarist Russell, writing in 1857, described this as "a savage, beastly, and degrading custom" and noted that the perpetrator "had no fear of any pains or penalties of the law". To be fair, slavery existed before the British arrived, and perhaps while a Nawab's whipping was as painful, a Sahib's was remembered. The startling difference between the British Raj and Indian Raj is the utter absence of humour between ruler and ruled under the British. There is no chapter on wit in The Sahibs. There are jokes aplenty in British Life in India: An Anthology of Humorous and Other Writings Perpetrated by the British in India, 1750-1950, With Some Latitude for Works Completed after Independence edited by R.V. Vernede, but Indians only appear when the Sahibs laughed at them, not with them, although quite often fondly. Hence: Suleiman Khan was a zubberdust man, but fond of the ladies too. He'd an iron fist and a very long list of all the villains he knew. They came to no harm if they greased his palm, as sensible rascals did; But no `Pro Quo' if a fellow said `No' and failed to produce his `Quid'. There are fun and games, of course, in British India, particularly between the sexes. There was much dancing, correctly described as the vertical expression of a horizontal desire, when the fishing fleets brought in another catch of BENGALI BABU BEING BEATEN UP BY HIS WIFE, 1880. eager women from `home'; and there was sufficient horiKALIGHAT PAINTINGS WERE BAZAAR ART THAT zontal expression in the summer capital of Simla for a POKED FUN AT THE NOVEAU RICHE BHADRALOK. Vicereine to sniff that no one could be found sleeping with his or her legitimate partner. Rudyard Kipling's Mrs always wary of censorship, which was a formidable weapon Hauksbee noted tartly, in Plain Tales from the Hills (1898), in the Raj arsenal. How do you censor the Oxbridge-rethat "take my word for it, the silliest woman can manage a turned leader of the Khilafat movement, Maulana clever man; but it needs a very clever woman to manage Muhammad Ali, when he cheekily asks the British why they a fool". And the Honourable Sir J.A. Thorne, ICS, educated Indians if they wanted them to remain subservient. No force, as Mark Twain pointed out, can recalled, It turned to a kill, I intended a withstand the assault of laughter. quarrel./Flirtatious young miss! (Yet it turned The British The savage cartoon is 18th century to a kiss.)/She pouted--and this robs my reserved their Britain's contribution to political debate; and verse of a moral./It turned to a kiss; I wit for Britain, where if vulgarity is an issue, then you have to take intended a quarrel! a look at British caricature of its royalty. The British were hardly humourless, class distinctions Those pamphleteers were merciless. Why but they reserved their wit for Britain, remained rigid, does the Indian ruling class, across party where class distinctions remained rigid, but where life was lines, react with such outrage over cartoon but where life was lived without fear. The lived without and caricature? It cannot merely be implodfirst casualty of fear is humour. As George fear. ing self-confidence as defeat looms on the elecOrwell, a Raj officer in Burma, remarked, toral horizon. That would be human, and might "You cannot be memorably funny without at even be easily explicable. It seems more likely that some point raising topics which the rich, the powerful and the complacent would prefer to see left alone." The while we fashioned our system from the Westminster guardians of the British Raj understood that it would be model, our rulers inherited their attitudes from the British more easily destroyed by ridicule than guns. It was not until Raj of Calcutta and Delhi rather than the Indian pedigree of Indians began to rise again, in the early 20th century, that Mughal or Maratha or Rajput. Our founding fathers could take a joke, because they wit entered the political dialectic. Indian poets, of course, continued to lance their lines with sentiment against foreign joined public life to serve. Their successors entered rule; and Bankim Chandra Chatterjee's satire against the politics as a means to power. They lost their sense of Tommy is lacerating. But this literature was subversive, and humour at the gate. 

20

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

