Mail

The Black Mark of Coal
SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

The rising heat of the Coal War scorches the Prime Minister's credibility.

``
Allocation Troubles
Congress-led UPA seems to be little concerned about the impact of the scam and the loss incurred by them ("Hauled Over the Coals", September 10). BJP has taken the fight to the streets and the Prime Minister is least bothered about the crisis and acts as if he has nothing to do with it. Instead of solving issues, the Congress president is looking for dodging tactics. The second run of UPA is fast becoming a laughing stock in the eyes of Indian public and also at the international level. The Prime Minister owes a serious and urgent responsibility to the country and needs to take some rigid measures immediately.
S. VENUGOPALAN, Chennai

The allegations levelled at Manmohan Singh for coal block allocation have tarnished his image as an impartial leader.
A . S R I K A N TA I A H ,

Bangalore

YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Leading from the Front
There is no doubt that there is a huge vacuum of leadership ("Sonia Leads Congress Defence", September 10) at the top for both the Government and the Congress party. The way things are unfolding for the ruling party, it is inevitable that sooner or later someone has to take charge of the situation. There is no Pranab Mukherjee by Sonia Gandhi's side. Hope that the Prime Minister learns something from her.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

The coal scam raises critical questions about how policy pertaining to na-

Sonia Gandhi is a busy lady these days. She is showing a newfound interest in parliamentary politics. With Rahul Gandhi himself unsure of his future, she has to take everything on her shoulders. Priyanka Gandhi too seems to have found a sudden interest in politics and can be seen helping her mother out.
PARUL KHANNA, Panipat

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

``
tional resources should be formulated and implemented. The statement made by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) has cautioned the Government against mass cancellation of the coal block allocation, saying such a step would hurt business sentiment. Further, CII emphasises that the law should take its own course and no action should be taken yet. In fact, any coal block allocation where it is established that due process has not been followed, should be reviewed and appropriate action should be taken in accordance with the law.
BEENA MATHUR, Pune

Opposing the auction route and favouring discretionary allocation of coal blocks have been attributed to BJP-ruled states by the Congress party, including the Prime Minister, as

Mail
if they merely approved such recommendations. However, the undisputable records testify to the fact that both the parties worked in tandem. Surprisingly, the Central Government has reportedly been magnanimous, soft and considerate to have accepted BJP chief ministers' requests for coal allocation. Unfortunately, we hardly come across such a cordial approach by the Centre towards the Opposition-ruled states.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

35
trouble has made them a successful team. Indeed, their seniors might find inspiration in that capacity. With the kind of talent that was seen at the Under-19 World Cup, the future of Indian cricket looks bright.
J. AKSHOBHYA, Mysore

Post-violence Fears
It is shocking to note the pathetic conditions in which the displaced from Chirang district of Assam live ("Trapped in Hell", September 10). What is more shocking is that these people do not have any confidence in the ruling government of Assam. They live in fear of ethnic violence with the Bodos, which sadly has become a frequent affair. The government needs to act impartially and without any vote-bank interests in mind for the situation to be fixed soon.
RANJIT SINHA, Delhi

in India. The move will also help in further strengthening the bilateral ties between the two countries. It will also help India in getting the most favoured nation status from Pakistan, which would enable it to export more products to the neighbouring country.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
O CT O B E R 1 6 - 3 1 , 1 9 7 7

Company for Keeps
Calcutta's bars, not necessarily the posh ones, are offering a new kind of service to their customers--a drinking companion. They call them hostesses, hired for specific hours during the day by the bar owners, to increase liquor sales. The rest depends on the initiative and purse of the customer. This is the latest manifestation of the increasing number of women taking to prostitution in Calcutta. Prostitution is illegal in the city. A Central Act, the Suppression of Immoral Traffic In Women of 1956, has banned the profession. From time to time, therefore, the police conduct raids, arrest a few women and release them on payment of fines ranging from Rs 10 to 15. The woman in the city's red light areas have a monthly pay-off arrangement with the police. On an average a group of a dozen women pay the police around Rs 500 every month. They accept police raids as an occupational hazard, but more often than not, are tipped off in advance. Moreover, almost every prostitute has a "protector", usually a rough-neck who also acts as a pimp. She shares her earnings with him and one-third of the total income is paid to the brothel keeper, invariably an elderly woman called mashima, mother's sister. Depending on their incomes, the women live in small flats of one to three rooms. The poor ones live in slum houses, not in cages as in Bombay. According to a Bengali researcher, the number of prostitutes in the Calcutta municipal area was 14,869 in 1911.

Fuel to Fire
The article by Gopalkrishna Gandhi ("Founding Fathers", August 20) ends with a naïve suggestion that a happy Indo-Pak friendship can be achieved, say, on Kashmir. The reality which liberals evade is that no Muslim, whether in Pakistan or India, can dare to stand up to Islamist bigotry. It was Jinnah's thundering threat "I will have a divided India or a destroyed India!" that set in motion the communal fires, started dutifully by the Muslim League ministry headed by Suhrawardy in Calcutta on August 16, 1946, followed by Noakhali, Bihar, Punjab (even Jaswant Singh omits mention of this). In her book Halfway to Freedom, Margaret Bourke-White, however, theorised that the terrible consequences of a million murdered and 10 million left homeless hurt Jinnah's conscience before his death. That perhaps explains his moist eyes referred to by Gopal Gandhi.
M.L. RAO, Bangalore

Corrigendum
In the cover story, Telecom Minister Kapil Sibal's quote was repeated in the box as P. Chidambaram's. The Finance Minister's quote should read thus: "If coal remains buried in mother Earth, where is the loss? Loss can arise only if one tonne of coal is taken out and sold at some unacceptable price." The error is regretted.

Investment Gains
Opening doors for foreign direct investment (FDI) by Pakistani entrepreneurs ("India Opens Doors to Pakistan", September 10) is a right step undertaken by India. Though much investment can't be expected from Pakistan because of its weakened economy, yet some of its wealthy business houses can encash the opportunity by entering a bigger market. Some businessmen in Pakistan are already preparing proposals to open future projects

Future-ready
What made victory all the more impressive for the Under-19 team was that the tournament had tested them all the way ("The Terrific Trio", September 10). Unmukt's match-winning century was put together with professional maturity, he did not attack blindly. He nursed the batsmen at the other end without trying to dominate them. The capacity to fight their way out of potential

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

DOWN A RED-LIGHT ALLEY IN CALCUTTA
SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

