NET FLUX
news now

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video

app alert

It's been an interesting week on the World Wide Web A report from ComScore that measures the digital world states that Indians spend 25.5 per cent of their online time on social networks. Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg caused the wireless cooking thermometer application iGrill's website to crash when he endorsed the app on his web page.

Top of the Lot
A STILL FROM THE PARODY VIDEO

This week's app round up is for photo collectors, arts and culture enthusiasts and event planners. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. Mixel will take select pictures from your phone to form an interesting collage. GetGlue is a platform for people to review and discuss TV shows, books and movies. SmartEvent will coordinate the perfect party by letting you virtually interact with guests before, during and after your event.

This week, a parody video of NASA scientists singing about the Mars Rover to the tune of Sexy and I Know It, the disturbing new advertisement for Lady Gaga's perfume `Fame'and a compilation of the most maniacal laughs to grace the silver screen, went viral.
We're NASAand we knowit.

tweet tweet

Highs of the Week
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on August 21: Celebrated English football club Manchester United topped trends following their devastating loss against Everton. People wondered about the future of Ethiopia after the death of Prime Minister Meles Zenawi on August 20 at 57. MNS trended when its chief Raj Thackeray led a rally in Mumbai on August 21 to protest against the communal violence on August 11. Some netizens also claimed the media's criticism of Thackeray was too harsh causing the term `Anti-Hindu Media'to also trend. Tweeple reminisced about their favourite movies.
#MUFC
1,456,010

1.9 million views
100 greatest maniacal movie laughs Lady Gaga perfume ad

528,326 views

922,054 views
* Views from when videos were uploaded

app buzz

Visionary App
Anmol Anand, 23, a postgraduate in Master of Computer Applications, from Delhi's Lal Bahadur Shastri ANAND Institute of Management, may have just revolutionised the way visually and hearing challenged people communicate.Anand developed an app called PocketSMS, that uses phone vibrations to convert SMSs into Morse code, during an internship with the Bidirectional Access Promotion Society in Delhi. The app, launched in July, has been designed to work on Android touchscreen phones.

smart sheet
KARTIK (LEFT) AND LAXMAN

VVS the Angel
web tips
New to the photosharing social network Instagram? Here's how you get more followers: Upload photos that mean something. Don't upload pictures of your food and hair repeatedly. Always caption and tag the subject of the photos along with the location. Share your pictures on other social networks and compliment fellow users.

#Zenawi
1,230,726

#MNS
1,067,602

#moviesiwontforget
483,244

#antihindumedia
234,369
*Figures denote number of followers

The retirement of Hyderabadi batsman VVS Laxman from international cricket has saddened fans and fellow cricketers.Amongst the many tributes to the cricketer, one stood out. It was by spinner Murali Kartik on Cricinfo. Calling him `Lacchi mama' , weirdonet Kartik called Laxman's retireComedienne Rosie O'Donnell shared ment selfless and a way for a poem on Facebook and Twitter about youngsters to enter the her heart attack, going into harrowing team."If Sachin is called detail about the pain and nausea. the God of cricket, then you,VVS, are the angel Two Swedish female designers have we all strive to be," designed an invisible bike helmet that on he wrote. first look appears to be a scarf, but on impact, transforms into a protective airbag.

