BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

UPA'S TUNNELVISION
ight is too powerful a concept; it suggests hope. But only means to reach out towards economic opportunity. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh did promise Indian Simultaneously, Muslims began to demand reservations in Muslims some solace at the end of a long and silent government jobs to compensate for the gap that had built. Self-help brought rewards. Education among Muslim tunnel. That will probably be recorded as his biggest political mistake. When you raise expectations of a fragile girls, for instance, has multiplied at a geometrical pace. But community and then shatter them without remorse, each the Congress Government which sired the Sachar Commission did nothing about its recommendations. Instead shard develops a poison edge. Indian Muslims believe, with good reason, that it was of job reservations, Muslims got the old and stale retinue of their massive mobilisation in the 2004 General Elections that gimmicks. Come elections, and the promise of reservations made Dr Manmohan Singh the most unexpected Prime went into the first paragraph of speeches. Once votes had Minister in India's electoral history. Those whose eyebrow been counted, this promise went into a dustbin. The Muslim voter's faith in Dr Singh did not wane easily; has already risen may want to note a significant truth about Indian politics. It is expected that non-Congress PMs will be in fact it peaked in 2009. But a pinnacle, thanks to its height, unexpected, which makes every surprise very unsurprising. offers clarity; illusions melt very quickly. When Congress conBut when Congress deviates from its well-established tinued to do nothing even after the substantial endorsement in 2009, Muslims began to slip away from the party, with devground rules, we have a story. It took three degrees of surprise to catapult Dr Singh astating effect. The consequences of Congress' demolition in into his present chair: He had to overcome one probability, UP are still playing out. Assam turned this slippage into a fall. The politics of Assam is not simple. Congress Chief one certainty and one possibility. First, the probable winner of the 2004 General Elections, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, lost. Minister Tarun Gogoi wore his heart literally on his sleeve Then, for reasons that still have not been made entirely during visits to Muslim refugee camps when he chose to transparent, his certain successor, Mrs Sonia Gandhi, flaunt a Bodo scarf. Muslim reaction has also changed. Anger stepped aside, leaving the Congress dazed and Opposition used to be diluted by fear, but fear has evaporated. SMS, and bemused. Finally, Mrs Gandhi discarded the claims of its more sinister cousin MMS, have eliminated the distance the senior-most Congress leader, Pranab Mukherjee, and between Bodoland, Bangalore and Mumbai. Technology has pushed Dr Singh, who would have been content with the also opened the market for mischief: Between the photoshop finance ministry, forward. That sort of dream triple wins and visual cropping, murder on the Indus can be easily distorted into death on the Brahmaputra. Reality is harsh you the lottery of a lifetime. Dr Singh sent a thank you note to Muslims soon enough. enough. Malice, exported by certain elements in Pakistan It was called the Sachar Commission. Justice Rajinder according to the home ministry, gives it a vicious twist. For our Government, alas, the most volatile problem Sachar shocked the establishment with his honesty. First, he delivered his report very quickly. He did not linger in order becomes an opportunity, not for a solution, but for another to enjoy the various benefits that came with the appoint- veil over misdeeds. Officials began to censor tweets critical of the Prime Minister, thereby ment, as so many of his peers have SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com managing to increase the intensity of done: There are instances that are criticism from all sides. Technology shocking beyond belief. The Sachar is community-neutral. Commission's report was an exercise The collapse of hope in Congress in depth as well as profound and dishas driven various Muslim communicerning empathy with its subject. It ties into disparate political camps. quickly became embedded within the Mulayam Singh Yadav was a major Muslim political consciousness as a beneficiary, but the next question defining document. The Left Front is more worrisome: Where do UP never recovered from its revelation Muslims go if the Yadavs also disapthat Narendra Modi's Gujarat had a point? In Assam and Kerala, they far higher percentage of Muslims in have banded around exclusivist flags, government employment than which is bound to inspire a reaction, Marxist Bengal. Sachar etched a porMuslim voter's faith in Dr Singh sooner rather than later. Desegretrait of a community left in neglect by peaked in 2009. But a pinnacle gation divides communities with those political parties it had trusted. offers clarity; illusions melt very The Muslim response was dual: rivulets of suspicion. Instead of conIt spurred a momentum that had quickly. When Congress continued trolling this drift towards danger, the to do nothing, Muslims began to UPA Government has disappeared already been building up, motivating a thrust towards education as the slip away, with devastating effect. into its own tunnel of silence. I

L

SEPTEMBER 3, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

70

