AnimPACTreatiire

Emotional balance is essential for children's overall well being. Young children are learning to manage stress, find their identity, and deal with their relationship with friends and peers all at the same time. Thus parents need to teach their kids to handle their emotions that will help them foster healthy interactions with the people environment around them.

For parents, it takes lot of patience and perseverance to raise emotionally healthy children. Along with that, one needs warm and nurturing bond with the children. No matter how much guidance A major role that you can play in your child's emotional turmoil is encouraging him to accept and express his emotions. You have to make them realize that

feature

advantages of being emotionally aware is more than being ignorant of your feelings which may lead to unresolved thoughts and issues. When children learn how to express themselves, they are learning important skills of life. Unresolved thoughts and issues. When children learn how to express themselves, they are learning important skills of life.
HELP YOUR CHILD TO IDENTIFY EMOTIONS -

park with you". Practically seeing your emotion, a child develops strength to express his own.
LET YOUR CHILD'S EXPRESS EMOTIONS, BOTH NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE - The

feelings of anger, disappointment and frustration are new and disturbing for a child. The child remains in the dilemma to give an appropriate reaction and thus finds it difficult to express his own emotion. Label his reaction "You seem scared when thunder makes a loud noise" or "You look happy whenever you play with your friends". This will give your child a feeling of acceptance, thus giving him the courage to express. Acceptance, thus giving him the courage to express. BE EMPATHETIC - When children develop a strong sense of empathy, they are less likely to act aggressively and more likely to get along with others. Find daily opportunities to model empathy including caring for a pet, donating clothing to others and calling a sick friend to see how he is feeling.

While reading your child's favorite book, bring out the emotions of the characters. For instance, "Rosy felt happy when mommy gave her a surprise or Sam felt angry when his classmates bullied him". Children relate their experiences with the characters and understand the emotions associated with them. EXPRESS YOUR OWN EMOTIONS - The best way to make your child understand emotions and feelings is to express yours in front of them. "1 am so excited to go to the park with you". Practically seeing your emotion, a child develops strength to express his own.express yours in front of them. "I am so excited to go to the

For your parenting related queries, write to the renowned parenting expert Sudha Gupta at sudha_ gupta@mothersprideonline.com

POSITIVE
PARENTING

LET YOUR CHILD EXPERIENCE THE FEELING OF JOY, SADNESS, JEALOUSY,

OR ANGER; As THESE EMOTIONS WILL MAKE HIM REALIZE HIS EXISTENCE
AS A HUMAN BEING.

