A.K. ANTONY (LEFT) AND GENERALV.K. SINGH DURING VIJAY DIVAS CELEBRATIONS AT INDIA GATE IN DECEMBER 2011

Cover Story ARMY

BEFORE SERVICE
By Sandeep Unnithan

f l e S

The standoff between General Singh and the defence establishment over his date of birth has become a public spectacle.The biggest casualty is the institution of the chief of Army staff,and the reputation of an admired force.

A
HT

rmy chief General Vijay Kumar Singh's 21-month tenure has been consumed by a singular passion. He calls it transformation; turning the 1.1 million-man Army into an agile, lean and lethal force. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) is more cynical. It believes the only change General Singh wants is to have his date of birth changed from May 10, 1950 to May 10, 1951 so that he can stay 10 months more in office. The Army chief claims his honour is at stake. The Government dismisses General Singh's demand as petulant, pointing out that the Army
chief, humours the air force chief and ignores the navy chief.' From his teak-panelled office on the first floor of South Block, the Army chief has a spectacular view of India's power centre. He jets around in a 13-seat Embraer 135 jet from the IAF's VIP fleet, drives in a convoy of black bulletproof Ambassador cars,is consulted on border disputes and is a key element of India's military diplomacy. General Singh has had a distinguished service record. As a young captain he saw action with the Mukti Bahini during the Bangladesh war of 1971. He topped the tough Rangers course in Fort Benning, US, in the 1970s and completed the Indian Army's commando instructor course. As a lieutenant colonel, he played himself in a cameo in Nana Patekar's Prahaar (1991). Yet, he was one among 35,000 other officers. General Singh hit the fast track after being promoted to Major General in 2003. The rank came after a complaint of being overlooked for promotion, not unusual in the Army. It was after he took over the prestigious Ambala-based 2 Corps in 2006 that he shot to prominence as a man who would be chief. He was still relatively unknown in Delhi, never having served

chief has been free with his public comments and quiet about his standoff with defence minister A.K. Antony. South Block has not seen such an ugly confrontation between civilian and defence authorities, at least since 1998, when Admiral Vishnu Bhagwat was sacked by the then defence minister George Fernandes for not agreeing to the appointment of the deputy naval chief. And that was a comparatively quiet fracas. A joke within the armed forces testifies to the importance of heading the world's second largest Army: `The Government listens to the Army

JANUARY 16, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

19

NEW

Cover Story ARMY
in Army headquarters. The timing of his new campaign has baffled and embarrassed the Government. The controversy has the potential to diminish the stature of one of the last Indian institutions left untouched by political intrigue. The chief has challenged a fundamental law of democracy: the supremacy of civilian control over the military by disregarding the Government's opinion not once but three times on his birth date. The Army chief's supporters feel he could take the Government to court, a move that is unprecedented for a sitting Army chief. The threats to resort to legal action come after the MoD's December 30 rejection of his statutory complaint sent to Antony in August 2011. The birth date controversy has been on the simmer for over a year. The Adjutant General's branch which deals with manpower issues recorded General Singh's date of birth as May 10, 1951 but the Military Secretary's branch that deals with promotions and postings records it as May 10, 1950. General Singh insists 1951 is his correct date of birth and calls 1950 a clerical error. MoD officials are not convinced. General Singh's last three appointments were made on the 1950 birth date and it was too late to change it. They say the Army used an RTI application in October 2010 as a pretext to change the chief's birth year to 1951. It has now led to a cold war in other areas. The MoD recently returned the chief's recommendation of Lt-General Sanjiv Chachra's name for

THE ARMY LIST SHOWS THE CHIEF'S DATE OF BIRTH AS MAY 10, 1950. IN HIS LETTER TO THE PRIME MINISTER IN MAY 2011, GENERAL SINGH ADMITTED THAT HE KNEW THIS.
chief's statutory complaint, former Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh (who served in the Army for three years), endorsed General Singh's stance in a letter to the defence minister. A Congress spokesperson said the former chief minister wrote the letter in his personal capacity. Veering away from the controversy, a BJP spokesperson called it an internal matter of the Army. Antony's silence on the topic is in sharp contrast with the shrill campaign mounted by General Singh. He has imposed a lockdown on statements about the controversy in the ministry and expressed mild disgust when questioned about it by reporters in public. Yet, Antony has made the ministry's stand clear where it mattered. In a written reply to the Rajya Sabha on September 7, 2011, Antony made two important assertions. General Singh's last three appointments--as corps commander in 2006, Army commander in 2008 and Army chief in 2010--had been made on the basis of the 1950 birth date. And that General Singh's tenure would run out on May 31, 2012 (when he hits 62). The MoD, which has initiated the process of anointing General Singh's successor, has stuck to this stance. It has shortlisted three Army commanders for selection as the next chief. This is seen as a mere formality. The appointment of present eastern Army commander LtGeneral Bikram Singh as the next chief is a certainty. Many former chiefs are privately aghast at the public spectacle but are circumspect in public. "It is a matter between the chief and the defence minister," says former Army chief General V.N. Sharma. The biggest question being asked is, why now? The Army list, a crucial document which carries the personal particulars of all Army officers, has listed the chief's date of birth as May 10, 1950. In his letter to the Prime Minister in May 2011, General Singh admitted that he knew this. Why did he not make any attempt to have it changed then? Worse, the chief weakened his case when he agreed to the 1950 birth date in writing on two occasions in 2006 and 2008. "To now blame the civilian leadership for the controversy is both misplaced and mischievous," says an MoD official. MoD officials say they entered the picture only in February 2011 when the October 2010 RTI petition filed by former IAS officer, Kamal Taori, inquiring about anomalies in the birth date of the chief, was forwarded to them. The Army responded that there were no

GENERAL SINGH INSPECTS THE GUARD OF HONOUR AFTER TAKING CHARGE IN APRIL 2010
HT

the crucial post of military secretary . The official explanation is that the officer was being posted to the vital department for only six months. Over the past year, General Singh's energies have been consumed by the raging birth date controversy. There are concerns that he may have neglected his job. A December 2011 CAG report rapped the Government and the Army for not acquiring modern artillery guns for over two decades and forcing troops to rely on "obsolete 1970s vintage guns".

The campaign to restore his birth date flies in the face of the Chetwode credo, instilled in every IMA cadet, of `service before self'; this is why General Singh has used another powerful Army credo, personal honour, to mask it. He has used, say his detractors, selective media leaks, waged a sly parochial campaign and tacitly moved to enlist political support. None of these allegations can be traced directly to the Army chief. MoD officials, however, say the circumstantial evidence for a motivated campaign

is overwhelming. In August 2011, soon after General Singh sent his statutory complaint to Antony, a group of 35 MPs led by BSP MP from Jaunpur Dhananjay Singh called on Prime Minister Manmohan Singh with a petition defending the Army chief's stand. The Prime Minister refused to accept the petition and requested the MPs not to politicise the Army. (Dhananjay Singh was arrested by the Uttar Pradesh police for his role in a double murder on December 12). Even as the MoD was to respond to the

VED PRAKASH MALIK

1997-2000

S. PADMANABHAN

2000-2002

N.C.VIJ

2002-2005

J.J. SINGH

2005-07

DEEPAK KAPOOR

2007-2010

Controversies Pakistani intruders sneaked
in undetected and occupied Kargil heights in 1999 for three months during his tenure. Subsequently evicted during the three-month conflict after 527 casualties.

Controversies Was Army chief during the
December 13, 2001 attack on Parliament that led to Operation Parakram, a 10-month deployment of the Indian Army along the Pakistan border. No strategic gains were made by the deployment.

Controversies Got a flat in the controversial Adarsh housing society in Mumbai.

Achievements
Completed the 670-km anti-infiltration fence along the Line of Control (LoC). Drew up plans for a mountain strike corps and additional divisions to bolster defences with China. Introduced Indian Army's first public doctrine.

Controversies A $1 billion tender for 197 light helicopters was cancelled in his tenure after deviations were noticed. Achievements
Opposed India's stand on demilitarisation of the Siachen glacier. Stressed humane face of the Army while operating in Jammu & Kashmir through `iron fist, velvet glove' .

Controversies Shifted northern Army
commander Lt-General H.S. Panag when he began investigating procurement irregularities. Got a flat in the controversial Adarsh cooperative housing society in Mumbai.

UNDER

FIRE
Army chiefs have been in the news for the wrong reasons
20
INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 16, 2012

Achievements
Introduced a pro-rata system to give combat arms and services promotional prospects based on their numbers.

Achievements Initiated
the procurement of 146 ultra-light howitzers from the US, the Army's first artillery purchase in 20 years.

Achievements Began
the post-Kargil re-arming of the Indian Army.

JANUARY 16, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

Final

Final

21

Cover Story ARMY
DATE WITH
April 1 , 2010
Gen V.K.Singh takes over as Army chief.Based on his birth date of May 10, 1950 seen by the Cabinet Committee on Appointments,his tenure is of two years.

Oct 28, 2010
RTI application

Feb 2011
Based on law ministry's advice, Adjutant General's branch amends General Singh's date of birth (DOB) to 1951. Directs Military Secretary's (MS) branch, which has on record his birthday as 1950, to do the same.

DISCORD
General V.K. Singh says his date of birth is 1951. The defence ministry insists it is 1950.

from retired IAS officer Kamal Taori queries Army on anomalies in the the chief's age.

VAHANVATI

May 2011
Matter referred to Attorney General G.E.Vahanvati who rejects General Singh's contention. Says DOB cannot be changed.

April 21, 2011
General Singh presents unsigned letter to Prime Minister stating a clerk who filed his UPSC form inadvertently noted DOB as 1950. Says he was pressured to accept it in writing by senior officers in 2007. PM forwards letter to defence minister without comment.
AP PHOTO

April 2011
Ministry of Defence asks Army HQ for clarification.Army replies it is not change of DOB but correction of a DOB that was incorrectly recorded by MS Branch.

May 25, 2011
General Singh files petition to Defence Minister A.K.Antony, encloses opinion of two former Supreme Court chief justices J.S.Verma and G.B. Patnaik.

June 2011
General Singh's petition is sent back to the attorney general who reiterates Government stance that DOB cannot be changed.

August 2011
General Singh files statutory complaint insisting he was born in 1951. It's the first by a sitting chief of Army staff.

September 2011
Antony says in Rajya Sabha that chief's last three appointments were on 1950 DOB. He has to retire on May 31, 2012.

December 30, 2011
Defence ministry rejects General Singh's statutory complaint for a third time. Begins process of choosing next chief.

VERMA

anomalies but merely an "omission" in one branch (the Military Secretary) and that the necessary corrections were made to this. This move by the Army bypassed the civilian bureaucracy and a specific government office memorandum of 1964 that states that no "request for change in date of birth shall be entertained after the lapse of two years from the grant of the first commission". The RTI application triggered an avalanche of missives that involved everyone from the defence secretary, defence minister, joint secretary (ground and air) and finally even

Attorney General Goolam Vahanvati whom the MoD consulted thrice. Vahanvati's contention is the Government's defence: "The amendment of the date of birth is not legally tenable and the issue cannot be reopened at this stage on any basis whatsoever." General Singh's response has been to suggest that the attorney general's responses were tailor-made and designed to arrive at a conclusion convenient to the Government. The chief's main line of defence has been that he was born in 1951 but compelled by the then military secretary and Army chief to accept the 1950

DESPITE THE GENERAL REAFFIRMING HIS FAITH IN THE SYSTEM, HE RELEASED AN ENDORSEMENT OF HIS 1951 BIRTH DATE BY TWO EX-SUPREME COURT CHIEF JUSTICES.

birth date in writing. In his letter to the Prime Minister, Singh alleges, "It was orchestrated through persons who benefit if the date remains as May 10, 1950." His supporters allege it was part of a conspiracy by then Army chief General J.J. Singh to ensure General Bikram Singh is made Army chief in 2012. General J.J. Singh, presently Governor of Arunachal Pradesh, refused to comment. He has, however, privately denied the allegation and said he had recommended General Singh's appointment for the Ambalabased 2 Corps. In its replies to General Singh's letters, MoD officials emphasised that the succession line as one of the reasons for not allowing a change in the birth date of the chief. When Indira Gandhi granted Field Marshal Sam Maneckshaw a one-year extension in 1972, she gave a similar one-year

22

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 16, 2012

NEW

Cover Story ARMY
AP PHOTO

``

This is a matter between the Army chief and the ministry of defence.

General V.N. Sharma, Former Army chief
GENERAL DEEPAK KAPOOR (LEFT) HANDS OVER CHARGE TO GENERAL SINGH

''

RUMOURS SWIRLING AROUND SOUTH BLOCK SAY THAT GENERAL SINGH MAY RESIGN AHEAD OF HIS RETIREMENT DATE TO REDEEM HIS HONOUR.
extension to his successor, General G.G. Bewoor. However, nothing prevents the Government from picking any of the Army commanders as chief. This has, however, been done only once when Indira Gandhi chose General A.S. Vaidya over the seniormost Army commander, Lt-General S.K. Sinha, in 1983. Antony has, however, made it clear that the succession boat will not be rocked. The mild-mannered defence minister has been bewildered by the chief's shifting stance, particularly after a meeting with General Singh last year. Despite the General reaffirming his faith in the system, he went on to release an endorsement of his 1951 birth date by two former Supreme Court chief justices J.S. Verma and G.B. Patnaik. This procedure entirely bypassed the ministry. The chief may have indicated a compromise formula for the Government with his recent assertions of terming it a battle for honour and not tenure. The suggestion is that he would resign on time if the ministry accepted 1951 as his year of birth. The MoD says there is no room for compromise and that Singh must retire on May 31, 2012 as scheduled. `Rules are rules and cannot be bypassed,' Law Minister Salman Khurshid said in a TV interview. General Singh should have corrected any inaccuracies on his date of birth earlier, he said. Rumours swirling around the corridors of South Block say General Singh may resign ahead of his retirement date if he feels his battle is lost. But, clearly, the personal crusade has hobbled his options. In 1961, General K.S. Thimayya resigned as Army chief. Thimayya's reasons were never personal. He was dissatisfied with the Army's poor preparation against China and defence minister V.K. Krishna Menon's neglect of adequate equipment. General Thimayya was persuaded to withdraw his resignation by Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. In the case of the present Army chief, however, things are different. "There is no interest in this case except self-interest," says a senior Army officer. Whoever wins at the end of this bitter controversy, the outcome will have substantially diminished one of the nation's great institutions. It can lead to what the Army uses to describe a depleted war machine--hollowness.
Check on iPad for the moving cover

`` ``
24

If the dissent is on an issue of operational concern, it may receive support from the organisation, but if it is in pursuit of a personal agenda, people tend to distance themselves from it.

Maj Gen (retd) Surjit Singh

''

If I were in his (Singh's) place, I would resign if I felt very strongly about the issue and then move court. I wouldn't seek legal recourse as chief.

Air Chief Marshal Fali Homi Major Former IAF chief

''

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 16, 2012

NEW

