SIMPLY DELHI

Inside
COVER STORY

M u st se e, m u st do

s-4

A list of all that is iconic in your city as well as a few little known jewels
THEATRE

C u rt a i n r a i s e r
A sneak peek into the 14th Bharat Rang Mahotsav
BUZZ

s-28

I n t he c i t y

s-38

A checklist on where to party and what to shop for
ELSEWHERE

O u t a n d A b o ut
Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie Chief Executive Officer Ashish Bagga G Editor Director M.J Akbar Assistant Editor Insiyah Vahanvaty Editorial Team Rewati Rau, Ekta Alreja, Vanita Chitkara, Shilpa Mehta, Ekta Marwaha, Sibi Arasu Photo Editor T Narayan Photo Department Ravi S. Sahani, Reuben Singh, Vikram Sharma, Subir Halder, Sipra Das, Rashmi Hajela (Chief Photo Researcher) Design Associates Madhu Bhaskar, Vandana Nayar, Sheeba Narain Production Surinder Hastu (Chief of Production), Harish Aggarwal, Naveen Gupta Layout Execution Ramesh Gusain, Ravishanker Singh, Rajesh Kumar Rawat G Publishing Director Malcolm D. Mistry Associate Publisher (Impact) Anil Fernandes G IMPACT TEAM Senior General Managers Sonal Pandey (West and South), Preeti Kohli (North), Sunil R. (Bangalore) Kaustav Chatterjee (East) V. Somasundaram (Chennai) Jitendra Lad (West)

s-42

Heading out? Then try these places
WHAT'S UP

E nj o y !

s-46
Garden of Five Senses

A month of food, art, music and more
Cover design by Saurabh Singh

OUR PICK of the month
Art unlimited
In 2008, India hosted its first art fair, the India Art Summit, in Delhi. Since then, it has played an important role in modernising Indian art scene. Now in its fourth edition and renamed as India Art Fair, the 4-day event will showcase the works of leading artists such as Damien Hirst, Anish Kapoor (his installation Ascension, left) and Antony Gormley. Some of the prestigious international art galleries participating for the first time include Hauser and Wirth and Galleria Continua. In addition to their flagship speaker's forum programme that will have discussions by 54 headline speakers on topics like You don't have to be a Millionaire to Collect Art, the fair will have a video lounge and an art bookstore. India Art Fair 2012 at NSIC Exhibition Grounds, Okhla, runs from January 26-29; indiaartfair.in
Want to tell us about an event?A new store? A restaurant?People doing interesting things?Anything newsworthy? Please email us at: simplydelhi@intoday.com

