Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE ROAD TO PERDITION
Why Sachs will be widely misread and quoted to justify India's rising public expenditure
By Bibek Debroy

ew economists are as visible as Jeffrey Sachs. He publishes in non-academic and popular form (books like The End of Poverty, Common Wealth, columns in Financial Times, Scientific American, Time and The Huffington Post) and he has been an adviser to governments (Latin America, East Europe) and interTHE PRICE OF national organisations (World Bank, OECD, WHO, IMF, CIVILIZATION: UNDP). Sachs is widely read and he doesn't like ECONOMICS AND capitalism. "Capitalism" is an odd animal. Its ETHICS AFTER THE FALL proponents rarely use the term, preferring instead byJeffreySachs market-based economies, which theoretically and BodleyHead empirically, use all inputs (not just capital) more Price: RS 599 efficiently. Thus, the word "capitalism" is more Pages: 322 often used as a pejorative expression by proponents BETWEEN THE COVERS of "socialism", whatever that might mean. This US-centric book Market-based economies require rule of law. isn't about economics Consider the preface in the new Sachs book: only; it is also about "The US has been very quick to give stern lectures ethics and Sachs writes to other countries, for example in the wake of the with approval about East Asian financial crisis in 1997. Crony Gross National capitalism, cried the American government officials Happiness and the need to curb excessive who swooped in for the kill in Jakarta, Seoul, and Bangkok. Wall Street's consumption. meltdown in 2007-08 had all the makings of a morality tale, with greedy bankers claiming to be doing `God's work,' corrupt politicians fawning on Wall Street in search of campaign contributions, and a hapless public left to foot the bill for trillions of dollars of newly added public debt." True. But this isn't an indictment of the market-based system, notwithstanding such interpretations floating around in India. All it establishes is that the US was more of a deviant from the model than we thought it was. Rule of law and regulations were flouted. This book has 13 chapters, divided into two parts,

F

SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

"The Great Crash" and "The Path to Prosperity". It isn't a book on global developments, unlike Sachs' earlier books, at least not directly. This one is US-centric, except that learning from the US, countries should avoid the road to perdition. Earlier books have been naïve, written from the heart, rather than the brain. For instance, there have been convincing critiques from William Easterley, Amir Attaran, Dambisa Moyo, and others too. Unfortunately, they are not read as much as Sachs is. (How many economists get endorsements from Bono, not to speak of the secretary generals of the UN?) Here is a list of "seven habits of highly effective countries" from the book: (1) set clear goals and benchmarks; (2) mobilise expertise: (3) make multi-year plans; (4) be mindful of the far future; (5) end the corporatocracy; (6) restore public management; and (7) decentralise. At this level of generality, these are such that no one can object. The sub-title to the book is important. It isn't about economics only, it is also about ethics and Sachs writes with approval about Gross National Happiness and the need to curb excessive consumption. The US has a per capita GDP of $46,860 and India $1,371. Reducing consumption in India is completely different from curbing it in the US. The trouble with Sachs is that he will be widely read, widely misinterpreted and widely misapplied. Cross-subsidisation to finance public or collective private goods in US is not what it is in India. Sachs will now be quoted to justify increasing public expenditure in India. Influential economists and popular writers like Sachs would do less damage if they were also to flag costs of fiscal profligacy, not just in the US, but in Europe too. To quote out of context, "In our crowded and unstable world of 7 billion people, we need to dial down the propaganda." 

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

