GLOSSARY

CHIC ON AND OFF GROUND
Most of Bollywood welcomed the New Year away from India. And when it was time to head home, the celebs made some stylish and some not-so-smart choices.

KIRAN CHANDRA

ART ALERT
Delhi's art scene will have a fancy addition this month, with New York-based artist Kiran Chandra holding an exhibition on farmers' suicides.The artist will turn the gallery into a paddy field and feature some very strong pieces. Date January 18-February 18 Venue Shrine Empire Gallery Internationally acclaimed avant garde artist, musician and known to most as John Lennon's widow, Yoko Ono is also coming to India with her exhibition Our Beautiful Daughters. The exhibition will include a special piece that Ono is creating for India. Date January 13-March 10 Venue Vadehra Art Gallery

Best of Vest Resorting to basics in bright colours and classic aviators, Priyanka Chopra sported a simple vest and faded skinny jeans. While edgy leather jackets seem to be the in-thing among B-Town hotties, flirty peep-toe flats don't really go with it. Comfort in Love On her way back from chilly London with Aditya, Uday and Yash Chopra, Rani Mukherjee seemed at ease both in her navy blue tracksuit and among the Chopra family. Shiny locks and glowing skin hint at wedding bells?
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Yay and Nay You can rarely go wrong with a relaxed tee and jeans.And Shah Rukh Khan seemed to know it only too well when he chose a cool white T-shirt with what can safely be called the perfect blue jeans. Gauri's vest seemed to be borrowed from her husband's closet. Simply Stylish She may be in and out of Bollywood, but Karishma Kapur's style is always in vogue.An all-black ensemble of relaxed rolled-up jeans, teemed with a sweater and white ballerina flats, was a sure win.The oh-so-chic Birkin bag adds a whole lot of class to the yummy mummy's look.
Photographs by YOGEN SHAH

MONEY ISSUES?
While reports of Dhanush's dissatisfaction with the decision of selling Kolaveri Di to Sony Music for a pittance are going viral like the song, wife and director of the video,Aishwarya Rajinikanth, says,"We should let rumours be rumours.We were working with a new music director and Sony approached us. It was a good opportunity for us and we're happy about the business we did," adding that no one could have predicted the popularity of the song and the price they got for it was a "good one" . She went on to trash more rumours about a Hindi version of the song in the offing. "We'll be releasing this song in a Hindi film. How does a Hindi version even work out then? There has been no such talk." Papa Saif Ali Khan OF THE may be busy planning his wedding, but daughter Sara, 16, has made her media debut on the cover of a magazine with mommy Amrita Singh. Bollywood may have another Khan coming its way.And this time, it's a Pataudi princess.

ADITYA RAJ KAPOOR
FOTOCORP

VS

SUNEILANAND
YOGEN SHAH

LATE BLOOMERS
Suneil Anand and Aditya Raj Kapoor are anything but fresh-faced star kids making their debuts. Both 55, they are the sons of Bollywood icons Dev Anand and Shammi Kapoor, and are giving another shot at film careers that never really took off with Ali Peter John. Says director Kader Kashmiri, "I had wanted to make this film with Dev Anand, Raj Kapoor and Dilip Kumar." The two have their work cut out.

Q& A

ANUPAM KHER
ACTOR

TWEET IFYOU'RE THERE
Trust the volatile micro-blogging site Twitter to usher in New Year by giving the world plenty to gossip about. This time, it was about dodging impersonators. Rupert Murdoch The News Corp CEO found himself a fake wife three days after he joined Twitter. Yes, it's true. @wendi_deng received the tiny blue and white verified badge from Twitter, before she admitted she was a fake. The said handle now sports a "Verifiably not @rupertmurdoch's wife. Unless you're Twitter. Or News International. SPOOF ACCOUNT."
GETTY IMAGES GETTY IMAGES

"I strive to remain original in this industry of cardboard people"
Anupam Kher, 56, adds a surprise chapter in his life with a self-help book titled The Best Thing About You Is You, even as he is on a personal high after working with Hollywood icon Robert De Niro in The Silver Lining Playbook. Q. What made you write a book? A. Life and its teachings. A play I did, Kuch Bhi Ho Sakta Hai, made me laugh at my disasters and I felt liberated. It also came from lectures I delivered at educational institutes. Q. Does it have anything to do with you playing a shrink in The Silver Lining Playbook? A. It is interesting as I have been a shrink to many of my own friends. This is what I drew on when playing a shrink to Bradley Cooper. Q. How was working with Robert De Niro? A. It was like a dream. For the first half-hour of shooting with him I thought I would start sobbing because I was emotional. There was an instance when he told me I was terrific. That's the biggest trophy I could get. Q. What's your role in Midnight's Children? A. I play Ghani who is a kind of philosopher. He is shrewd, intelligent, and has some interesting lines. But he is also blind, so it was fascinating to play him. Q. What is the best thing about you? A. I strive to remain original in this industry of cardboard people and have not let success change me.
by Nishat Bari

STAR KID

WEEK

YOKO ONO

QUOTE
OF THE

"ONE CAN'TMAKE BESTFRIENDS IN BOLLYWOOD. BONDS HERE ARE VERYFRAGILE."
ACTOR ASIN'S REVELATION

WEEK
70
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

Amitav Ghosh The author has finally decided to become a part of the twitterati. Earlier in 2011, a fake Ghosh who tweeted under the handle @ghoshamitav, eventually forced the author to write a blogpost emphasising "I do NOT have a Twitter account," followed by a reply to his fans about the decision to finally join the bandwagon. For all those who were eagerly waiting, the real @GhoshAmitav has entered the building.
GETTY IMAGES

As Dhak Dhak girl Madhuri OF THE Dixit prepares for a comeback in Bollywood, she has reason for cheer. She'll be joining the gallery of wax statues at Madame Tussauds, London, in March this year.This sure merits that gorgeous smile.

STATUE

GETTY IMAGES

WEEK

by Nishat Bari, Kruttika Rao and Avantika Sharma
JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

