P O LL S A P A R T
CRIMINAL SCORESHEET
Congress Samajwadi Party BJP
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com RAJESH BHAMBI

VOTE BAZAAR
Adil Chaudhary, Samajwadi Party candidate from Meerut South constituency, is in trouble after wads of notes were distributed among party workers during a rally at Meerut's Patel Mandap on December 29. Were the armed hoods there to protect the candidate or the cash? Ahmad Hasan, the leader of opposition in Uttar Pradesh Assembly, was the chief guest. A defensive Chaudhary now alleges some Bahujan Samaj Party workers arrived at the venue and began distributing money to hurt him. The administration has lodged a case of violation of electoral code of conduct. by Richa Joshi

MANMOHAN

KARTAR SINGH

FACE-SAVER
irebrand sanyasin Uma Bharati is not ready to stake her prospects in home state Madhya Pradesh for some illusionary offer in the post-poll scenario in Uttar Pradesh, where she is one of the BJP's star campaigners. She is believed to have told party President Nitin Gadkari that she will not end up as na ghar ki na ghaat ki (neither here nor there). In any case, Bharati doesn't think the party is likely to win power in Uttar Pradesh. by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

26/271 24/397 20/143
(ABOVE) MONEY BEING DISTRIBUTED AT A MEERUT RALLY; SP LEADERS AT THE VENUE

F

n battleground Uttar Pradesh, political parties take little time to shed their holier-than-thou stripes. A day after it said its doors were closed to Mayawati's chors (thieves), the BJP on January 3 admitted tainted Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) leaders Babu Singh Kushwaha and Badshah Singh. While the party clarified later that it won't give Kushwaha a ticket, criminals, bahubalis and tainted politicians abound in all party lists announced for Assembly elections. Data compiled until Decemberend by National Election Watch, a nationwide campaign of NGOs and citizen-led organisations for electoral reform, shows that 20 of the 143 candidates announced by the BJP in the state have a criminal record. The corresponding figures for the others: 26 out of 271 for the Congress, 24 out of 397 announced by the Samajwadi Party (SP) and one out of 16 named by the Rashtriya Lok Dal. The BSP hasn't officially declared its candidates list but it is expected to feature quite a few tainted names, including mafia don Harishankar Tiwari from Chillupar constituency in Gorakhpur district. Over two dozen BSP leaders have been booked by the police since 2007. Even smaller parties have shown no qualms in giving tickets to criminals. Former BSP MLA Jitendra Singh Babloo, accused of instigating an attack on Congress leader Rita Bahuguna Joshi's house in Lucknow in 2009, is contesting from Bikapur in Faizabad district on a Peace Party ticket. Apna Dal has fielded Munna Bajrangi, jailed on extortion charges, for Madiyahun seat in Jaunpur district. Don Mukhtar Ansari, also in jail, is fighting in Mau constituency from Quami Ekta Dal. by Ashish Misra

I

SEPARATED AT BIRTH?
Former Punjab Agricultural University professor Kartar Singh's astonishing similarity to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh is turning a lot of heads in pollbound Punjab. Sporting an identical blue turban, the 67-year-old, five-feet-sixinch professor is somewhat amused. Cars have been known to come to a screeching halt and complete strangers want to shake hands with him whenever he is out walking the dog or at the local bazaar in Ludhiana. Kartar says he first became aware of this in 2004 when his two-and-a-half-year-old granddaughter, Friya, excitedly exclaimed `Dada!' when she saw the Prime Minister on television. He has been accosted on the streets in New York, Toronto and Sydney. Kartar is "not interested in politics", and points to a crucial difference with his more illustrious look-alike. "I'm a retired man," he grins. by Asit Jolly

UMA BHARATI

WEEK

OF THE

-- Amarinder Singh, Punjab Congress chief

RAIN NO DAMPENER
Rain almost spoilt Mulayam Singh Yadav's New Year's Day, but his supporters salvaged the show.The Samajwadi Party (SP) chief and Azam Khan, his party's Muslim face, couldn't make it to the big-ticket January 1 Azamgarh rally due to bad weather. But other party bigwigs ensured a turnout of more than 30,000 people. More than a 100 buses were deployed to bring supporters from the surrounding districts.The Azamgarh region, with 22 Assembly seats at play, is crucial to Mulayam's comeback bid. Fifteen of the seats went to the Bahujan Samaj Party and six to the SP in the 2007 Assembly elections. The caste combination in the area is around 28 per cent Dalit, 18 per cent Yadavs and 17 per cent Muslims. by Ashish Misra
MULAYAM

FAMILY FIGHT
Pitted against each other in Lambi, the Punjab Chief Minister and his brother are still being emotional

First the separation of my younger brother (Gurdas Badal) and then the death of my wife (Surinder Kaur, who passed away this year), left me heartbroken. I was unwilling to contest the elections.
PARKASH SINGH BADAL

I have no grudge against Badal Sahab. Sukhbir Singh no longer listens to him. We loved each other a lot, but Sukhbir's impatience to become the chief minister changed everything.
GURDAS SINGH BADAL

Mayawati's belated activism in purging `non-performers' from her Cabinet has left at least one casualty in tears. Avdhesh Kumar Verma, one of the 16 ministers the Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister has sacked in the last two months, broke down while discussing his dismissal at a rally in Shahjahanpur on January 2. Denied a ticket from Dadraul in central Uttar Pradesh, Verma lamented, "Someone whom I treated like a parent is punishing me without even letting AVDHESH KUMAR VERMA IN SHAHJAHANPUR me know what wrong I have committed." But the tears dried up soon. Later that evening, Verma walked over to the BJP camp and was promptly rewarded with a party ticket. Same pitch, but a different team.

AXE EFFECT

by Ashish Misra

32

SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

Our agenda: We will leave to people the job of mending the Badals. Mending the economy of the state is our priority.

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

NEW

NEW

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

P O LL S A P A R T

RINGSIDE VIEW
Gopal Chaturvedi

Net Caste Wide

GUEST COLUMN

rom Bundelkhand to the fertile Gangetic plains, from the Terai region of eastern Uttar Pradesh to the Jatland of western Uttar Pradesh, there is diversity in the landscape, but one common thread--poverty. Elections, in the country's most populated state, are marked by promises of development by all parties. The result so far has always been the same: total amnesia regarding pious commitments. Politicians, apparently, have a short memory.They strike an emotional chord through caste identity.The dependence on caste is, therefore, no surprise in the Uttar Pradesh elections. Even Rahul Gandhi cites the caste of Sam Pitroda. He accuses the incumbent Chief Minister of gargantuan corruption, forgetting 2G and other scams. Mayawati retorts by sacking, on the basis of Lokayukta reports, possibly the largest number of ministers in the history of independent India. BSP supporting the Congress-led Government at the Centre proves that in politics there are neither friends nor foes, only convenient collaborators. Politicians take pride in displaying their secular credentials and, at the same time, assuring Ram Rajya. This does not deter parties from seeking minority votes. Mulayam Singh Yadav is reaching out to ulemas, while the Congress has played the card of 4.5 per cent minority reservation within the OBC quota.Who knows where this quota contagion will spread. No political party is certain about the outcome. BSP is haunted by anti-incumbency. Samajwadi Party has a lurking fear of splitting the Muslim vote, while the BJP is yet to declare its complete list of candidates.The Congress campaign lacks organisational support.The paan shop owner, a popular psephologist, prophesies a hung Assembly. It is "Ram bharosay".

F

ANIL SINGH (RIGHT)

Uttar Pradesh Police Inspector Anil Singh, 41, built a reputation for himself as an encounter specialist in Bundelkhand, gunning down dreaded dacoits Nirbhay Gujjar (2005), Dadua (2007) and Thokia C A R D (2008). But on November 30, 2011, the three-time President's Police Medal winner quit the force after being denied a promotion to deputy superintendent of police. "It's hard to believe, but I was transferred over a dozen times within a month from one district to another," he says. Now the supercop has decided to try his luck from the Manikpur Assembly constituency in Chitrakoot district. "I was posted in various districts of the Bundelkhand region for the past eight years. Development work here is zero," he says. "I am confident no one can defeat me--whether I contest on a party ticket or as an independent," he adds.
by Ashish Misra

WILD

TWO TO TANGO
Digvijaya Singh reserves his nastiest for BSP. Pearls from a rally in Badaun on December 13.

STAR TRACK

Gundey chadh gaye haathi par, goli maar rahe hai chhati par (Thugs have mounted the elephant and are firing at people). Sarvjan dukhaya, dalal sukhaya (People unhappy, middlemen happy).

C

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

The author is a Lucknow-based retired bureaucrat and columnist

aste equations are not the only thing that the BJP is trying to work out ahead of the Uttar Pradesh elections. Poll-time planetary positions are also under intense scrutiny. Astrologically inclined partymen feel that the BJP would have had a much better showing if elections were held in April-May instead of February-March. Their explanation: Jupiter, which is supposed to be the party's guiding planet, is on the ascendant since December 2011 and peaks in April-May. They believe that the ascendance of Jupiter would ensure that the party, at the very least, will do marginally better than in 2007. If only Chief Election Commissioner S.Y. Quraishi had been more accommodating. by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

Irked at the largescale transfer of officials across the state, Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal shot off a furious letter to the Election Commission, insisting that its officers were exceeding their brief. Chief Electoral Officer Kusumjit Sidhu shot back that Badal's own administration was responsible, as it had ignored advice against posting officers to home districts.
by Asit Jolly

PHOTO FINISH
unjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal's penchant for having his photograph on everything, from government vehicles to ration cards, has returned to haunt him. Under strict instructions from the Election Commission, teams of officials are laboriously stripping off or painting over scores of Badal's beaming images. Over 200

P
RAJESH BHAMBI

GIRLS IN LUDHIANA WITH CYCLES BEARING THE CHIEF MINISTER'S PHOTOGRAPH

by Asit Jolly

by Priya Sahgal
PRENEET KAUR

MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Rest in Piece
A GIRL STANDS ON A PILE OF SEIZED ILLEGAL POSTERS AND HOARDINGS STREWN AT THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION DUMPING SITE IN LUCKNOW

Compiled by Abdus Salam
34
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012 JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

state-run ambulances were cleaned up immediately after the poll code came into force on December 24. Now, the transport department is removing pictures from 170 state roadways buses. Several consignments of brand new bicycles also bearing the Chief Minister's photograph are being sent back to the manufacturers in Ludhiana. Government officials in Punjab are calling it a "photo finish" .

BARB BLITZ
It's how grandfathers beckon the young in Punjab.The word kaka, which means young man, has landed the Congress in trouble with the Election Commission (EC).The ruling Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) took exception to Congress advertisements featuring Jeeta and Jaggi, two fictional Hindu and Sikh characters, telling voters how kaka was responsible for all problems plaguing the state.The obvious reference is to Deputy Chief Minister and SAD chief Sukhbir Badal. On being quizzed by the EC's media monitoring committee in Chandigarh as to who kaka is, Punjab Pradesh Congress Committee Vice-President Laal Singh wrote back,"Kaka is used generally in Punjabi vocabulary and does not refer to any specific person." Discretion is the better part of valour.The Congress has now replaced kaka with `Akali-BJP in the advertisements. by Asit Jolly

PEELING TOUCH
It's keenu (orange) diplomacy time for the Badals. Both Harsimrat Kaur and husband, Punjab Deputy Chief Minister Sukhbir Badal, have been showering MPs across party lines with boxes of keenus from their orchards. Amused Congress MPs were overheard ribbing Union Minister of State for External Affairs Preneet Kaur about when they should be expecting a consignment from Patiala.

35

