BYWORD

by M.J. AKBAR

MY DALLIANCE WITH DHOKAPAL BILL
e distribute goodwill generously on New Year's suggest, it became an "open" partnership, with either side largely because there isn't much chance of seeing it free to go its own way when it wanted to. Hence: no hurt again for 364 days. But cynicism is a distasteful feelings, no recriminations, no arguments and no expectaresponse to the array of mobile and immobile best tions of a stable home teeming with policy-offspring. wishes that welcome the departure of yet another year of Outcome: Clarity. Example: Chor Progressive Dalliance our lives. Having received my little share, I thought it would be far more accurate than Chor Progressive Alliance. Wish Number 3: Clarity has a healthy appetite. It keeps only fair to record what precisely my five preferred best-ofasking for more. This may be one wish too far, but could the-best wishes for 2012 are. Wish Number 1: There must be an all-party resolution Government get precise about words it uses? When job in Parliament's Budget session to rename the Lokpal Bill a reservations are promised (but not yet delivered) to minoriDhokapal Bill. The difference, for those not familiar with ties, why does Congress advertise them as a boon for only Hindi, is that `Lok' (or Loka) means people, while `Dhoka' Muslims? There are elections in both UP and Punjab. Why means betrayal. You will surely recall the passion and isn't any Congress leader telling Sikhs that the new reseroratory with which political parties proclaimed the need for vations from the backward castes quota will be a great large dollops of disinfectant in our public life. Okay, not all chance for their kids to become government servants? parties: Lalu Yadav and his MPs, for instance, were honest Once a category is delineated, there is no bar on any enough to argue that a little dishonesty was necessary minority from applying for a job. And indeed, since there is leavening for Indian democracy. But the Congress and BJP no sub-quota, it is perfectly valid for any relevant authorengaged in a vicious squabble over who was holier than the ity to fill up the vacancies with Sikhs and Christians if they other. Then, with a face as straight as a mobster's income find them the better candidates. Wish Number 4: This one is about jobs too, but of a rarer tax returns, both parties published their first list of candidates for the UP Assembly elections. According to National kind. How about some form of punishment for those who Election Watch, an NGO working for clean politics, the select the wrong people for top jobs? There is clearly Congress had 26 candidates with criminal records, something mentally askew about an army chief like V.K. the Samajwadi Party 24 and the BJP 20. These are early Singh who has reportedly said that the Government of India days. Expect numbers to triple. Mayawati, who discovered is treating him as if he was the army chief of Pakistan. she was surrounded by crooks only after keeping them as Metaphor is the mirror of temperament and judgment. ministers for five years, will pool in her contribution. General Singh claims to be fighting for his honour. Pundits are predicting that the coming UP SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com How can a man who used one birth date to clamber up a thinning elections will end in a hung Assembly. I ladder discover a second birth date to stay have a solution which the Governor must on top for a few months more? If the date consider. He should instruct all criminals is wrong today, why was it not wrong 20 elected across party lines to come toyears ago, when it proved useful in an ingether and form CPA, or Chor Progressive stitution where seniority is taken seriAlliance. Their numbers will exceed the ously? Who let Major General Singh add 201 needed for a majority, and they can stars to his shoulder? form a stable government in Lucknow. Last Best Wish: An immediate, naBy 2018 they will also have gunned down tionwide ban on the suggestion that one another in squabbles for loot, which Sachin Tendulkar deserves a Bharat will be a bonus. Ratna. Ever since this clamour has risen, Wish Number 2: The term `Alliance' Sachin has been unable to get a century. must be banned from political parlance I thought he was going to be victim of the through an amendment to the Bradman Curse: the great Don could Constitution. When the glue for unity is have reached a career average of 100 if convenience rather than conviction, the he had made just four runs in his last proper word is `Dalliance' rather than innings, and got out for zero. But this Alliance. Ergo: More accuracy. The When the glue for unity is looking more like a Ratna infection. Congress entered into a dalliance with is convenience rather Let us keep quiet, let Sachin score his Mamata Banerjee's Trinamool in order to uproot Leftists from power in Bengal. than conviction, the proper 100th 100 and then watch Indian cricket Once the immediate objective was fulword is `Dalliance' rather decline to its torpor when a win against Kenya was good reason for a filled the relationship becomes nonthan Alliance national holiday. serious; or, as modernists would

W

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

NEW

