Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

LESS THAN GOLDEN
By Asha Bunny Suraiya ay back in 1986 when Vikram Seth burst onto the literary scene with his novel-in-verse, The Golden Gate, it was immediately clear that he had a very fine ear for rhyme, metre and scansion. The cutest example of this was right there on the front cover of the book: The Golden Gate/By Vikram Seth, even though it's unlikely that Western readers--perhaps one should say audiences --caught this cheeky little rhyme, given that they tend to pronounce Seth to rhyme with `death' rather than, more correctly, with `fate'. It's no surprise then to find that Seth went on to write libretti --words designed to be sung to a musical arrangement as part of a concert performance. The four libretti that comprise The Rivered Earth were written over four years for a project called `Confluences' in which Seth worked with composer Alex Roth and violinist Philippe Honore to create four compositions to be performed over four successive years at the Salisbury and Chelsea music festivals. The writing of libretti is a hugely challenging art form, and it is only the very best librettists whose work can stand up to reproduction on the printed page without the accompaniment of the music which rounds them out and gives them balance and memorability. W.S. Gilbert of Gilbert and Sullivan fame, although he wrote largely in the comic mode, had such command over his metrical skills that even those who have never heard his words set to Arthur Sullivan's music can delight in such memorable verses as the one in Patience when the effete aesthete Bunthorne is being raffled off as a husband: Such a judge of blue-and-white and other kinds of pottery/ From early oriental down to modern terra-cottary/ Put in half a guinea--you may draw him in a lottery/ Such an opportunity may not occur again!

NEW RELEASES
INDIA: BLUE GUIDE
bySam Miller; Somerset
Adetailed travel guidebook on India's art,architecture and history.

Seth's libretti do not stand up to being separated from their musical context

THE LIVES WE HAVE LOST
byManjushree Thapa; Penguin
Traces the transformation of Nepal from 1990 to 2009,spanning the Maoist insurgency and peace process.

W

NAGA CULTURE
byFrans Welman and Ngathingkhui Jagoi; DevPublishers
Apictorial tribute to the unique culture of the Nagas.

THE RIVERED EARTH
byVikram Seth Penguin Price: Rs 399 Pages: 104 BETWEEN THE COVERS The four libretti were written over four years for a project called `Confluences' in which Seth worked with composer Alex Roth and violinist Philippe Honore.

TARGET 3 BILLION
byA.P.J.Abdul Kalam & S.P.Singh; Penguin
The book encapsulates the author's mission to eradicate poverty.

THE NEWSROOM MAFIA
byOswald Pereira; GreyOak
The thriller is an insider's view of the growing culture of planted news.
SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

NITISH KUMAR AND THE RISE OF BIHAR
byArun Sinha; Viking
How Nitish Kumar challenged the assumption that development does not win votes,and changed the face of Bihar.

And in a more serious vein, Andrew Lloyd Weber and Trevor Nunn captured brilliantly the voice of T.S. Eliot in the ambitious libretto for Cats, the musical based on the poet's work. This is adapted from Eliot's Prelude: Burnt out ends of smoky days/ The stale cold smell of morning/ A street lamp dies, another night is over/ Another day is dawning. It's unfortunate that Seth's libretti do not stand up to being separated from their musical context. They are just not good enough to hack it on their own. Consider this for example: Heart's-ease, heart's-bane; a balm that chafes one raw;/ The soul in splints; graph with no grid or gauge;/A fort, a house on stilts, a hut of straw;/A tic, a weal, the flue, the plague, the rage.. Or this: Fa-yaah/ O fayah ­ fayah ­ fayaah/ Dizayaah/ Hot hot hot/ I'm burning a lot with dizayaah/ O fayah fayah fayah/ Hot as a filament wa-yah/ Hot as a prawn jamba-la-yah/ I'm burning so hot/ I'm baking a pot ­ / O hot hot hot as diszayaah/ Fa-yaah! Fy-yaah! Perhaps it was a mistake to publish these libretti in book form; they would have served their author better as part of the sleeve-notes packaged with the CDs of the complete performances. 

ECLIPSE: LIVING IN THE SHADOW OF CHINA'S ECONOMIC DOMINANCE
byArvind Subramanian; Piie
Examines the rise of China and its impact on the world economy.

THE IIMA STORY
byPrafull Anubhai; Random House
Charts the journey of the institution from its inception to what it is today.

SARATCHANDRA­VOLUME I
bySaratchandra Chattopadhyay; Penguin
An unabridged collection of eight of the novelist's most popular novels.

DANCE OF GOVINDA
byAshokK.Banker; Harper
Govinda takes on the might of Kamsa in the second of Krishna Coriolis series.

FLUTE OFVRINDAVAN
byAshokK.Banker; Harper
Infant Krishna wields the flute to make Kamsa dance to his tune in the third instalment of the Krishna Coriolis series.

ARTEFACTS OF DEVOTION
byMichel Boivin; Oxford
On Sehwan Sharif shrine of Lal Shahbaz Qalandar,a Sufi icon from Sindh,Pakistan.

66

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

