Nation

KERALA
vances. "Only rich people can make big transfers. A large number of emigrants are borrowing from banks in the Gulf at lower rates and depositing in India," Mathew points out. The worry, if any, is in the future. Right now, Kerala is rejoicing. According to experts, the state's poor performance on the industry and agriculture fronts is compensated by its galloping services sector, driven by the remittances sent in by the diaspora. "Hospitality, healthcare and housing are boom sectors fuelled by remittances. Remittances have saved the state from high unemployment and poverty," says Irudayarajan. But others are quick to point out that most

So what if the rupee is in freefall? Malayalees aren't complaining. Dollars sent back by relatives abroad are worth more now.
By M.G. Radhakrishnan

SARANGI MAHAJAN

or Lizie Mathew, a nurse from Kerala's Pathanamthitta district, it has been a particularly merry Christmas and happy New Year. In August 2011, the $1,000 her husband Mathew Mathai, 45, a biomedical technician in Dallas, US, sent fetched her about Rs 43,000. Four months on, the same amount from Mathai got the 42-year-old Rs 10,000 more. "I have big plans now," says Lizie, beside herself with excitement. The rupee's continuing fall against the dollar for the past five months-- from Rs 43 in August to Rs 53 in January 2011--has come as a windfall for Kerala's 25 lakh families of non-resident Indians. The Indian migrant community, especially in the US and Gulf countries, has begun to get much more for its remittances to

SARANGI WANTS MAHAJANS TO PAY
lmost six years after her late husband Pravin Mahajan pumped three bullets into elder brother, BJP leader Pramod Mahajan's body, Sarangi has offered an olive branch to brother-in-law's estranged family. "I am ready to forget everything that happened. I am willing for reconciliation but not at the cost of my selfrespect," Sarangi told INDIA TODAY. Pramod succumbed to his injuries on May 3, 2006. Pravin, who died of brain haemorrhage in March 2010, was sentenced to life imprisonment by the Mumbai sessions court in 2008. Now, Sarangi is determined to erase every "stain" on her husband's name. She has succeeded in proving he was a victim of medical negligence at Nashik Central Jail. Her next goal: getting a "legitimate" share in an ancestral property in Osmanabad that is worth Rs 10 crore. She says she is open to an out-of-court settlement. A ruling by the Maharashtra State Human Rights Commission (MSHRC) in her favour in December has boosted Sarangi's confidence. She believes the Osmanabad court will give her "jus-

F

Pravin Mahajan's widow wants her share of the family wealth and says she is willing to reconcile with her in-laws

A

RISING TIDE
Remittances from emigrants are pouring into Kerala's banks

Year 2008 2009
A WESTERN UNION OUTLET IN THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
GETTY IMAGES

NRE Bank Deposits

2010 2011

RUPEE'S DOWN,KERALA'S UP
families and banks back home. "The windfall is expected to take the annual foreign remittance flowing into Kerala beyond Rs 60,000 crore by March as against Rs 50,000 crore recorded in March 2011," says S. Irudayarajan from the Centre for Development Studies, Thiruvananthapuram. It has triggered an intense interest rate war amongst banks to mop up the dollar inflow. Following Reserve Bank of India deregulating interest rates on NRI deposits on December 16 in order to stem the rupee's fall, all banks have more than doubled the interest rate -- from 3.82 per cent to a maximum of 10.10 per cent--on tax-free NonResident External (NRE) term deposits. Kochi-based Federal Bank was the first to hike rates on NRE term deposits from 3.82 per cent to 6.50 per cent on December 19. Within days, it raised it again to 9.12 per cent. Soon all banks, including State Bank of India (SBI), raised their rates up to 9.50 per cent. As the race got hotter, Catholic Syrian Bank, a Kerala-based private bank, announced 10.10 per cent as the interest on NRE term deposits maturing be-

Rs 31,585 cr Rs 37,454 cr Rs 36,886 cr Rs 41,719 cr

Source: State Level Bankers Conference

Annual remittances in 2010

Rs 50,000 cr
Remittances expected in 2011

Rs 60,000 cr

tween 15 and 24 months. "We have to be aggressively competitive in order to rise to the occasion," says V. Murali, SBI's Chief General Manager (Kerala). "It is a great time for NRIs and banks," he adds. No bank has yet estimated the increase in NRI remittances. But all are certain that it will go up by at least 15 per cent by the end of March 2012. NRI deposits--Rs 41,719 crore on September 2011-- form more than 25 per cent of total bank deposits in Kerala. "There could be an increase of about 20 per cent in deposits especially following the rupee's fall," says C. George Mathew, assistant general manager, Federal Bank. He adds that the rising interest rates may affect the cost of funds in the long run. It could lead to a surplus of deposits over ad-

of the remittances flow into consumption and not to productive channels like infrastructure. The state continues to top the country in per capita consumption expenditure as shown by the 2011 National Sample Survey Organisation figures. "Kerala's consumption expenditure is 30 per cent more than its state domestic income thanks to remittances," says K.M. Chandrasekhar, former cabinet secretary and now vice-chairman, Kerala State Planning Board. Most of the current windfall too is likely to find its way to consumption channels. Glittering malls, jewellery shops, hotels and luxury apartments are rising across the state. Bollywood stars, so far infrequent visitors to the state, are now regulars. Shah Rukh Khan visited Kerala twice in 2011, once to inaugurate a resort and again to open a textile mall. 

"I am financially sound. It does not mean I will give up my right. My daughter has to be married. My son wants to study abroad."
SARANGI MAHAJAN, Pramod Mahajan's sister-in-law
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

tice" even if a settlement does not materialise. The MSHRC found the Nashik jail authorities guilty of not providing adequate medical treatment to Pravin, a diabetic, during his incarceration. It awarded Sarangi Rs 7 lakh as damages. "He was not given a single tablet to control his diabetes. His sugar level was never checked nor his blood samples tested," says Sarangi. Sarangi says she is pursuing the Osmanabad land case because she feels the Mahajans cheated Pravin. "The 3.8-acre plot is ancestral property. Pramod Mahajan donated it to Tapasvi Trust in 2004 to construct a college in memory of his father. I have staked claim to 0.8 acres," she says. The market value of the built-up area she has claimed is around Rs 2.5 crore. "I was unaware of the land till Prakash Mahajan (Pravin's brother) spoke about it on a news channel in July 2010," she says. Pramod's daughter Poonam contends the college that stands on the land is run by a public trust and is not the Mahajans' personal property. "I am financially sound. But it does not mean I should give up my legitimate right. My daughter has to be married. My son wants to study abroad. I need money for that." Then why is she looking for sympathy? "Who am I to seek sympathy for Pravin? My children will prove they were not born to a criminal. Today they are known as Pravin Mahajan's children. One day they will acquire their own identity." by Kiran Tare

42

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

