Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

South Bound
When all else fails, head south. Like Zarine Khan, 27, is doing with Tamil film Karikalan, opposite Vikram. Her mega budget debut Veer opposite Salman Khan fell flat and even after an item number in yet another Khan film, she is seen as a chubby Katrina Kaif lookalike. The L.I-Kannan directed historical film may change her fortunes, and hopefully her weight. Brazillian model Bruna Abdullah, 31, too is hoping a trip down south will do her good. Her Tamil gangster film Billa 2 opposite Ajith may just be her gamechanger.
BRUNA ABDULLAH ZARINE KHAN
AP

IN TRANSIT
Anoushka Shankar, 30, will soon be trotting all over India to promote her latest musical offering, Traveller. The album comes four years after her last one, this time inspired by Spain and by flamenco. While she did get her father Pandit Ravi Shankar to write lyrics for some of the songs, there are also singing talents such as Shubha Mudgal and Tanmoy Bose. In tow will be her nearly year-old tot Zubin, as she starts her 10-city tour with Mumbai on January 13. Early training for yet another musical talent?
GETTY IMAGES

Hosting Oprah
India sure seems to be having an international moment right now.If there was any doubt,it was quelled with Oprah Winfrey deciding to visit.The American television host and philanthropist will be here for her forthcoming series, Next Chapter, in February and travel with Deepak Chopra."Too much for a tweet but let's hook up in Jaipur or Mumbai," said Oprah Winfrey to her fans on the micro-blogging site.With the show entailing celebrity interviews from across the world,we wonder which desi star will make the cut.
WEEK WRAP-UP

VS

THE HIGHS AND THE LOWS

VIRAT KOHLI LARA DUTTA Thumbs down to him for showThe soon-to-be mommy gets her house `baby ready' to welcome her ing his middle finger to the crowd even as Australia hammered India. first child next month.

AGENT VINOD The release date of Saif Ali Khan's James Bond-ian opus is finalised for March 23. We are pleasantly surprised.
GETTY IMAGES FOTOCORP

MOVIE TRAILER In the age of Delhi Belly and The Dirty Picture, promos of Bittoo Boss were rejected by the censor board for the tagline Bittoo Sab Ki Lega.


72

Volume XXXVII Number 3; For the week January 10-16, 2012, released on January 9

Compiled by Nishat Bari and

Avantika Sharma

