Nation ARMY
PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

After Sukna and Adarsh, another army land scam unravels.In 2007, DG Defence Estates okayed transfer of land worth Rs 16 crore to a trust of the ex-Jodhpur royals.
By Sandeep Unnithan

LOOTOFARMY LAND

``

Local military authorities colluded with defence estate officials to transfer land to a trust without legal sanction.The allotment must be scrapped.
KIRIT SOMAIYA , BJP
LEADER

48

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

``

senior Ministry of Defence official okayed a controversial decision to transfer 4.84 acres of defence land worth Rs 15.78 crore to a private trust in Jodhpur. As Additional Director General in the Directorate General of Defence Estates (DGDE), Ashok Kumar Harnal represented his department on a committee in 2007 that green-lit the transfer of land to the Major Maharaja Hari Singh Charitable Trust (MMHSCT), belonging to the erstwhile royal family of Jodhpur. The land has been set aside for commercial development. Harnal was appointed director general of the Defence Estates Department in 2010 and was, ironically, given the task of cleaning up the scam-tainted organisation. He did not return calls and did not respond to a questionnaire from INDIA TODAY. The deal was done in violation of not just the defence ministry's `Acquisition Custody and Relinquishment Rules' but also a 1997 government order which explicitly states that defence land cannot be transferred or leased without approval of the Union Cabinet and no land can be declared private except through a court or government order. In the April 2007 meeting, chaired by Rekha Bhargava, special secretary in the MoD, Harnal agreed that return of excess land need not be linked to withdrawal of court cases that the trust had filed against the acquisition of land by the DGDE. The minutes of this crucial meeting, made available to INDIA TODAY, became the basis for the transfer of the land to the private trust. Harnal's lies were nailed in two separate letters filed by his departmental colleagues in 2007 and 2011.

A

urement of the exact location of the excess land with the help of revenue authorities of Jodhpur. A board of officers from the Headquarters Jodhpur Sub Area, which included a representative of the Defence Estates Office (DEO), passed an order in August 2007 to hand over the land to the trust. The land was transferred on August 23 that year. However, an additional 1.6 acres had already been given to the trust by the army in 2006 without involving the DEO. No board was held and no taking-over certificate was issued. The DEO, Jodhpur, discovered this transfer and sent two reminders to the army in 2008 and 2011. Both went unanswered. Defence estates officials wonder how the army took the unprecedented step of handing over
THE CONTROVERSIAL 4-ACRE PLOT NEAR THE UMAID BHAVAN PALACE IN JODHPUR (LEFT); A. K. HARNAL, DG DEFENCE ESTATES

RAJE

RAJASTHAN

LAND GRAB HITS RAJE
Court orders FIR against former CM and her son
n FIR was filed against leader of Opposition in the Rajasthan Assembly Vasundhara Raje and her son Dushyant Singh, a BJP MP from Jhalawar-Baran constituency, on December 9, 2011 on charges of land grab. They are among nine accused in the case. The FIR was filed on the orders of Jaipur Metropolitan Magistrate Ravi Bala Singh, on a complaint alleging that the duo had conspired to grab 15 acres of pasture land in Bari, a remote town in Dholpur. The complaint was filed by Babu Lal, a Congress councillor from Laxmangarh Municipality and Srajna Shresth, an advocate. Lal told INDIA TODAY: "I filed this case to expose corruption in high places." The complainants allege that Raje misused her position as chief minister to transfer the land to her son. Raje has dismissed the charges. She says, "Such false cases won't perturb me. More of these will be filed as elections are due next year and I have got used to this vindictiveness." Her aide says the land was never allotted to Dushyant. The next hearing in the case is in the third week of January. by Rohit Parihar

A

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

On June 14, 2011, B.A. Dhayalan, joint director in the DGDE Pune office that oversees the Jodhpur circle, questioned the transfer on the basis of the minutes. "The local military authority has handed over the land pockets without any government order/approval which appears to be a serious violation of existing land policy of the Government of India, MOD," the joint director noted in the letter to Harnal. "Land measuring 4.84 acres in Khasra No. 426 of village Jodhpur was consid-

ered as excess land and was handed over to the trust by army authorities without government orders." Dhayalan notes that the trust did not present any clear proof regarding its ownership of the land; besides, the plot was neither identified nor demarcated. "It is a land scam where the local military authorities colluded with the defence estate officials to hand over land to a private trust without any legal sanction for it. The allotment must be immediately cancelled," says Kirit

Somaiya, a member of the BJP's national executive body. The case dates back to 1976 when the army acquired 296.2 acres from the MMHS trust for its use. In 2001, the trust challenged the land acquisition in the Supreme Court and said the army had illegally occupied its land. The revenue department said it did not have village survey records to back the trust's claims. Six years later, however, the trust found a votary in the defence estates department. Harnal, who was in charge of acquisition and hiring of land in the DGDE, argued that the cases of the trust's court matter and the land exchange were not related. He also clarified that "for return of excess land, no government order is required". He suggested meas-

defence land to a private trust. "The army is not conversant with land matters nor are they the appropriate authority," an official noted. Two months after this surreptitious transfer to the trust, another DGDE official questioned the act. Meena Sharma, an assistant director in the DGDE headquarters in Delhi, wrote to the Director Planning (Lands) that manages army land, asking whether defence land had been handed over to the trust. It requested the army to issue instructions for all proposals for land exchange to require the approval of the defence ministry. The letter came even as the trust put up further claims for 18.68 acres of land from the 296-acre parcel it gave up in 1976. 

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

