GLOSSARY

BOLLYWOOD'S FINISHING SCHOOL
The Kingfisher Calendar girls from the latest 2012 edition have a lot more in common than one would have thought. Yes, their shoots, by Atul Kasbekar, are bankrolled by the ostensibly broke Vijay Mallya. They are gorgeous and love flaunting their skimpily clad lean bodies on Sri Lankan beaches, but they are also heading to tinseltown, following distinguished predecessors such as Katrina Kaif and Deepika Padukone. Call it the alumni of the abs.

MAIA HAYDON
At 23, the music producer-director sister of the well-known model Lisa Haydon finds herself on the sunny beaches of Sri Lanka in itsy-bitsy swimwear.After modelling on and off for two years, she will be following in her sister's footsteps."I will probably do an acting course soon," she says.

SAIYAMI KHER MIMI BLIX
The Uganda-Norwegian model, 20, started modelling at 15 and is a regular on international ramps, having walked with supermodels like Naomi Campbell. She was seen on the Kingfisher Calendar in 2009. Now she has Bollywood on her mind. With a string of ad campaigns such as Pantaloons, Levi's and L'Oreal coming her way, Kher, just 21, is already an old hand in the modelling world. She has a glamorous pedigree to boot. She's the granddaughter of actor Usha Kiron and daughter of onetime Miss India Uttara Kher. Not to forget the predictable acting course from Kishore Namit Kapoor's acting school.

TENA DESAE
Modelling for over 100 ads has kept kept Desae busy over the last four years. Pepsi, Fair & Lovely and Toyota have all been wooing her. She has already taken the plunge in cinema with Yeh Faasley and Sahi Dhandhe Galat Bande, moving on to Hollywood with The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel, opposite Dev Patel. Is she the next Freida Pinto?

THE FAMILY GUY
OF THE

BLOOPERS
OF THE

WEEK
Salman Rushdie
Author
"Goodbye, my beloved friend. A great voice falls silent. A great heart stops. Christopher Hitchens-- April 13, 1949--December 15, 2011." "And now Havel. Damn. I am getting tired of finding friends and comrades in the obituary columns. Will everyone please stay alive for a while?" "A few people responded to Hitchens' and Havel's deaths by telling me that I too will die soon. Sorry folks, but my plan is to live forever."

ARULNIDHI IN MOUNA GURU

Though DMK has fallen prey to Murphy's law, at least one member of M. Karunanidhi's family is doing well.Arulnidhi, the 24-year-old grandson of the DMK president, is a two-film-old actor. His third film, Mouna Guru, a Tamil thriller, is garnering great word of mouth for its tight screenplay and nuanced dialogues. Directed by debutant Shanta Kumar, the low-budget film stars a newcomer, Iniya, 23, opposite Arulnidhi.

WEEK

"Indian mens are hot"
Anil Kapoor, Actor in Mission Impossible

T

THE SOUP STAR

L

ooks like music director and mastermind behind the national sensation, Why this Kolaveri Di? Anirudh Ravichander, has more than a few tricks up his sleeve. To keep the soundtrack of 3 a mystery, he has given the track names a twist. Each song will have a tagline like The Kiss of Love, The Innocence of Love and The Celebration of Love. What is Kolaveri Di? The Soup of Love, of course.

ANIRUDH RAVICHANDER

KAPOOR WITH CO-STAR PAULA PATTON

hat statement by Anil Kapoor playing the lecherous playboy Brij Nath, owner of rogue satellite and lover of iron-fisted western women, is not the only ludicrous element in Mission: Impossible--Ghost Protocol. There are some major gaffes we couldn't help guffawing at. Number plates that arbitrarily end in MH when they aren't Canadian registration plates in the first place and Kannada signage in a city that the Shiv Sena refuses to allow being called Bombay. Servile butlers who tote an array of mobile phones around on a platter. Tom Cruise zips across the city in a sci-fi car with a left-hand drive, achieving impossible speeds on roads famous for their bumper-to-bumper traffic.

Poorna Jagannathan OF THE will be sharing WEEK screen space with Jane Fonda in Thanks For Sharing and Peace, Love and Misunderstanding.
COOL COUPLE

Ameesha Patel and Sunny OF THE Deol are WEEK hoping to cash in on their Gadar success a decade too late, with an action thriller presumptuously named Bhaiyyaji Superhit. Aren't producer Fauza Arshi and director Neeraj Pathak getting carried away?
ODD COUPLE
by Nishat Bari and Shilpa Rathnam
JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

70

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

71

