Living
WILDLIFE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

ATTHE CUTTING EDGE
Hospitals are investing in high-end technology to improve clinical outcomes and reduce patient stress.The five top hospital staples.

ROBOTIC SURGERY
From open surgeries, where the surgeon needs to put both hands in the patient's body, to keyhole surgeries, where they get to see the insides through a mini camera, to tiny hand-like instruments of a robot that performs surgeries-- modern surgery has come a long way. The small incisions and extreme precision make it a patient-friendly procedure. It is increasingly being used across the country for various hard-to-reach parts of the body.

CLEARING UP THE HEART
For a country with the highest rate of heart attack, clearing blocks in the arteries is a procedure much in demand.And now a rush of new technology is changing the old-fashioned cath labs.The latest flat-panel digital cath lab is the most advanced imaging system that's revolutionising heart treatment. It captures distortion-free images of the inner workings of the heart and allows doctors to work with more accuracy and precision. It also means lower exposure to radiation in patients, clinicians and technologists.

THE GREAT CONVEYOR
Pneumatic chutes, or air pressure driven transport systems, are the rage in hospitals. The point is to move it all--lab samples, drugs, blood bags, disposables and reports--safely and speedily from one part of the hospital to another. No need to wait for attendants to run around.

BRAIN POWER
BrainSUITE iMRIs is a brand new system, essential for neurosurgery, and only a few are available the world over. It gives surgeons a real-time view of their progress during complicated brain tumour and other brain surgery cases, by using MRI during surgery. Today, a number of hospitals have introduced this fabulously expensive facility.

WHO NEEDS PAPER?
Hospital workflows--from patient consultation, prescriptions, investigations, registration, doctors'and nurses' notes, billing, inventory management to discharge--are increasingly being managed at the click of a mouse. Modern hospitals are moving over to digital hospital information systems.


Compiled by Damayanti Datta

66

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

