Signature

by S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

OF HITCH AND HAVEL
hile he was watching his own death, the slow intercellular disintegration, from Houston's MD Anderson Cancer Center with the same intellectual curiosity with which he watched the passion plays of history in his sunny days, Christopher Hitchens couldn't resist going back to Kingsley Amis: "Death has this much to be said for it: / You don't have to get out of bed for it./ Wherever you happen to be / They bring it to you--free." When Hitchens first thought about the doggerel, in his memoirs, he refused to "applaud this admirable fatalism" because he wanted to "do" death "in the active and not the passive." In his last published article, in Vanity Fair, his conversation with death became a lot more intimate, and modest; he almost abandoned the Nietzschean bravado of "Whatever doesn't kill me makes me stronger." Even in his last painful moments, though, he was strong enough to reach the computer and bring out yet another finely textured argument. It was a life lived in the enchantment of dissent. In death, he was followed by the man who turned the idea of dissent into a manifesto of truth. Wrote Vaclav Havel in his celebrated essay Power of the Powerless: "Living within the truth, as humanity's revolt against an enforced position, is...an attempt to regain control over one's own sense of responsibility." And dissidents have "tried to affirm their own human identity, and if they reject anything at all, then it is merely what was false and alienating in their lives, that aspect of `living within a lie'" Havel wrote this more than a decade before the Velvet Revolution of 1989 which would see the dissident playwright, the apostle of "anti-political politics" ("politics of man, not of the appa-

W

ratus"), becoming the philosopher king of the liberated. In the history of resistance, the second Prague Spring was the romance of the amateur who began what the British historian Timothy Garton Ash calls "the refolution" (revolution plus reform) from a theatre called Magic Lantern. When he migrated to Prague Castle as president of what was then Czechoslovakia, he must have realized, in his smoke-filled private moments, the banality, if not futility, of managing power after those lacerating years in struggle against power. He was the loneliest of presidents when he left office. Maybe that was the price the dissident had to pay for being propelled into the boredom of freedom. Hitchens, the relentless seeker of flashpoints in the lands without justice, never missed a dateline, including Havel's Prague in 1988, on the eve of Liberation, when he was arrested for attending a meeting of Charter 77, the dissidents' declaration. It was a natural destination for Hitch, whose rage against the systems of lie--and its ambassadors--remains an unassailable edifice in modern polemics. He abandoned the youthful idealism of the Left and sided with the moral interventions of the Right, and became an audacious supporter of George Bush's Iraq war. Havel was the Kafka in politics, who brought the trial of the powerless to an end. Both Hitch and Havel, the philosopher and the polemicist, defied the dead certainties of ideology with the power of ideas. Ideas of freedom. Between the piercing arguments of these heavy smokers, gods and their missionaries, belonging to religion as well as ideology, lost their halo--and even their kingdoms. It is a lesser world without their questioning gaze.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

HITCH AND HAVEL, THE PHILOSOPHER AND THE POLEMICIST, DEFIED THE DEAD CERTAINTIES OF IDEOLOGY WITH THE POWER OF IDEAS. BETWEEN THEIR PIERCING ARGUMENTS, GODS AND THEIR MISSIONARIES, BELONGING TO RELIGION AS WELL AS IDEOLOGY, LOST THEIR HALO-- AND EVEN THEIR KINGDOMS.

S I G N P O STS
DIED The 69-year-old supreme leader of nuclear armed North Korea, Kim Jong-il, of a heart attack during a train journey. His youngest son Kim Jong-un, 28, has been named successor.

DIED Vaclav Havel, a dissident playwright who was jailed by Communists and then went on to lead the bloodless `Velvet Revolution', at 75. He was the Czech Republic's first president. HONOURED Economist Amartya Sen, by Jamia

Milia Islamia, with an honorary doctorate at a special convocation held in New Delhi on December 17. FINED Actor Minissha Lamba, Rs 4 lakh, for evasion of duty on jewellery and dutiable goods worth Rs 31 lakh

she carried on her return from Cannes. APPOINTED POWELL Nancy J. Powell, career diplomat and veteran South Asia hand, as the new US ambassador to India.

KIM JONG-IL

16

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

