Nation BIHAR
Photographs by KRISHNA MURARI KISHAN

VIGILANCE OFFICERS RECOVER Rs 10 LAKH CASH, GOLD JEWELLERYAND PASSBOOKS FROM THE HOME OF A GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL IN PATNA (LEFT) AND NITISH KUMAR

CLEAN-UP CRUSADE
Nitish cracks the whip. One government officer has been nabbed every fourth day in six years
handra Prakash Paswan had a foolproof plan, or so he thought. He arrested Manoj Kumar, a Bihar State Food Corporation manager, accepting Rs 1.5 lakh bribe in August this year but did not declare five ATM cards recovered during the raid in the seizure list. Manoj was coerced to reveal the passwords and Paswan, deputy superintendent of police (DSP) in Bihar's Vigilance Department, sent two of his minions, constable Prakash Kujur and computer operator Premjit Kumar, to withdraw money from ATMS while he kept a close watch from outside. The Vigilance Department arrested the duo in October after Manoj complained. The DSP was still off the hook but CCTV footage from the ATM showed him in the frame as his cronies withdrew money. His locker then yielded a file that contained PIN numbers of Manoj's ATM cards. Paswan was arrested on November 23. On November 25, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar made it a point to mention the DSP's arrest while pre-

COLOUR OF MONEY
 Posing as a relative, a vigilance officer accompanies the complainant to the bribe-seeker to confirm the case is genuine.  White phenolphthalein powder is sprinkled on currency notes to be offered as bribe. Once the notes are accepted, the complainant alerts sleuths with a phone call and they rush in to catch the bribe-receiver.  The bribe-receiver's hands are

C

senting his annual report card on the government's achievements. Under Nitish's leadership, between January 2006 and October 2011, 527 government officials were caught accepting bribes in 458 traps set by vigilance officials. That's one official arrested every fourth day. In contrast, only 47 officials were trapped between 1995 and 2005. The first big fish snared in Nitish's net was the then Madhepura district magistrate Hemchandra Jha, who was intercepted on October 13, 2006, with Rs 1.9 lakh cash in his official car. Sources say it was Nitish who tipped off the vigilance sleuths. It was Nitish again who directed Ravindra Singh, a Janata Dal (United) leader, to the vigilance team to trap DSP Banke Rajak in Darbhanga district; he was caught accepting a bribe of Rs 30,000 on December 10. In February 2010, Bihar became the first state to adopt a special law which allows confiscation of assets of corrupt officials before their conviction. On September 4, the Vigilance

washed with colourless sodium carbonate solution which turns pink, confirming he touched the currency notes.This is recorded and submitted as evidence. Department confiscated a Patna building of former minor irrigation secretary S.S. Verma, under suspension since July 2007, and converted it into a primary school--the first such case in the country. The special confiscation law has ramped up interest across the country. Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh have already drafted a similar enabling legislation. The number of convictions, however, has been low. The special vigilance courts do not deal with trap cases alone, resulting in just 15 convictions so far. That's probably the weakest link in Bihar's crackdown on corruption.
by Amitabh Srivastava

50

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

