Pro file SUNNYLEONE

PORN AGAIN STAR
By Indira Kannan in Toronto

The world's highest paid porn star is a desi girl at heart. Her stint in the Bigg Boss house is a pit stop on the road to Bollywood. The offers have already started pouring in.
It's easy to be snide about the adult entertainment business, but like it or not, it's a legitimate--and lucrative-- industry in the US, estimated to be worth about $13 billion annually. It's so mainstream that the business news network CNBC has aired special programmes about the adult entertainment industry and its annual convention in Las Vegas. While estimates vary and nobody in the business will confirm any numbers, an industry insider said a popular actress doing regular work could expect to make around $250,000 a year from adult films alone, not including other shows and appearances. Leone has been Penthouse Pet of the Year; a "Vivid Girl" with the worldwide industry leader Vivid

he's an Indian at the top of another multibillion dollar American industry, but Sunny Leone is the only one to have got there without her clothes on. The 30-year-old was among "the top one per cent" and the "highest paid actor ever" in the euphemistically titled "adult film industry" during the time she was working on a contract, according to Daniel Weber, her business partner and CEO of their jointly owned and luridly named Los Angeles-based company SunLust Pictures, Inc. Yet this Canada-born, United States-based performer may turn out to be a desi girl at heart, willing to trade in all the adult action in the US for Bollywood dreams in India. Since her controversial and high-profile entry into the television reality show Bigg Boss Season 5 in November, Leone has received at least one very public film offer--from Mahesh Bhatt for Jism 2--and, says Weber, several other offers from Hindi filmmakers and even documentary producers. Bhatt says he found her to be a warm and charming woman who is not at all apologetic about what she does. "She took up her profession by choice and does not have a narrative of tragedy, which many women in the adult entertainment industry would have even if they haven't been through tragedy." He also found her ambitious, wanting to win. She has chosen to not reveal her profession to the Bigg Boss house inmates. Before going into the Bigg Boss house she had said: "I would like to try to improve my

S

Hindi and learn to cook some great Indian food. Bigg Boss is my attempt to connect with the Indian audiences and show them that I am just as conservative as they are regardless of the career path that I have chosen." Weber confirms Leone has mostly been offered "leading lady" roles and that at least three of the projects she is interested in will be filmed in 2012. She is comfortable with the idea of dividing her time between India and the US, according to Weber, who says her work at SunLust won't suffer as a result. "That's what employees are for." But he admits there might be an image conflict if she continues to act in adult films, so she might cut back on that or drop it, but would continue to direct adult films for her company.

Body of Work

Hardcore porn to reality TV, Leone has done them all
made sure her fans understood what a momentous event it was: "And now the moment you've all been waiting for! Sunny does a man. It's true. It is her first boy/girl scene ever... a stunner." THE VIRGINITY HIT, 2010. Appeared as herself in actor Will Ferrell's R-rated comedy. NOT CHARLIE'S ANGELS XXX, 2010. A porn spoof of hit franchise, Charlie's Angels. BIGG BOSS SEASON 5, 2011. "Bigger, bolder and louder than ever before"--It was the promo for the Colors show in which Leone is a participant.

PENTHOUSE: PETS IN PARADISE, 2001, Penthouse Video. She debuted as Pet of the Month. Given her professional name by Bob Guccione, founder of Penthouse magazine. SUNNY, 2005. Vivid Entertainment. Her first hardcore porn film. "Five fantasies...five wildly erotic settings... prepare yourself for something special." Thus was launched her adult film career. SUNNY LOVES MATT, 2007. Vivid Entertainment. Leone's first porn film with a male actor. After working with women initially, when she first appeared on screen with a man, the teasers

LEONE IN HER PORN STAR AVATAR

Courtesy: DANIEL WEBER, SUNLUST PICTURES

Entertainment; winner of several AVN Awards, known as the Oscars of porn; and is now head of her own fast-growing adult entertainment company. In popularity, she ranks up there with top stars like Jenna Jameson. On January 21, 2012, she will co-host the AVN Awards show in Las Vegas. With that background, and a porn star's body to boot, Leone was probably a natural draw for the producers of Bigg Boss, the reality show on the entertainment channel Colors. For a show that thrives on shock value, who better to rope in than the star of films like It's Sunny in Brazil, Undress Me, Not Charlie's Angels XXX, and Bang Van Blowout with Nick Swardson, to name some of the tamer titles? Leone is currently incommunicado, but Weber says she was approached by Endemol, producer of Bigg Boss, and Viacom 18, owner of Colors, in February to be part of season five. Negotiations went on for months before she was signed on to appear for the show starting October 2. "We got a call on October 1 saying she shouldn't come because it had created a huge controversy in India," recalls Weber. Her entry was pushed back by four weeks and she got into the show a month later. Her security in India was a real concern, says Weber. "We didn't know how people would react." Her real name has been widely reported to be Karen Malhotra, but the entertainment industry website imdb.com gives her name as Karenjit Kaur Vohra. Weber won't say what her real name is "for security reasons". Leone was born in Canada's Ontario province, and her family moved to Los Angeles when she was a teenager. Her father was a mechanical engineer and her mother also worked. Ironically enough, the

60

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

Pro file SUNNYLEONE

Having acted in and directed over 50 adult films, Leone now acts in only two movies a year and is focusing on building her brand.

LEONE

Punjabi couple reportedly sent their daughter to a Catholic school in Canada. Her parents have both since passed away, and her only immediate family is a younger brother, who is a chef at a Los Angeles restaurant. Speaking through Weber, and giving only his first name, Leone's brother Sundeep described his sister as an individual with a firm head on her shoulders, someone who had achieved everything by being positive and working extremely hard. "She's very professional and I would do anything for her always," says Sundeep. Leone got into the adult entertainment business "by accident" in 2001, after a photographer who had shot her for a regular modelling portfolio showed her pictures to Penthouse magazine. The penny dropped when she learned how much the magazine was willing to pay, and she reportedly did her first nude photo shoot for

Penthouse, which made her Pet of the Month in March 2001. Steady work in magazine shoots followed for the next four years, and in 2003 she was also featured as Penthouse Pet of the Year. Leone has said in previous interviews that her professional name was chosen by none other than Bob Guccione, the founder of Penthouse. She transitioned into adult movies in 2005, signing a contract with Vivid Entertainment. Marci Hirsch, the vice-president of production for Vivid, said Leone worked only with women on screen for the first three years of her contract. In her fourth and final year as a "Vivid Girl", she made porn movies with a male costar for the first time. Now she's back to working only with women. All of it was "her own choice", according to Hirsch, who adds, "she really understands the business. If only everyone was like her, my job would be easier." Initially, Leone was a novelty in the industry, the only successful Indian in the business. Now she has a broad appeal, and was named one of 2010's top 12 porn stars by men's magazine Maxim. She has said in

previous interviews that her parents "understood" her choice of career. In 2008, Leone left Vivid to start SunLust Pictures with Weber, a businessman and former musician, whom she had met through mutual friends. The company produces adult videos and sells adult merchandise. "It's a common misconception that Sunny is just the face of the company," says Weber. "She comes up with the ideas and makes creative choices, I produce and sell the products. She's very hands-on." Having acted in and directed over 50 adult films, Leone now acts in only two movies a year, according to Weber, and is focusing on building her business and her brand. Like other companies in the business, SunLust is privately owned and doesn't disclose financial information. Pressed for a ballpark figure, Weber says it earns over $1 million annually. The buzz around Bigg Boss has earned the show at least two new fans in Weber and Hirsch. Both follow it online, despite understanding little of what's said. They may not be alone, for when Leone is on screen, viewers don't listen, they watch. with Nishat Bari

62

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

