Mail

Queen of Destiny
DECEMBER 19, 2011

The battle for India's most politically influential state is a national struggle as the electoral fortunes of Mayawati will determine the fate of UPA in 2012.

Two decades ago people only concentrated on the slow pace of the elephant, not looking at its feet, which were heavy enough to acquire any land and trample any opposition.
R A J N E E S H B AT R A ,
New Delhi

Testing Times
The nation is heading towards turbulent political waters with Mayawati and Rahul Gandhi trying desperately to bag a win in the 2012 Uttar Pradesh polls ("Queen of Destiny", December 19). In this groundless melee, people become the eventual and victims. Our country's destiny is sadly in the hands of injudicious leaders like Mayawati who can transfigure the fate of not only UP but of unabridged India.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore

AP

and Nitish Kumar at the national level. Her performance in the forthcoming polls will decide her destiny.
ARUNIMA DHAWAN, Mumbai

A Mine Of Worry
It is outrageous how coal mines could be allotted to companies arbitrarily, causing a loss of Rs 85,000 crore to the country ("Coal Burns Congress", December 19). The issue becomes more serious since the allotments were made with the full knowledge of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. A probe should be ordered and the guilty punished.
RITIKA AGGARWAL, Dehradun

Over the past two decades, Mayawati's government is probably the only one to have completed its full five-year term in UP. If people vote her in again, then her claim to power at the Centre will get reinforced. However, her decision to spend enormous funds on parks has invited widespread criticism.
ASEEM DIXIT, Hyderabad

Mayawati's dream of becoming the prime minister of India is hard to realise because she has to compete with Mulayam Singh Yadav and Rahul Gandhi's influence in UP, and with Narendra Modi

Big Brother
The latest episode of the UPA wanting Internet companies to evolve a mechanism to monitor and regulate `derogatory' and `defamatory' content has whipped up a storm of

It appears that the allotment of coal blocks may become the mother of all scams .The integrity of the PM is at stake again. Cancelling a few blocks will not undo the damage that has been done to our depleting natural resources.
KAMINI DANG, Allahabad

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

``

``

Mail
with bloggers and tweeters slamming Kapil Sibal for his alleged attempt to push for a form of online censorship ("Scissorhands Sibal", December 19). Someone should remind him of the terrible consequences the Congress had to face because of the gag on free speech during the Emergency.
NEENA SINHA, Jaipur

35
of her assets has enraged the conservatives. Of course, it goes without saying that this hue and cry could most certainly be a gimmick which will benefit both Malik and the magazine.
KRISHNA MURTHY, Kerala

Man of Valour
K. Vijay Kumar, the Director-General of CRPF, deserves kudos for his bravery and his efforts to turn around the fortunes of his men ( "Dodge Me If You Can", December 19). He has helped them evolve as a force to reckon with. Kumar should be honoured for his conviction, diligence and accomplishments.
LISA ALLEN, via www.intoday.in

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J A N U A RY 1 6 - 3 1 , 1 9 7 7

Gone is the Glitter
A jeweller's shop window no more possesses for an Indian that quality of glamour and magnetism traditionally associated with it. Jewellers themselves watch with growing apprehension as prospective customers continue to dwindle, and their usually dependable clientele is slowly reduced to passing window shoppers. Indian jewellers have reason to be the most worried men in the business world today. Once powerful tycoons in the trade are now sliding towards-a precipice. No more are they the builders of mammoth fortunes. Robbed of its glitter, the jewellery business in India faces a dark future. The last year has been one of ominous foreboding for those dealing in gems and jewels. Business, which first began to suffer following the imposition of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA), got worse with the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Act (COFEPOSA), the crackdown on black money and the introduction of the voluntary disclosures scheme. The final blow to the business came with the recognition of dowry as a major social evil. by M. Khosla & Sunil Sethi

Kapil Sibal is right. Some of the objectionable content on social networking sites hurts people/communities and even religious sentiments. Surely, censoring is not an issue involving a "Big Brother government vs libertarian citizens" stand-off. It is about maintaining a balance between freedom of expression and the need to be sensitive about what one expresses online.
J. S. ACHARYA, Hyderabad

In these modern times, skin show is as common as the rise in petrol prices. Nudity is most admired if sold aesthetically but Malik's posing in the buff is just too hard to digest for people in Pakistan. All the furore apart, the actor is surely worthy of accolades for her bold move.
VIMAL S. THAKER, Ahmedabad

Porous Border
I would like to state that the observation with regard to Madhubani district being the entry point for terrorists into India is very relevant and should be an eye-opener for the state as well as the Central government ("Terror's New Gateway", December 19). In fact, Bihar is also a hub for illegal manufacturers and buyers of weapons. At least now the administration should be vigilant and initiate strict preventive measures.
RANJIT SINHA, Kolkata

All Play, No Work
C. Rangarajan and M. S. Ahluwalia, who are highly respected economists, are not really `managers' of the economy but experts making pronouncements on it ("The Mismanagers", December 19). In India, predicting the growth rate has become a pastime of industrialists, economists, politicians, bankers and analysts. It will be a useful service to the public if pronouncements are confined to only a few really knowledgeable people who could gather insiders' opinions and speak on behalf of the government. The article shows how government experts speak on important issues without consistency or a degree of certainty.
K. U. MADA, Mumbai

Any attempt to censor content on social networking sites would be like closing the windows and doors of your house and thinking the winters are over.
RITU, New Delhi

Love Lost
Dev Anand was a suave gentleman who loved life and all its blessings ("The Loose-Limbed Lover", December 19). The void created by his departure is hard to fill. Hats off to his spirited living. His genius created some very memorable moments on celluloid.
HITESH PANT, Haldwani

Body Beautiful
There's no spectacle as wonderful as the sight of a beautiful woman naked ("Veena Recital", December 19). The female form continues to be an object of wonder for men. It is unfortunate that Veena Malik's bold display

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

TROUBLED BYA DWINDLING DOMESTIC DEMAND

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

