BYWORD

by M.J. AKBAR

DIFFERENT STROKES
generals to avert a possible coup in Islamabad. Haqqani, Dear Doctor Dubai: ou are a very busy man, Doc, as anyone who predictably, denied authorship but the memo was so toxic commands the sole confidence of the President of that Haqqani has disappeared into a coma. His resignation Pakistan must surely be, so I hesitate to waste your on November 22 did nothing to impede the rampaging intime over a niggle. But this niggle just won't go away. On fection of the memo. Haqqani is not a diplomat, by profesDecember 6, President Asif Ali Zardari unexpectedly left sion or temperament; he was and is star yes-man in the his country ostensibly in search of your care in Dubai. Zardari court. His appointment to Washington was a graceZardari returned to Pakistan on December 19 amid intense and-favour gift from Zardari. Add two and two and you get speculation that he would disappear again, this time for a the contemporary Pakistan crisis. Zardari ran but could not hide. His government fired more generous absence. It seems, therefore, that the fate shots in the air, insisting that Parliament, press, and its of a nation hangs on a niggle. Doc, all you have told us is that Zardari had "stroke-like friends in Lahore and across the world would never tolersymptoms". This carefully mysterious formulation has left ate another coup. General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani was not us a trifle confused and a bit thirsty for more information. particularly impressed by bluster. Instead, the army chief Every stroke may have stroke-like symptoms, but every showed that his grasp of politics and the comparative power of his country's institutions was more astute than civilians symptom does not, it seems, owe its origin to a stroke. So, Doc, was it a stroke or not a stroke? If it was a stroke, had bargained for. The army petitioned the Supreme Court where did it strike? If it was merely "stroke-like" then you to investigate the origins of memo which "unsuccessfully attempted to lower the morale of the Pakistan Army". Very could perhaps let us know what it was like. Please don't take this personally, Doc. But was there smart: the memo was a failure, but its intentions were treaanything specific in those "symptoms" that required treat- sonable. If the Supreme Court after due process can find ment in Dubai and only from your capable hands and someone higher up the civilian command chain guilty, then doubtless brilliant mind? Are there no doctors in Zardari is pincered. This would, in effect, become the most Islamabad, or Lahore, or Karachi, capable of dealing with legitimate coup in Pakistan's history. Kayani could recover dislikeable symptoms? One asks because nasty wags in his own, and the army's, prestige by refusing to occupy the Pakistan and despicable rumour-mongers in India are consequent vacant space, and letting a general election find thoughtlessly spreading the idea that the President of the next president and prime minister. Zardari recognises a crossroads by instinct. On the night Pakistan does not trust any hospital in Pakistan, and is terof Friday the 16th, Kayani had a threerified of being poisoned or some such. hour meeting with Prime Minister This cannot be true, of course, for if a Yousaf Raza Gilani, an unusually long President cannot trust his own people chat for peacetime palavers. Within 48 then he has no right to continue in ofhours Zardari was back to his resifice. But loathsome western journaldence in Pakistan from his home in ists have even reported that Zardari Dubai. Never imagine that a scapegoat was "recuperating at his home in cannot hear the sound of sharpening Dubai" after, apparently, you sorted knives; indeed, the fever of his imagiout those malicious symptoms. If nation raises decibels. When a miliIslamabad isn't safe even for some tary-political commentator like Lt Gen much-needed recuperation by its Talat Masood (retired) states deadpan President, then you are up a creek that civilian and military leaderships without a paddle, isn't it? are on a collision course, Zardari doesYour medical knowledge is vast, n't need any advice on who will be in Doc, so perhaps you could enlighten the middle of that collision. At the age us on this one, without, I hope, violatof 56, a hospital bed in Dubai, with reing the Hippocratic oath. Is it possible cuperation facilities nearby, must be for a President to get a stroke from a immensely preferable to years in a memorandum? damp Attock prison, even if it is on the I am referring of course to the If Islamabad isn't safe even banks of a brisk Indus within breathmemo passed on to the Pentagon by a for some much-needed view of the Himalayas. Pakistani-American businessman recuperation by its President, taking So you see, Doc, how vital those Mansoor Ijaz, allegedly on behalf of then you are up a creek "stroke-like symptoms" are? Do reply Zardari's ambassador to Washington without a paddle, isn't it? when you find a minute. Hussain Haqqani, begging American

Y

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

50

