Nation

IRON ORE EXPORTS

BENEFIT OFCLOUT
Chidambaram's 2007 flip-flop let Anil Agarwal's Vedanta take over Sesa Goa at a cut price and go on to profit from iron ore exports
CHIDAMBARAM ANILAGARWAL
Photographs by YASHBANT NEGI and UMESH GOSWAMI/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Sandeep Bamzai

n April 23, 2007, Anil Agarwal-owned Vedanta Resources bought 51 per cent stake in Sesa Goa, India's top producer and exporter of iron ore, for $981 million or Rs 4,070 crore. Before its purchase and subsequently, there were some curious goings-on. On February 28, 2007, then finance minister P. Chidambaram imposed an export duty on iron ore in the Union Budget. Expounding on Item 141 of his speech, he noted: "The Anwarul Hoda Committee (set up by the Planning Commission) has submitted a report on minerals policy. Taking a leaf out of the report, and in order to conserve our natural resources as well as to raise revenue, I propose to impose an export duty of Rs 300 per metric tonne on export of iron ore and concentrates and Rs 2,000 per metric tonne on export of chrome ores and concentrates." The Hoda report or the National Mineral Policy 2008 has finally taken shape recently as the Mines & Mineral Development and Regulation Bill 2011 appoved by the Cabinet late last year. At the same time, Japanese firm Mitsui Finsider International Ltd, which had majority control of Sesa Goa, mandated Morgan Stanley to find a buyer for its 51 per cent holding in Sesa Goa. The Japanese firm was

O

selling this stake as part of a global strategy to exit the mining business. The successful bidder would also have to make an open offer to Sesa Goa shareholders, to buy a further 20 per cent. Sesa Goa's valuations sank after the finance minister levied the duty on iron ore exports. The immediate concerns were that Sesa Goa's profitability would be affected by the tax on iron ore exports, the company's lifeblood. The stock declined sharply from Rs 1,928.70 on February 20, 2007 to Rs 1,611.10 by March 7, soon after the budget announcement, a drop of over 20 per cent. This may have prompted the six bidders, including Lakshmi Niwas Mittal-owned ArcelorMittal, to lower their bids, which Mitsui agreed to. The winner was Vedanta, with a bid of Rs 2,036 per share, a lower valuation arrived at on the basis of a sixmonth weighted average price, given

that valuations had tanked in the aftermath of the budget decision. Speculation has it that Brazilian miner CVRD and British-Australian giant Rio Tinto pulled out of the race for Mitsui's 51 per cent stake in Sesa Goa after the new tax regime. To a question whether many of the bidders fled fearing the duty would hit profits, Sesa Goa spokesperson told INDIA TODAY that all through March and early April 2007, various companies carried on with the due diligence process. And on whether this materially altered the pricing environment under which Vedanta acquired Sesa Goa in April 2007, the spokesperson denied any knowledge of pricing except for that finalised by Vedanta. Two months later, on May 3, while passing the finance bill, Chidambaram, in a volte-face, slashed the export duty on iron ore to Rs 50 from Rs 300. There was a hue and cry

CHIDAMBARAM REDUCED EXPORT DUTY ON IRON ORE WITH LESS THAN 62 PER CENT IRON CONTENT TO RS 50 PER TONNE FROM RS 300. VEDANTA BENEFITED.
in the steel industry because it was felt that the partial rollback of export duty on iron ore fines would hit domestic steel utilities and affect expansion plans, even as ore exporters sought full withdrawal of the levy. The steel industry had been demanding that export duty be doubled to discourage export of iron ore. The state chief minister and the Goa Mineral Ore Exporters' Association (GMOEA) wrote to the Prime Minister and finance minister on the hike in export duty in March 2007, which is indicative of the widespread dissatisfaction of iron ore exporters with the new duty. When Chidambaram reduced the export duty on iron ore fines to Rs 50 per tonne from Rs 300, he did so only on ore with less than 62 per cent iron content. The duty on ore with over 62 per cent iron content remained unchanged at Rs 300 per tonne. The direct beneficiary was Vedanta's Sesa Goa since it exported iron ore with less than 62 per cent iron content. In fact, in 2007 alone, the cut in duty from Rs 300 to Rs 50 fetched it Rs 232.5 crore (9.3 million tonnes of iron ore exported multiplied by a duty differential of Rs 250 per tonne) in terms of savings on levy. Asked whether Sesa benefited due to the downward revision in export duty on iron ore in May 2007, its spokesperson said all exporters of iron ore were subject to the same hike or revision of export duty. No special favour was extended to Sesa Goa. Sesa Goa accounted for approxi-

Open Links Chidambaram was part of Vedanta's legal team and on its board
In 2002, a year before UK's Financial Services Authority allowed Sterlite to reconstitute itself as Vedanta Resources Plc, the Enforcement Directorate (ED) served a show-cause notice on three of Chairman Anil Agarwal's family. The notice was a demand that Sterlite directors answer allegations about using their holding companies--Volcan and Twinstar--to avoid paying taxes on forex transactions. It was a polite way of saying there was prima facie evidence, dating back to 1993, that the Agarwals were guilty of money laundering. For seven years the case dragged on in courts as Sterlite employed top lawyers to use

before becoming finance minister in 2004
THE STERLITE PLANT NEAR CHENNAI

every possible delaying tactic. P. Chidambaram argued in Sterlite's defence in a 2003 Bombay High Court case related to the ED's allegations. The following year, Chidambaram found himself appointed non-executive director on the board of Vedanta Resources Plc. And very soon, he became finance minister in UPA 1.

mately 10.5 per cent of India's total iron ore exports in 2007, according to the GMOEA. Its revenues from iron ore alone were Rs 8,387 crore in 2010-11, with an operating profit of Rs 4,884 crore. Seventy-seven per cent of all Sesa Goa exports are to China. The relatively lower- and medium-grade iron is from Sesa Goa and the freight cost advantage that Indian exporters has over their Brazilian counterparts have contributed to rising Chinese offtake. With net profit growing by 159 per cent, Sesa Goa's earnings and cash flows have expanded at a rapid pace over the past five years. Recently, news that the Serious Fraud Investigation Office has been directed by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to initiate action against Sesa Goa on eight grounds, including over and under invoicing of exports and imports of over Rs 1,000 crore, caused its shares to plummet. In 2003, Chidambaram defended Vedanta subsidiary Sterlite in a tax evasion case (see box). He had served on their board till late May 2004 (2003-04), when he was appointed finance minister. INDIA TODAY sent repeated reminders to Chidambaram's office, but no response was forthcoming till going to print. Chidambaram's involvement with Anil Agarwal's companies is well documented. As required, he resigned from the board of the London-based Vedanta Resources on the eve of his appointment as finance minister in the UPA 1 government in May 2004. In a notice to the London Stock Exchange on May 24, 2004, Vedanta Resources intimated board changes by announcing that in the light of Chidambaram becoming India's finance minister, he has tendered his resignation from the board. On the occasion, Brian Gilbertson, chairman of Vedanta, commented, "It was a privilege to have the benefit of his knowledge and experience, particularly during our listing on the London Stock Exchange." With the opposition baying for his blood on the 2G scam, the new controversy over Vedanta-Sesa Goa could well add to his woes. I

34

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

35

NEW

