GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

PRAY TIME
onia Gandhi is scheduled to pray at the Tirumala shrine on February 2 on the invitation of the Chairman of the Tirupathi Tirumala Devasthanams K. Bapiraju. The Congress president last visited the temple on November 25, 2006. All that non-Hindus have to do before entering the temple is to declare that they believe in Lord Venkateswara. No doubt the visit is meant to help Rahul Gandhi, currently campaigning in eastern Uttar Pradesh, in his toughest test yet.

S

SONIA IS SET TO VISIT THE TIRUMALA SHRINE ON FEBRUARY 2
AP A.PRABHAKAR RAO

NRIS Inc
The tenth Pravasi Bharatiya Divas in Jaipur on January 8 and 9 had some colourful hits and misses, not in the least because of the glamorous chief guest Kamla Persad Bissessar, Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, who is the first woman of Indian origin to become head of government outside India. BEST GESTURE When the sariclad Bissessar touched the feet of President Pratibha Patil after being honoured with the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman. BEST OVATION When steel tycoon Lakshmi Mittal stood up to applaud after Gujarat
HAQQANI

Chief Minister Narendra Modi completed his half-hour speech. The visibly uncomfortable host, Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot, chose to skip most of the speech, leaving at the point when Modi said the surplus power produced by Gujarat was more than the total power produced by Rajasthan. Gehlot's excuse? He had to receive Patil at the airport. SILLIEST CHALLENGE Issued by Rajasthan Urban Development Minister Shanti Dhariwal, who attributed Rajasthan's poor performance to lack of resources. His gladiatorial

gauntlet: "Let Modi come here and perform or let me go there and we'll show what we can do there." BIGGEST BLOOPER Cricket legend Brian Lara, who travelled with Bissessar, almost didn't get a seat in the 1,300seat Birla Auditorium, the venue of the inaugural session. It was only when Prime Minister Manmohan Singh mentioned his name, describing him as a legendary cricketer and household name, that officials realised he had been asked to move to an adjoining room because of lack of space. He was promptly ushered back in.

JAGANMOHAN

STAR CROSSED

C

AMBASSADOR US-ED TO BE
If you can't escape the country to a villa abroad, staying in the guest quarters of Pakistan Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani's compound in Islamabad is the next best thing. That's where former Pakistan ambassador to the US, Husain Haqqani, is currently resident. He fears he could be murdered if he leaves the high-security home. By who? Islamists. And if he's lucky enough to escape them, there's always the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI). His lawyer said the ISI "might pick him up and torture him" to elicit a confession of treason for Memogate. It hasn't stopped Haqqani from tweeting though, whether it's on a Guardian article on Pakistan or a counter-attack on trolls.

ongress is preparing yet another "answer" to the irresistible rise of 39-year-old Y.S. Jaganmohan Reddy, actor Mahesh Babu. Congress believes the 36-year-old can galvanise youngsters as a campaigner. His father, former Congress MP Ghattamaneni Krishna, 68, was a supporter of the late Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy. Mahesh Babu, however, is super busy, making blockbusters and endorsing everything from hair oil to gold to a pain balm. Congress is desperate for relief from Jagan, its biggest pain.
MAHESH BABU

K.BHASKAR

AP

16

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
UNPLEASANT TREATMENT

SON RISING
hile papa Tarun Gogoi is talking to a faction of United Liberation Front of Asom (ULFA), son Gaurav Gogoi, 29, got a pat on the back from Paresh Baruah, the elusive military head of the banned organisation. On January 10, junior Gogoi organised `Asia Rising: Implications for the World Economy' in Guwahati where Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz and Lord Meghnad Desai spoke on the rise of China and India. "We are happy that Gaurav Gogoi has made an attempt to look at Assam's
GITIKA TALUKDAR MANDAR DEODHAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

P

une's Sancheti Hospital waived Anna Hazare's Rs 81,400 medical bill because "he has been doing so much for the nation". The daily spread was positively luxurious compared to Hazare's more famous dietary preferences: nine hours of sleep, eight glasses of water, two glasses of milk, four small meals, dry fruits in between and 14 pills every day till he recovers from bronchitis. Normally, Hazare eats just once a day, when he is not fasting, that is.

W

THACKERAY

MIND THE LANGUAGE
al Thackeray's language gets more colourful by the year. In an interview to Shiv Sena mouthpiece Saamna on January 10, he said the Maharashtra government was like a `non-performing' husband, which is why industries were fleeing the state for Gujarat. "If a husband is not able to satisfy his wife, she tends to have a relationship with others. What is her fault? If the husband only sleeps and does not do anything else, what can she do?" So charming.

B

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

SURPRISE OF THE WEEK
"There is no saint without a past and no sinner without a future.'' Press Council of India chief Justice Markandey Katju defending Sunny Leone's appearance on Bigg Boss 5. Citing a religious example, he said, "Mary Magdalene was a fallen woman (according to the Gospel of Luke as interpreted by Pope Gregory) and Jesus allowed her to wash his feet and she later became his disciple."

GAURAV GOGOI

CATCH OF THE WEEK
Ten snakes, including a cobra and two kraits, from Rashtrapati Nilayam near Hyderabad, just a day before President Pratibha Patil arrived for an 11-day visit to the city. A special team from the Nehru Zoological Park in Hyderabad was called in to pick up the snakes.

ANNA HAZARE

KAPIL SIBAL, Minister of
IT

and Communications

"PDP says my travels are an unnecessary drama. That is the best acknowledgement of my efforts and I take it as a compliment."
OMAR ABDULLAH, Chief Minister,

"Looks like the over-supply of aviation journalists will have to take a pay cut if Kingfisher does not make headlines daily."
VIJAY MALLYA

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

"15 per cent gas you have brought to India through gas pipeline and the rest you can get through mass communication."

economy in the light of the economies of China and India. We are particularly happy that he is trying to distinguish Assam's economy from that of India," said a statement from Baruah's publicity secretary Arunoday Dahotia. How did ULFA jump to such a conclusion? It may have something to do with where Baruah is hiding.

JOKE
O F T H E W E E K

Jammu and Kashmir

Chairman, Kingfisher Airlines

MALLYA

Breaking News: Rahul Gandhi to judge MasterChef Uttar Pradesh by eating food at contestants'homes.

with AMARNATH K. MENON, ROHIT PARIHAR, SANDEEP UNNITHAN, KIRAN TARE, KAUSHIK DEKA

18

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

