GLOSSARY

SPECIAL DAY, SPECIALWAY
It's raining birthdays in Bollywood this month. While some went high-profile with star parties, other pretty people spent their birthdays with a chosen few.

All Smiles Though Hrithik Roshan's 38th birthday dinner was an intimate affair, Bollywood's sexiest man alive didn't shy away from cutting cakes with fans and the media. Party's Over Glitterati came to celebrate with Farhan Akhtar, 37. But, when the festivities went beyond the prescribed time limit of 1 a.m., cops showed up to break up the party.
YOGEN SHAH

All in a Day's Workout Not one to trade fitness for fun, Bengali beauty Bipasha Basu celebrated her 33rd at "her favourite place" the gym, complete with a surprise birthday cake and all her trainers. True to Form Not one to do anything on a small scale, Farah Khan, 47, celebrated her special day all day.The morning saw a cake at work and the night was spent partying with friends.

BACK TO TOLLYWOOD
After eight years of films in the South, Kamalinee Mukherjee, 31, is now back where she belongs. In Aniruddha Roy Chowdhury's relationship drama Aparajita Tumi, she plays Ushashi, a bored housewife, who seduces the family-oriented Pradeep. The Kolkata girl's tryst with Bollywood ended with her debut, Revathi's Phir Milenge (2004).

Q& M A H E K C H A H A L A "Salman Khan is a very respectable person"

YOGEN SHAH

BIGG BOSS 5 RUNNER-UP

FIRST LOOK OF THE WEEK
A poster that's a throwback to the noisy 70s and promos with a spirited woman who's totally contemporary

TARTY START
Ameesha Patel, 36, hopes turning into a screen tart will add some sparkle to an otherwise dull career. She has decided to play a high profile prostitute in her own production, a romantic thriller that is being helmed by David Dhawan. There is also Shortcut Romeo with Neil Nitin Mukesh, Abbas Mustan's Race 2 and Bhaiyyaji Superhit with Gadar co-star Sunny Deol. Plenty of films but clearly lacking the kind of attention she is craving. And desperate times call for desperate measures? After all, it did work for Kareena Kapoor, didn't it?

Mahek Chahal, 32, may not have won Bigg Boss 5, but she comes away with household fame. It's got her more attention than anything else. A link-up with host Salman Khan, a brand new fiancé, and a clutch of film offers for `character roles'. Q. A lot has been said about Salman and you. A. I am tired of hearing this. This was a controversy created by others in the house. I have worked with Salman in the past and if he was supporting me he would have done that earlier. He is a very respectable person. Q. What kind of relationship do you two share? A. I have worked with him and he is just a regular friend. I don't call or meet him every day. Q. What does your fiancé, Norway-based engineer Danish Khan think about it? A. Danish knows me for a very long time. He knows such controversies come with this profession. But he trusts me. Q. When do you two plan to marry? A. In Norway we don't marry immediately after an engagement. This is a kind of roka and we won't get married till another four-five years. Q. What do you plan to do next? A. Everyone wants a bite of you. I have a lot of film offers, not just glam doll roles but good character roles, like that of a journalist.
64
INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

VS

VS

NAME DROPPER
KAMAAL KHAN

Rowdy Rathore's handpainted poster is a throwback to the kitschy retro age. Directed by Prabhu Deva, the film stars Akshay Kumar with Sonakshi Sinha and the stars have been giving the fans tidbits from the sets, with Akshay tweeting about Sonakshi dancing to the tunes of Saroj Khan.

After the gargantuan success of The Dirty Picture Vidya Balan is ready to rock the screen with Sujoy Ghosh's Kahaani.Always reinventing herself, Balan plays the role of a pregnant woman. It's said to be a loose adaptation of cult film Kill Bill and is the fourth woman-centric film in a row for Balan. Go girl.

To Pooja Bedi "madam ji you will get 40k followers within 24hrs if you will upload a hot n sexy pic of yours. Something like Jo jeeta...."

OF THE

WEEK

"@poojabeditweets but Madam ji I grown up watching your udti huyee skirt and I am still your fan because of your do dhari Talwar beauty." "Good morning and kiss to Asin. Everything is temporary in my life only Asin is permanent."
FOTOCORP

A chance meeting with Chowdhury at a National Award ceremony brought South star Padmapriya to Kolkata for the filming of Aparajita Tumi. The army kid credits none but her greed for having brought her thus far. Her only Hindi film, Striker, hasn't helped her get a toehold in Bollywood.
by Avantika Sharma, Nishat Bari, Tithi Sarkar and Shilpa Rathnam
JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

PTI

65

