UP FRONT

by VIJAY AMRITRAJ

LET'S PLAYTENNIS TOO
started my career in tennis in the early 1970s, when also read that tennis is the second most widely watched sports itself was perceived differently. Sports had sport on television in India. There are other options as always been more of a pastime than a profession. My well, other than cricket. As for tennis, what has changed is the audience. When brother Anand and I were the first full-time national athletes in India representing any sport, including cricket. I played back then, I was playing to a crowd of 14,000 peoPeople would listen to my matches at Wimbledon on the ple at a stadium in Kolkata, which could seat only 12,000. radio, and if my match happened to be telecast on BBC, In today's age of flat screens, high-definition and Doordarshan would telecast it also. Of course, there was comfortable air-conditioned rooms with snacks, it is a harder sell to bring the viewer out. We used to have seven Test cricket and it was a big deal in the country. In the last 35-odd years, things have changed so much. grand prix events in the country; now we have sporadic For one, you can play sports professionally. There are sev- tournaments and the Aircel Chennai Open, which has eral sports channels, so it is also getting media coverage. taken place for 17 years. India is a large enough country And with growth in the business, there is growth in spon- to have more than one tournament. I believe the future of Indian tennis is bright. Great tensorship as well. In terms of sponsors, there is a lot of nis players need to have a combination of performance money going in, even if most of it is for cricket. A mistake we all make in India is comparing all sports and longevity, and our players have that. And most importo cricket. If we just say "Cricket is a religion", and take tantly, you have to be able to do what's enough to win. The greatest thing about sports when compared to the sport out of the equation, we can all move on and politics and entertainment is actually see that there is a SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com that it's all based on merit. quantum leap in sponsorEither you win or you lose. ship for other sports. Even if There are no grey areas. For 25 per cent of the sponsorIndians to perform well at ship money is left for other the world stage, we can't afsports, it can be divvied up ford to rest on the laurels of to encourage other games. a few people who have At the peak of my career, I achieved in sport. We need a would tell my good friend slew of new players, like the Sunil Gavaskar, "I wish Spanish Armada. you'd hit a century, then the Excelling in tennis repressure would be off me," quires commitment, support and he would respond "I from the family and ecowish you'd win a five-set nomic stability. One thing match, then the pressure the government can do is would be off me." At the make tennis accessible to time, it was Test cricket and children from all walks of tennis. Today, our country life. I have recommended has hosted a Formula 1 that the government install Grand Prix, a golf tournatwo public tennis courts in ment, and we have a gold every ground across the medallist shooter, a badcountry. I have sponsors minton champion and a who are ready to provide chess grandmaster. So if rackets, tennis balls and Tendulkar misses a century, help the children. If this is there's another sportsperdone, the children won't just son to pick the country up. be playing cricket and footWe can't question ball, they will be playing cricket's popularity, but we tennis as well. should see that there is a I believe the future of Indian growing interest in other tennis is bright. Great tennis sports as well. I've heard Vijay Amritraj is a former players need to have a that the audience for tennis tennis champion.The article is combination of performance and is bigger here than it is in based on his conversation the United States. I have with Lakshmi Kumaraswami. longevity. Our players have that.

I

14

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

