Spe cial Report

PUNJAB ELECTIONS
SUMEET INDER SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com BANDEEP SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

HARVESTOF INHERITANCE
Six clans dominate the political and social landscape of Punjab. Strategic marriages have ensured that no family is ever completely out of power.
By Asit Jolly

PARKASH SINGH BADAL AND SON SUKHBIR BADAL

n Punjab's feudal Jat culture, politics is a family affair, where six clans dominate the state's fortunes. Together, these wealthy, landed Jat families--the Patiala Royals, Badals of Muktsar, Majithias of Amritsar, Kairons of Tarn Taran, Brars of Sarai Naga and Manns of Sangrur have ruled over Punjab since Partition. Elections are merely a process of temporarily shifting the balance of power from one clan to the other. Inter-clan marriages have spawned political havens that ensure that no family is ever completely out of power. Like his ancestors, the current head of the Patiala clan and former chief minister, Captain Amarinder Singh, 69, has linked his fortunes to the Congress party. His father, Yadavindra Singh, first aligned with the Congress after Patiala was incorporated into the Union in 1948. If the Congress wins, Amarinder is tipped to be chief minister yet again. His rivals are 84-year-old Parkash Singh Badal, the current Chief Minister, and his 49year-old son, Sukhbir. The Badals head the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD),

I

CAPTAIN AMARINDER SINGH

the largest Sikh party and have close filial ties with the descendants of Ranjit Singh's ferocious Majithia generals. Ironically, the current line-up is reminiscent of the 19th century Anglo-Sikh Wars in which Patiala sided with the British against Maharaja Ranjit Singh's forces. It's not always war. The clans have a cordial rapport on social occasions. "Weddings offer politically divided relatives the opportunity to interact and reduce existing mutual tensions," says Amarinder's wife and UPA's junior foreign minister Preneet Kaur. At such gatherings, the distinctive turban styles of Punjab's three geographical regions--Malwa, Doaba and Majha--merge in a sea of resplendent colours. Traditionally, the Congress wears white, while the Akalis sport

navy blue. "It is an oversized kinship group," says Pramod Kumar, director of the Chandigarh-based Institute for Development & Communication. In his book, India: A Portrait, British author Patrick French says Punjab has the highest number of hereditary politicians in India, with over 76 per cent of the current MPs being dynasts. Amarinder agrees that "politics has become a business for some families".

Royal Challenge
The flamboyant Amarinder sees himself as the "first serious politician" in Patiala's erstwhile royal family. His father Maharaja Yadavindra Singh preferred sports and diplomacy to politics. But Amarinder's mother, Mohinder Kaur, 90, was an active politician. She was elected to the Lok

Sabha from Patiala on a Congress(O) ticket and later switched sides, joining the Janata Party government in 1977, after the Emergency. Like all political scions, the Captain says families only help in giving an aspiring politician the initial leg-up. "Today, people across Malwa, Doaba and Majha acknowledge me as a leader, not because of who I am, but because I have worked hard to win their loyalty," he says.

Amarinder's transition from royalty and army life to politics came about in 1980, after he was elected to the Lok Sabha from Patiala. He resigned from Parliament in 1984 in protest against Operation Bluestar, but maintained his association with the Nehru-Gandhi family. He joined the SAD and was a minister in the S.S. Barnala Government from 1985-86. Subsequently, he floated his own party --Akali Dal Panthic, to contest the 1992 Assembly polls. He

Punjab has the highest number of hereditary politicians in India,with over 76 per cent of the current MPs being dynasts.Politics has become a business for some families here

later rejoined the Congress in 1999 and led it to victory in the 2002 Punjab Assembly elections. The Captain's success, particularly as chief minister for five years till 2007, gave a boost to other family members. His wife, the elegant Preneet, 66, is a third-time MP from Patiala. Their son, Raninder Singh, 44, has charisma but no political success. He lost the 2009 Lok Sabha poll from Bathinda, which was a high profile battle of the clans, as the Badals fielded Sukhbir's feisty wife Harsimrat against him. Raninder is now contesting from Samana seat. Amarinder's brother Malvinder, 67, had fancied himself as the Congress candidate from Samana. An upset Malvinder has since quit the Congress and joined the SAD. He blames Preneet for influencing the ticket distribution in

46

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

47

Spe cial Report

PUNJAB ELECTIONS
Temple in June 1984. "That was our turning point," he says. However the Majithas have not broken all ties with the Congress. "My cousin is married to Maharaj sahib's (Amarinder) daughter Jaya," said Bikramjit. The Badal-Majithia alliance was a consolidation of both power and wealth. It amalgamated the substantial fortunes of Harsimrat's father Satyajit Majithia, owner of the rich Saraya Group, with interests in sugar, liquor and aviation, with those of the Badals. Political weddings are aplenty in Punjab. The Kairons were traditionally Congress till Pratap Singh Kairon's grandson Adesh Pratap married into the Badal dynasty. Family patriarch Pratap Singh Kairon was a close associate of Nehru and United Punjab's dynamic chief minister for eight years till 1964. Adesh is an MLA from SAD and the minister for food and supplies. He changed the family's politics after he married Parkash Badal's daughter, Parneet Kaur, 51, in 1982. However, he has strained relations with his brother-in-law and is tipped as the next rebel in the family after Sukhbir's estranged cousin Manpreet Badal quit the party in October 2010. Manpreet was the Chief Minister's favourite nephew. It was his uncle who inducted him into politics in 1995 on his return home from London University. Manpreet was the finance minister in the Badal government. But differences with his headstrong cousin Sukhbir forced him to quit and float his own party, Peoples' Party of Punjab (PPP). Manpreet claims he will shun dynastic politics and his father, Gurdas Badal, would not be part of the government if his party came to power. Gurdas is pitted against his brother Parkash Singh Badal in the Lambi constituency. The latest Badal on the block is his 17-year-old son Arjun. Manpreet's wife Veenu Badal says, "Arjun is getting a firm grounding in the election arena." On an extended winter vacation from his school in Connecticut, USA, Arjun is campaigning for the the PPP. Come January 30, Punjab's family feuds would once again be played out on the electoral battlefield. I

PUNJAB'S RULING FAMILIES
Marriages, mergers, acquisitions. It's all there in the six clans that control the state's politics. Surjit Singh Majithia
(1912-1995)
D E P U T Y D E F E N C E M I N I S T E R (1952)

Bhupinder Singh
brother
(1891-1938)
M A H A R A J A , P A T I A L A (1900-1938)

Pratap Singh Kairon
(1901-1965)
C H I E F M I N I S T E R (1956-64)

Jaswant Singh Kairon
(1902-1987)
COMMUNIST PARTY MEMBER

Yadavindra Singh
(1913-1974)
M A H A R A J A , P A T I A L A (1938-74)

BADALS
P.S. BADAL
CM, SAD

MAJITHIAS
SATYAJIT MAJITHIA

KAIRONS
SURINDER KAIRON GURINDER KAIRON

BRARS
GURBINDER KAUR BRAR (H.S. Brar, husband)

PATIALA ROYALS
AMARINDER SINGH
EX - CM , C ON GR E S S

MANNS
S.S. MANN, Former MP, SAD (Geetinder, wife)

GURDAS BADAL

MALVINDER SINGH (Harpriya, wife)

(Preneet, wife) PARNEET SUKHBIR, Deputy CM
MANPREET
PPP President

sisters
EMANN SINGH

HARSIMRAT, MP, SAD

BIKRAMJIT

KANWARJIT (Karan, wife)

BABLI

RANINDER

JAYAINDER

married married
ADESHPRATAP

sisters

BIKRAMJIT SINGH MAJITHIA

ADESH PRATAP SINGH

favour of her son. "What party I choose is not relevant," he declared, while announcing his move to the SAD. "My mother was with the BJP and my brother is in the Congress. I can just as well be part of the Akali Dal," Malvinder said. Another powerful family from south-western Punjab is the Brar clan. In the early 1950s, Pratap Singh Kairon's niece, Gurbinder Kaur, married Harcharan Singh Brar, the rich young heir of Sarai Naga in Muktsar district. Brar later became Punjab's chief minister from the Congress for a

brief period, following the assassination of Beant Singh in August 1995. Daughter Babli lost to Sukhbir Badal in the 1996 Lok Sabha polls in Faridkot, while her brother Kanwarjit Singh (Sunny Brar) was elected MLA in 1977. Sunny 's wife Karan is the present Congress nominee from Muktsar, as a `personal reward' from Sonia Gandhi, as she had taken on Sukhbir Badal in 2004 Lok Sabha polls. The extended family has also benefited from Punjab's feudal patronage. Closely related to the Patiala Royals

and former external affairs minister K. Natwar Singh (Amarinder's brotherin-law), businessman Arvind Khanna started out in SAD, but joined Congress shortly after, to contest the 2002 Assembly polls from Sangrur. He lost the 2004 Lok Sabha polls, but bounced back as Amarinder's principal adviser for the upcoming Assembly elections. Khanna is the Congress candidate from Dhuri, even though he was chargesheeted by the CBI in a foreign exchange case and the family name had cropped up in the 2004 Oil for Food scandal, involving Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein.

It's not alwayswar.The clans have a cordial rapport on social occasions.Weddings offer politicallydivided relatives the opportunityto interact and reduce existing mutual tensions.
T S BEDI

PRABHJOT GILL

T S BEDI

S.S. MANN

Defenders of the Faith
The politics of inheritance is equally strong in the rival camp. Ever since the 1990s, Parkash Singh Badal has been grooming his son Sukhbir to inherit his mantle. Sukhbir is now the deputy chief minister. In 1991, Sukhbir strengthened his political clout by marrying Harsimrat, 45, the granddaughter of Surjit Singh Majithia, who was India's deputy defence minister in prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru's govern-

SUNNY BRAR

ment in 1952. The pro-Congress Majithias used this new alliance to switch political sides and threw their weight behind SAD. Harsimrat's younger brother, Bikramjit Majithia, 36, is the president

of the SAD youth wing and more importantly, Sukhbir's most trusted aide. Bikramjit says the Majithia clan parted ways with the Congress after former prime minister Indira Gandhi ordered the army into the Golden

48

T S BEDI

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

49

NEW

NEW

