Leisure
FA S H I O N BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

SOUTHERN SIZZLE
Director Mani Ratnam's search for a leading lady has finally come to an end. After months of scouring the industry, the director has zeroed in on 24-year-old Tollywood actress Samantha Ruth Prabhu for his next venture, Pookadai. The film will see Prabhu starring opposite Kollywood actor Karthik's son, Gautham, in a film set in a coastal village. While this will be Gautham's debut, Samantha has already created waves in the Telugu film industry with successful films like Brindavanam and Dooduku and her debut Ye Maaya Chesave. Looks like Sam will soon be a Kollywood darling as well.
G. VENKET RAM

COMEBACK

We expected retirement, and OF THE a baby, but Shilpa Shetty announced a film instead--her first as producer with husband Raj Kundra."Happy Makar Sankranti tweetos. It's an auspicious day so we did the 1st mahurat shot of Dishkiyaaoon today," she tweeted.

WEEK

GETTY IMAGES

WEEK WRAP-UP

THE HIGHS AND THE LOWS
A.R. RAHMAN A religious forum has asked A.R. Rahman to apologise for using their sacred word Hosanna in a love song. Is nothing sacred? JOHNNY DEPP Johnny Depp has separated from girlfriend of 14 years, Vanessa Paradis. The couple has two kids: Lily-Rose, 12, and Jack, 9.
YOGEN SHAH

ANURAG KASHYAP The dark knight of indie cinema has been selected to represent Bollywood at the Jameson Empire Awards in London. JAY-Z The rapper vowed not to use slang in his songs. He dropped the word "bitch" from a song after the birth of his daughter Blue Ivy Carter.

Star Kid
Diksha Basu, author of Opening Night, a new book on chasing Bollywood dreams, is the daughter of India's Chief Economic Advisor Kaushik Basu. And she happens to be a Cornell University graduate with a double major in economics and French, no less. Like her protagonist Naiya Kapur, Basu came to Mumbai from New York City with starry ambitions and has acted in two plays, TV show Mumbai Calling and film, A Decent Arrangement. What's next is anybody's guess.


Heir Times
Though behind the camera,another son will rise in Bollywood: Mukesh Bhatt's son Vishesh Bhatt,27,who will join Vishesh Films.An NYU graduate,Bhatt Junior comes prepared.He has worked on Raaz, Murder 2, Gangster and Jannat."I want to take it slow and not jump on the publicity bandwagon," he says.Hard to do if your uncle is Mahesh Bhatt,who hasn't met a PR strategy he didn't like.
74

Compiled by Avantika Sharma,

Volume XXXVII Number 5; For the week January 24-30, 2012, released on January 23

Nishat Bari, Shilpa Rathnam, Prachi Rege and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

