LADAKH

419 incursions

Nei ghbours CHINA
AP

2010-11 J&K TRIG HEIGHT DEMCHOK BARAHOTI

By Saurabh Shukla

classified Intelligence Bureau (IB) document blasts the Government's own claims of peace with China. Almost 750 incidents of intrusion by Chinese forces have been recorded along the border with China between 2010 and 2011. As many as 419 intrusions have been reported from the Ladakh region in Jammu and Kashmir. The IB document, The Border Review, in November 2011, meant for internal circulation, says, "During the month, there were 20 incidents of LAC violations by the Chinese. During the current year, 323 transgessions were reported: western sector­194, middle sector­9 and eastern sector­120. In the corresponding period, in 2010, there were 325 intrusions; 224 in the western sector, 111 in the middle and 90 in the eastern sector in Arunachal." (see box) The revelation comes against the backdrop of India-China talks to resolve boundary issues. Special interlocutor for the Indian Government and National Security Adviser Shivshankar Menon met his Chinese counterpart Dai Bingguo on January 16 and the talks focused on areas like bilateral trade. Even in the state of Uttarakhand, there have been 120 intrusions from the Barahoti area while in the eastern sector, 210 incursions were reported in the past two years. This, in a state considered the least contentious of all areas between the two nations. Intelligence agencies say Chinese soldiers entered disputed areas and in some cases constructed bunkers and hoisted Chinese flags. The note says that in November 2011, India raised the issue of the construction of a trench by the Chinese inside Indian territory at Spangkur, Ladakh, in two successive meetings between officials of both countries. Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah flagged the issue to the Centre. According to another internal report sent by the IB--accessed by INDIA TODAY--to the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) in November, Chinese troops intruded 7 km inside Indian ter-

A

ENTER THE DRAGON
China has stepped up incursions into India over the past two years.
CHINA TIBET

ARUNACHAL PRADESH/ SIKKIM

210 incursions
2010-11

UTTARAKHAND

120 incursions
2010-11 NEPAL

INDIA

BHUTAN ASAPHILA

CHINA INTRUSION ROUTES WESTERN SECTOR MIDDLE SECTOR EASTERN SECTOR

SUMDORONG CHU TAWANG

BELLIGERENT ON THE BORDER
Intelligence Bureau report exposes intrusions by China, demolishes India's claims of peace with its neighbour
ritory. On August 15, 2011, 44 Chinese soldiers set up tents 3 km inside Indian territory in the Asaphila area of Arunachal Pradesh. "Through increased incursions, China is seeking to pin down the Indian Army along the Himalayas. Beijing uses border talks with New Delhi as a cover to step up military pressure on India and strategically encircle it," says strategic analyst Brahma Chellaney. Though South Block continues to underplay the intrusions, experts view these as evidence of increasing Chinese assertiveness. The note also warns that youths in border areas of Arunachal Pradesh are being given arms training and free rations along with the option of joining the Chinese army. The skirmishes between patrols of the two sides are also on the rise. The note mentions a clash between the Indian and Chinese forces in Ladakh on December 20. On September 2, there was another clash at the Thakung post on the Sino-Indian boundary in the western sector (Jammu and Kashmir). "These intru-

CHINESE STATE COUNCILLOR DAI BINGGUO (LEFT) WITH NATIONAL SECURITYADVISER SHIVSHANKAR MENON

Games They Play
A Government report accessed by INDIA TODAY shows a dominant dragon "During the month of November 2011, there were 20 incidents of LAC violation by the Chinese; western sector­14 (Pangong Tso12, Demchok-1 and Dotetango-1) and eastern sector­6 (Dichu area). During 2011, 323 transgessions were reported, western sector­194, middle sector­9 and eastern sector­120. In the corresponding period in 2010, there were 325 intrusions, 224 in the western sector, 111 in the middle and 90 in the eastern sector."

sions are tactically provocative but strategically timed to keep India on a certain level of dis-equilibrium," says strategic analyst Commodore (retired) C. Uday Bhaskar. Highly-placed government sources say that in September there was tension between New Delhi and Beijing when China complained that Indian forces had destroyed a Chinese surveillance post in the western sector in Ladakh. Beijing flooded New Delhi with strongly-worded demarches and also summoned Indian envoy S. Jaishankar. India was left with little choice but to order a high level probe. Top officers of the Indian patrolling forces were summoned by Menon over the incident. "We feared they were creating a situation like the one that triggered the 1962 war," says a government source. A report compiled by the Joint Intelligence Committee, the national

security adviser and senior government officials in December, warned that China was planning military bases in Pakistan. The report said the Chinese wantedto set up a base in the federallyadministred tribal areas of northern Pakistan, besides a base in Gwadar, near Karachi. The report suggests that though it may not be politically feasible for Pakistan to openly allow China to set up military bases on its soil, it might allow China to use its military facilities without any public announcement. While China continues to make its moves, New Delhi needs to develop a strategic spine. India's interventions have been a mix of hot and cold, but Beijing continues to view India as a soft state. Even 50 years after the 1962 war, the prospect of history repeating itself cannot be ruled out. 

50

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

51

