Cover Story PAKISTAN

GREED VS GUNS
Corrupt politicians and power-hungry generals turn Pakistan into vendetta land
By Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad

and Sandeep Unnithan t 8.30 pm on Saturday, January 14, Pakistan President Asif Ali Zardari's spokesman Farhatullah Babar issued a cryptic one-line statement. President Zardari and army chief General Asfaq Parvez Kayani had "discussed the security situation" at Islamabad's sprawling 20acre President House. The full truth was something else. During the hour-long meeting that began at 6 pm, Zardari had just deflected another coup. He promised to dump his most important loyalist Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani. On January 11, Pakistan came as close to a coup as in 1998 when Pervez Musharraf overthrew Nawaz Sharif. The Pakistan army was enraged. Kayani was livid. Prime Minister Gilani had accused him of violating the consti-

A
PRESIDENT ASIF ALI ZARDARI

tution by directly testifying before the Supreme Court in the Memogate case. He then also refused to withdraw his remarks. The infamous `memo' despatched by the Pakistan's civilian government in July last year sought US assistance against the Pakistan army. The generals described the memo as treason and went to court. Kayani's homework for Plan B was in place. This would not be a garden-variety coup with a military ruler running the country. Kayani would put in place a national government of non-Pakistan People's Party (PPP) parties. The Pakistan army as an institution and the Bhuttos as a family have never been comfortable with each other. Vendetta has been part of their heritage. But vendetta in order to succeed must find an opportunity. Zardari's corruption and his insidious appeal to a foreign country against Pakistan's army, was reason enough for a perfect storm. The cause simmered in the Supreme Court which ordered an investigation into
GENERALASHFAQ PARVEZ KAYANI
Photographs by GETTY IMAGES, AFP Photo imaging by SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

Cover Story PAKISTAN ENDGAME IN PAKISTAN
Zardari's well known Swiss bank accounts in 2009. Gilani, who took his orders from Zardari and not the Supreme Court, had done nothing. Having bought time from the Pakistan army, the wily Zardari thought he did not have to live up to the promise. Gilani stayed on. The Supreme Court was bent upon prosecuting Zardari for his alleged Swiss bank accounts. On January 16, the court issued contempt proceedings against the prime minister for refusing to write to Swiss authorities to re-open graft cases against Zardari. Gilani could be dismissed or jailed for up to five years. A contempt notice is sufficient cause for resignation. But Gilani was obdurate. No one leaves power in Pakistan unless dragged out of office either by public opinion or at gunpoint. He decorated his language with excuses, "Zulfiqar and Nusrat Bhutto also appeared in courts," he said. On January 19, Gilani mobilised the party. As his white Toyota Prado swung into the Supreme Court porch, supporters showered him with flower petals and key PPP leaders Hina Rabbani Khar, Interior Minister Rehman Malik and alliance leader Shujaat Hussain of the PML(Q) gave him moral support. Inside the courtroom, he was humility personified. In chaste Urdu, he conveyed his respect for the court and firmly reiterated his stance: the President is immune from prosecution. The case has now been postponed to February 1. But this is only a temporary respite for Pakistan's most famous odd couple, Zardari and Gilani. Parallel crises are travelling like acid through the Pakistan establishment, corroding its credibility and mincing its ability to govern. Memogate, also being investigated by the Supreme Court, is at a crucial juncture. Mansoor Ijaz, a colourful US businessman of Pakistani origin is

GOVERNMENT ASIFALI ZARDARI
Has indicated he will sacrifice premier to save the government.

Zardari's four-year-old regime faces threats from a host of adversaries ARMY Lt-Gen Ahmad Shuja Pasha DG ISI and
Kayani's chief trouble shooter.

YOUSUF RAZA GILANI
Prime minister and vocal opponent of army interference.

Husain Haqqani
Pakistan's ambassador to US who quit after Memogate.

OPPOSITION Imran Khan
Rising star, could be force to reckon with in polls later this year.

ITTAKES THREE TO TANGO
The clash of institutions is an endemic problem
PAKISTAN is seeing a 21st-century version of its lifelong problem of MADIHA SATTAR clash-of-instiEditor, The Herald tutions. This time it involves a military that is frustrated but unwilling to topple a government directly, a Supreme Court that feels slighted but has fought to uphold democracy, and an executive with a persecution complex bent upon preserving its independence. Over the last couple of weeks the three players--or two sides, rather--have been taking dramatic jabs but not going in for the kill. That alone marks a step forward from the past. If the country makes it to the next general elections, they will mark a turning point in its history.

Gen Ashfaq Parvez Kayani Believed to be
tacitly backing Imran Khan of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf.

Nawaz Sharif
Former prime minister. His PML-N controls Punjab province.

Lt-Gen Naeem Khalid Lodhi (retd) Defence
secretary who was fired by Gilani.

Mansoor Ijaz
Memogate witness. Plans to testify before Supreme Court

JUDICIARY Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry Chief
Justice. Leading Memogate probe.

General Pervez Musharraf Former
military ruler. Wants to return to contest elections.

 
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Memogate's whistleblower. The current government and army face-off began on January 9, when Gilani publicly chastised Kayani's December 15 deposition before the Memogate commission appointed by the Supreme Court to probe Ijaz's allegations. In an interview to a Chinese news agency, Gilani was bold enough to say that Kayani had violated the constitution by bypassing him. He also sacked the defence secretary, Lt-General (retd) Naeem Khalid Lodhi, for "gross misconduct" after the latter told the commission that the government did not have operational control over the

With the economy growing at less than 3 per cent, the country is leading an International Monetary Fund handout-to-mouth existence. Anger against the government, particularly Zardari, is perceptible.
24
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

Pakistan Army and the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI). War had broken out. With the Supreme Court battling on behalf of the army, Gilani faced uncomfortable questions during his ten-minute January 19 appearance before the Supreme Court. He may have postponed Judgement Day but not escaped it. "If immunity was the reason for not proceeding against Zardari, why was it not conveyed two years ago when the Supreme Court had first quashed the 2007 National Reconciliation Ordinance (NRO)?" a judge asked. Under the controversial 2007 ordnance former president Pervez Musharraf gave immunity to politicians, including the late PPP chairperson Benazir Bhutto and her husband Zardari. A majority of these charges relate to Zardari's questionable role during the two tenures of Benazir Bhutto as prime minister between 1988 and

1990 and again between 1993 and 1996. Zardari allegedly siphoned kickbacks on government contracts, earning the dubious sobriquet of `Mister Ten Per Cent'. A report prepared by Pakistan's secret agencies estimates that the Bhutto family allegedly stashed away more than $1.5 billion (Rs 7,500 crore) in Swiss bank accounts. Close aides of Zardari term him a person of "great lust" for whom "money is everything". He owns mansions on either side of the English channel. The 365-acre Rockwood estate with a $6.5 million (Rs 32.5 crore) mansion and two farms in Surrey, Britain, and a 16th century chateau in Normandy, France. But it is two specific charges of corruption--a Swiss money-laundering inquiry and a British civil case--that continue to haunt the Zardari presidency. In 2003, a Swiss magistrate declared he had evidence against Zardari and Bhutto after

pursuing a money trail from offshore companies in the Caribbean to banks in Geneva to a jewellery shop. The judge convicted Zardari and Bhutto of money laundering in absentia. He connected Zardari to a chain of corruption cases that began with two Swiss firms which funnelled $11.9 million (Rs 59.5 crore) in bribes to bank accounts in Geneva via three offshore firms in the British Virgin Islands. Opposition parties feel that the only route back to stability is another general election. Zardari's opponents are closing in. In November, former prime minister Nawaz Sharif, Zardari's erstwhile ally, urged the Supreme Court to set up the nine-member panel to investigate Memogate. Former cricketer and Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf chief Imran Khan, whose political fortunes are on the ascent after a spate of wellattended national rallies, backed the judiciary and accused the Zardari-led

THE GOVERNMENT was getting into a conflict with state institutions only to divert the masses' attention from the National Reconciliation Ordinance implementation and Memogate case. It is time for the politicians to unite and thwart attempts to derail the political process. The incumbent government has crossed all limits and to save the skin of its leadership, it even ignored the country's vital national interests. We fully back the Supreme Court's decision to issue a contempt of court notice to Prime Minister Gilani. The government should have implemented the AFTAB KHAN SHERPAO court orders in Former minister true spirit.  

NEW

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

25

Cover Story PAKISTAN
DELIBERATE ATTEMPTTO INCITE ACOUP
MY party, the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, and I fully back the court decisions. The IMRAN KHAN Zardari-led govPolitician ernment will have to obey the Supreme Court's decision; it will have to face the music otherwise. The incumbent government came to power through the National Reconciliation Ordinance and tried to hide its theft of billions of rupees. The Court has issued contempt of court notice to the prime minister because he did not fulfil his responsibilities. The supreme thing is the Constitution, not parliament. The only way to bring the country out of the quicksand is by holding early elections. The government must step down and let the people decide.   THE ELECTED
government was deliberately provoking a military coup. AHMED QURAISHI And the Defence analyst Pakistani Army is trying to avoid it by all means. Key government officials are subject to allegations of legitimate corruption cases in President Asif Ali Zardari's case and a national security breach case involving his close aide and former Pakistani envoy to the United States Husain Haqqani. The Pakistani government has concluded it will lose these cases and that it's better to pick a fight with the military, incite a coup and come out as pro-democracy martyrs. It would help them secure American support and help in escaping to Dubai, London and New York to plot how to destabilise the country.
(FROM LEFT) ZARDARI, GILANI, THEN FOREIGN MINISTER SHAH MAHMOOD QURESHI AND KAYANI AT A MEETING IN 2009

KEY INSTITUTIONS are near collapse. It is the result of the obstinate approach of President Asif Ali Zardari, who has literally dictated to the party despite advice given by senior Pakistan Peoples Party legal experts and leaders like Aitzaz Ahsan to obey the orders of Supreme Court. The prime minister must respect the rule of law. He should not challenge the Supreme Court, rather apologise to it and implement its orders by writing to the Swiss court to open cases against Zardari. If he does not, he will undermine the rule of law and the supreme constitutional institution that guarantees a democratic dispensation. He should avoid playing into the S.M. QURESHI hands of political adventurists. Ex-foreign minister   THE CIVILIAN government knows well that it has done nothing for the common man over the course of its tenure. It has done nothing except mint money, indulge in corruption and destroy institutions. It is deliberately dragging the Pakistan Army into a fight with it as a diversion from real issues confronting the nation. The Pakistani government should have implemented the Supreme Court verdict in true spirit; rather, it has ignited a fight with the army just to earn the sympathy of the masses in view of the forthcoming general elections. It is nothing but an underhand tactic. Early elections must be called to let the Pakistani people chose their SHIREEN M. MAZARI future Geostrategist government.  
government of hiding "its theft of billions of rupees". "The only way to pull the country out of this quicksand is to step down and announce early elections," he said. The media made known its distaste for a fourth military takeover. "Not another coup, please" screamed an editorial in one of the country's most influential newspapers, The Express Tribune, dated January 12. Across the country, TV programmes and editorials echoed the sentiment. With the economy growing at less than 3 per cent, the country is leading an International Monetary Fund hand-tomouth existence. Power cuts are endemic and inflation high. Anger against the government, particularly Zardari, is perceptible. "When Mister Ten Per Cent has become Mister 100 Per Cent, we can't progress like our neighbours. We have to get rid of him and his corrupt associates," says Shazia Sultan, a working woman in Islamabad. She, however, strongly opposes a military coup. With mounting hatred for the US
AP

A Swiss money-laundering inquiry and a British civil case have long haunted the Zardari presidency. A Swiss judge in 2003 convicted him and wife Benazir Bhutto of money laundering in absentia.
over drone strikes, there is scarce public support for the government over Memogate. A popular SMS doing the rounds reads, "America ka jo yaar hai, gaddar hi gaddar hai" (A friend of America is a traitor). The implication: Zardari had betrayed the nation by seeking foreign help. The overseas troika of China, US and Saudi Arabia, key players in Pakistan's stability, kept a low profile. A US envoy who attempted to visit Pakistan during the ongoing crisis was snubbed, indicating Washington's diminishing leverage with its ally. There are indications that Zardari's frequent trips to Dubai may have to do with secret meetings with the powerful Saudi royals. Back home, Zardari has managed a shaky truce with Kayani and the Pakistan army. The military has reciprocated. On January 19, former military ruler General Musharraf said he was delaying his plans to return to Pakistan. ISI chief Lt General Pasha conveyed the army chief's discomfiture at Musharaff's return, at a secret rendezvous in Dubai. Political analysts say the threat of a coup has receded for now. The principal reason for Kayani's unwillingness is popular resentment. This is a check on the army. "General Kayani is fully aware that the international environment no longer favours military coups and he could be very easily isolated if

 
26
INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

he topples the civilian government," says political analyst S. Iftikhar Murshed. Yet, the enormous stakes for both civilian and military rulers will ensure the tensions remain. "Both Zardari and Kayani are riding tigers," says an Indian intelligence analyst who asked not to be named. "If Zardari blinks, the military will overwhelm his government. If Kayani stands down, the army's invisible control over the civilian government suffers," he says. Both Kayani and Zardari inherited blood-soaked legacies. With the 2008 departure into exile of Musharraf, Zardari inherited the political mantle of his assassinated wife Bhutto and led the PPP to a landslide victory in February 2008; Kayani acquired Musharraf's legacy of extracting aid from the US to fight an internal insurrection in Pakistan's lawless northern frontier. He was to also maintain the pace of a blistering conventional and nuclear arms race for strategic parity with arch-rival India. Both Zardari and Kayani are now fighting a desperate endgame for survival. Both have less than a year to go before the end of their tenures: Kayani retires and Zardari faces general elections later this year. That is where the similarities end. Zardari, the playboy scion of a Sindhi feudal family, soared to prominence after his 1987 marriage to Bhutto. Kayani, the oldest son of a noncommissioned officer from Gujjar Khan, Rawalpindi, rose through hard work and, some would say, proximity to Musharraf. Commissioned into the army three months before the December 1971 war with India, the high point of the chain-smoking, introverted Kayani's tenure as spy chief was brokering a political deal with Bhutto in 2007, one that paved the way for her return to Pakistan in December that year. Zardari and Kayani first came into contact when the latter was Benazir Bhutto's deputy military secretary during her second tenure as PM. It is not known whether Kayani had anything to do with Zardari's 2004 release after an eight-year prison sentence for corruption. After Bhutto's assassination in December 2007, the ambitious Zardari donned the Bhutto legacy. He ap-

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

27

NEW

Cover Story PAKISTAN
AFP

JUDGE DREAD A

Chaudhry has put the fear of judiciary into the executive
achieved the opposite, turning the judiciary into an extra-constitutional monster answerable to none. "The current tension in Pakistan between Zardari and the judiciary is the direct result of unconstitutional judicial activism and aggression by Iftikhar Chaudhry," journalist Bilal Qureishi writes in Foreign Policy Blogs. Appointed chief justice by then president Pervez Musharraf in May 2005, Chaudhry was suspended two years later on charges of corruption and nepotism. A Supreme Court order four months later reinstated him. Musharraf once again suspended him in 2007 and imposed an emergency after placing him under house arrest. The chief justice became the rallying force against the Musharraf government. Nationwide protests led to the

ccepting a medal of freedom from Harvard Law School Association in November 2008, Pakistan's Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, 64, outlined Pakistan judiciary's struggle to end its enslavement by the executive: "Pakistan's gun has a history of winning over Pakistani law. The law should win over the gun." For decades, Pakistan's judiciary remained under the thumb of its military and civilian rulers. Now, Pakistan's Supreme Court, pursuing twin cases against the Asif Ali Zardari-Yousuf Raza Gilani government, has Pakistan's president and prime minister under its thumb. On his watch, Pakistan's judiciary is now acting as a check on the executive. Critics, however, say Chaudhry has

IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY

lifting of the emergency. Once again, the chief justice was restored to his post. Many believe that it was the strength of his reputation which brought political parties, civil society and judiciary out on the streets. Chaudhry can often be seen advising bureaucrats and officials not to follow the illegal orders of their superiors and instead abide by their conscience and the law. Critics, however, accuse him of being biased against the democratic government and collaborating with army to create hurdles for the incumbent government. His supporters however insist he is doing his duty. "The judicial revolution triggered by Justice Chaudhary is irreversible," says Roedad Khan, a former federal secretary. Chaudhry steps down as chief justice on December 11, 2013. The civilian government can breathe easy only then.
by Qaswar Abbas

A debilitating insurgency has killed over 3,500 soldiers in the past decade, more than in all its four wars with neighbour India. The decade-long War on Terror has cost Pakistan over $17 billion.
cally and politically strong Pakistan. Since his 2008 takeover, however, Pakistan has teetered on a precipice. A debilitating insurgency has killed over 3,500 soldiers in the past decade, more than in all its four wars with India. The Pakistan Economic Survey says the decade-long War on Terror has cost the nation over $17 billion (Rs 85,000 crore). It notes: "Pakistan had never witnessed such devastating social and economic upheaval, even after dismemberment of the country by war." As the Obama administration struck with drones and prodded the Pakistan Army deeper into the hinterland, Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan bombers killed over 4,600 persons over the past decade and maimed over 10,000. A 2009 suicide attack on Army Headquarters in Rawalpindi showed even the military wasn't safe. "You can't keep snakes in your backyard and expect them only to bite your neighbours," US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said tersely in Islamabad last October as the US openly accused Pakistan of playing a double game. Relations with the civilian government first developed cracks after the May 2, 2011 raid by US special forces that killed Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad. Kayani travelled around his garrisons to directly address a shaken army. Zardari's government took this to mean a coup was imminent and reached out to the US. The tremors from these revelations could return to rock Pakistan's eggshell democracy.
With Saurabh Shukla in Islamabad

THE GREATGAME THEORY
THERE IS no fear
of a coup by the Pakistan army but tensions between the NASIM ZEHRA civilian governJournalist ment and the military are at an unprecedented high indeed. On the Memogate affair, the army, under immense internal pressure since the Abbottabad operation by US Navy Seals to kill Osama bin Laden, is determined to see a full inquiry through the judicial commission. This contrasts with the government's position that a parliamentary inquiry would suffice. The judiciary and the army appear to stand together while the government is using Parliament, Cabinet and political forces to fight back. The current situation is untenable. Something's gotta give.

THIS MONTH'S circus has three major players--the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP), the Pakistan Army General Headquarters (GHQ) and the Supreme Court (SC). Whenever I don't fully understand what the players are doing, I fall back to my favourite `Game Theory': the PPP, the GHQ and the SC are all interested parties facing a `competitive situation' whereby each and every one of them determines its own `optimal course of action' . Each and every one of the three entities acts to maximise its own individual gains by anticipating the responses to its actions by one or FARRUKH SALEEM other players Political analyst in the game.

 

 

pointed his son Bilawal as party chief while ruling as regent-President. Musharraf passed the mantle of army chief to Kayani in late 2007, a man without personal or political ambitions. Under Musharraf, the army had begun attracting ridicule. Lawyers protested the removal of Chief Justice Chaudhry with banners that read "Ae watan ke sajeele Genrallo; saaray ruqbey tumhare liye hain (O handsome generals, all the plots are just for you)", a cruel spin on a 1965 patriotic song. Kayani was the first ISI chief to be made army chief, a violation of an unwritten law in the Pakistan military. It is thought that a former ISI Director General's deep ties with politics and involvement in national security could lead him to misuse his authority as chief. In 2008, when Musharraf was forced out of office and into exile, Kayani ended Musharraf's practice of posting serving army officers to civilian departments. He gave the example of a militarily strong Soviet Union collapsing while emphasising on an economi-

28

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

NEW

