Signature
B O T T O M

by DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

SUCCESSION OFTHE BEST
he final act of the farcical drama surrounding Army Chief General V. K. Singh's T correct date of birth is set to be played out in the venerable Supreme Court. Even if the final judgment goes against the defiant Singh, their lordships must firmly reject the defence ministry's reported argument that Singh should retire in 2012, not in 2013, simply in order to preserve the "line of succession". Surely, only monarchies, and the Congress party, follow predetermined lines of succession to top jobs. In any merit-based, competitive and open society, like we aspire to be in India, the best must succeed. According to the defence ministry, Lt General Bikram Singh, the Eastern Army commander, is first in line to be the next army chief. He will be the seniormost by a whisker, a twist of fate more than anything else. Lt General Shankar Ghosh, the Western Army commander, who was recruited to the army six months before Bikram, happens to retire on the same day as the incumbent chief. Had Ghosh been born in June 1952 instead of May 1952, he would have beaten Bikram to the top job. Another contender, Lt General K.T. Parnaik, the Northern Army commander, was commissioned into the army in the same batch as Bikram. However, 40 years ago, Parnaik performed worse than Bikram in their military academy examinations. He was therefore destined to be junior to him, no matter how they performed in service. Ironically, Bikram did not top his graduating batch at the Indian Military Academy. He was ranked 11th. If all that matters in determining promotions is seniority at the time of graduation, why were the top 10 officers retired early? In any system which respects merit and does not blindly discriminate on the basis of age, both Ghosh and Parnaik would be considered on equal footing with Bikram for the top Army job. Bikram Singh deserves to be Chief if he's the best among the top four or five generals, not because he is marginally younger than one, and 80 graduation ranks higher than another. The same logic applies to the civilian bureaucracy as well. The only reason Ajit Kumar Seth rose to the position of cabinet secretary in July last year was because he topped his IAS batch in 1974 and happened to be the senior most bureaucrat at the time K.M. Chandrasekhar demitted office. His career profile does not suggest that he had done enough to merit the job as head of the civil service. He did not preside over any Union ministry as a secretary. He was not chief secretary of his home state. His only stint as joint secretary at the Centre was in the insignificant Ministry of Textiles. Many of his batchmates had more distinguished careers but were denied the top job because of an examination result in 1974. The Government has shown occasionally that it does reward merit over seniority. Shivshankar Menon `superseded' a number of seniors to become foreign secretary in 2006. He deserved to. He had a most distinguished career and had served as ambassador to Pakistan, China and Sri Lanka, crucial prerequisites for the top MEA job. The Government needs to promote merit more often than it does, if it is at all serious about administrative reform. The country will be better off when the best beat the rest.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

ONLY MONARCHIES, AND THE CONGRESS PARTY, FOLLOW PREDETERMINED LINES OF SUCCESSION TO TOP JOBS. IN ANY MERIT-BASED, COMPETITIVE AND OPEN SOCIETY, LIKE WE ASPIRE TO BE IN INDIA, THE BEST MUST SUCCEED.

S I G N P O STS
WON A gold, by Abhinav Bindra, in the 10-metre air rifle event at the Asian Shooting Championships in Doha. The Beijing Olympics gold medallist BINDRA beat reigning Asian Games gold medallist Zhu Qinan of China.

DOWNGRADED Sovereign ratings of nine Eurozone countries by rating agency Standard and Poor's. The sovereign ratings of France, Malta, Austria, Slovakia and Slovenia were lowered by a notch, while that of Cyprus, Italy, Portugal and Spain were lowered by two notches. The move has reignited concerns

over the fiscal sustainability of the region. MILESTONE India poliofree as no case has been recorded in 12 months-- the longest ever. Bill Gates, of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, described it as a major milestone in the global fight against polio.

PREMJI

FILED A Rs 500-crore defamation suit against Azim Premji in Bombay High Court for purported damage caused to retail chain Subhiksha by his remarks in an interview.

20

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

