AnimPACTreature

ORDNANCE FACTORY BOARD

Shri S. D. Dimri, IOFS, ndc, Director General Ordnance Factories and Chairman, Ordnance Factory Board w.e.f. 1st September, 2011, a Gold Medalist of University during his Post Graduation in Physics, joined IOFS in 1974 after serving the Indian Forest Services for one year. He has attended the prestigious APPPA course and NDC (National Defence College) course. Under his stewardship, OFB commenced bulk production of Pinaka rockets and A&E division came up with a number of new products like practice versions of Antisubmarine Rocket RGB-60, RGB-12, Rocket 140 mm and Shell AK-100 for Indian Navy. Shri Dimri, a capable and efficient administrator has versatile experience in the Manufacturing of Small Arms Ammunition, Medium and High Caliber Ammunition, Fuze Production & Troop Comfort and Protective Clothings.

 Can ytfu please trace the growth and development of OFB into one of the largest arms producing companies in the world? Even before the Post and Telegraph came to India & the steam engine powered the train to move, Ordnance Factory was born at Cossipore way back in 1801. We inherited 18 OFs at the time of independence, facilities of which were created to support the wartime efforts of Britishers for consumables, not so much for developing capability in weapons platforms. Ordnance Factories have marched with times. We are now 41 units including two projects spread across the length and breadth of the country. The Indian Ordnance Factories (popularly known as OFB) has the internal vitality, namely the capacity to retain leadership position in Land Systems Solutions. OFB is a departmentally run organization and has the ability to anticipate and proactively manage change. OFB has the agility to continuously reinvent and reinvigorate itself and sustained its competitive edge for more than two centuries. Today, OFB is the single largest supplier to the Indian Army for a wide range of products spanning arms, ammunition, battle field tanks, night vision devices, armoured as well as heavy vehicles, troop comfort items. OFB is a providerof-choicefor intermediate chemicals, warheads and propellants used in Missile programs and advanced Aluminium alloys for Space programs. OFB ensures that India builds up self-reliance in Land Systems. Look at our growth. We have grown more than three times from Pre-Kargil days. We are set to cross ?12000 Crore this fiscal. No other organisation in the world produces latest weapon ranging from Howitzers, Tanks, Infantry Combat Vehicles, Air Defence Guns, Field Guns and Ammunitions in an integrated manner like us. We are a manufacturing force to reckon with.  Considering that your products go towards ensuring the country's safety and security, how do you ensure the highest quality standards at all times? Our products speak of our quality. Look, India is more than a country, a subcontinent. See the wide extremes; Himalayan glaciers to the Thar Desert, from lofty mountains to the marshy Kutch terrains. Any terrain or any condition, OFB makes the Armaments that deliver unfailingly every time every place. Quality of the product is the outcome of the process, delivered by the workforce committed to a quality-culture. !SQ-9001;2008 certification for all our units speak of our commitment to the process. Products are being tested through very rigid and rigorous Quality Procedures, sheeting.tjMrQducts to

AnimPACTreature
both Static as well as Dynamic Tests in conformity with the International Standards. We have stringent quality checks by our own quality department and final product quality check by DGQA. All weapons undergo dynamic firing in the Proof Ranges. Proof and Testing of all ammunition items in each stage is done based on scientific sampling. Our 58 Laboratories have been accredited with National Accreditation Board for Laboratories (NABL) ISO/ IEC-17025 certification. Like any world class manufacturer, we are migrating to a system of selfcertified quality. We have made our processes transparent by adopting a Networked Quality Data Base Management System where our Quality Assurance representatives from Customer have direct access to testing and process parameters. We practise TPM culture enabling the grassroots workmen to do Kaizens. OFB believes, Quality is a march for excellence, a never ending journey.  In a dynamic world, where the needs and requirements change drastically, how does OFB keep pace with change and upgrade its products? Technology is the key to delivering capability. There are two routes, one incremental and the other is radical. We have in-house R&D backed by our 12 Ordnance Development Centres, manned by technocrats, who mostly have been trained abroad in the finest institutions. We try to improve processes and provide product upgrades. Thanks to our entrepreneurial spirit; OFB has successfully developed/indigenised many items. To name a few, 40 mm MGL for Indian Army, practice versions of Anti-submarine Rocket RGB-60, RGB-12, Rocket 140 mm and Shell Ak-100 for Indian Navy, Air -lifting apparatus for Ml -17 helicopters of Indian Air Force and Sea king of Indian Navy, Platform for AN-32 aircraft, Long barrel 0.32 Bore revolver and Trichy Assault Rifle equivalent to AK-47. The second route is leapfrogging the ladder by absorbing technology either from DRDO or from abroad. We have successfully established production of many new items like Pinaka MBRL Rockets, Multi Mode Grenade from DRDO, Tank T-90 S, Tank Ammunitions 125 mm FSAPDS, Rocket Launcher MK III, AK 630 Gun for Indian Navy, Fuze FB-40,84 mm HEAT 551 and 40 mm PFFC ammunitions. We have been designated as the production agency for many of the sophisticated items such as Smerch Rocket, 122 mm Grad Rocket, Sensor Fuzed Munition, VSHORAD, Electronic Fuzes etc through technology transfer. OFB is going to manufacture its own prized 155 mm gun in substantial numbers. We are fully geared up to take new challenges.  "In times of war and distress, OFB always rises to the occasion."- This must be giving you some pride... Whenever our enemies had dared to attack us from the border, our valiant soldiers, using arms and ammunition, weapons and tanks made in Ordnance Factories have given them a befitting reply. We have kept our promises during all the wars. Even during Kargil, we won accolades from the then Chief of Army Staff and from the Parliamentary Standing Committee. In the foreword to "Arming the Indian Arsenal", former COAS Gen VP Malik has stated" Indian Ordnance Factories, which could produce ammunition and some equipment for which they had the necessary technology rose to the occasion. But we faced considerable problem in procuring items that had to be imported at short notice." We are the Force behind the Forces.  Can you trace some of the significant achievements of the recent past? We have helped the nation to achieve self reliance. We have started Indigenous production of T-90 tank, MBT Arjun, Armoured Ambulance, Pinaka rocket and Mine protected vehicle. We have successfully patented Microalloyed Ultra High Strength Steel, which would help production of high quality small arms. We have successfully established as the lone supplier of extrusions for aircraft applications. OFB has earned Railway Board's appreciation for timely supply of Rough turned Axles and Axle Forgings. Many of our units like OF Muradnagar & Medak, High Explosive Factory, Kirkee, National Academy of Defence Production have received Golden Peacock National Award. Recently, Grey Iron Foundry has received award for energy conservation from Ministry of Power. OF Dehu Road has received Rakhsha Mantri's Excellence Award. Smt Mousami Mitra, one of our employees has received SODET award for development of technology. We have strengthened democratic process by participatory decision making. We have institutionalized good governance by our transparent public procurement systems. We all feel exuberant about our stellar achievements.  How do you rate the overall performance of OFB? Winning the trust of the customer has been our greatest achievement. Innovation and adopting new technology have given us an opportunity to grow exponentially. The Growth trajectory, as I have already pointed out, has been very impressive. We have the will to question the unquestionable and the drive to stretch the envelope. We have the imagination to dream and convert our vision to actions on ground.  Looking at future requirements how do you propose to develop facilities at OFB? Future is a thing we build today. Capacity and Capability creation takes time. We need to put up new P& M and train our manpower to meet the demands of new technology. We have chalked out a long term strategic plan in line with demand from Indian Armed Forces. We are going to make capital investment of approximately ?15000 crore during 12th Plan. Our modernization plan would help us keeping abreast with the latest technology with emphasis on higher productivity, accuracy & safety in manufacturing lines. Besides augmenting and modernizing, 39 ordnance factories, we are having two new projects at Nalanda (Bihar) and Korwa (UP). We are making OFB future ready.  On the occasion of the Republic Day, any message to our countrymen, on behalf of OFB? We are proud of serving the nation. We thank the citizens of India, who have stood by us in our thick and thin. We thank our valued customers who have reposed their trust on us. We sincerely appreciate the support the Ministry of Defence has given us in keeping us in tune with times. On this occasion of Republic Day, we renew our dedication to serve our great Nation with deep sense of commitment and make all out efforts to provide our valiant Armed< Forces with the latest armament and equipment with world class qualit would like the synergy from all our stakeholders including privatej building solutions for our most valued customer i.e. Indian Armed are committed towards building a safer tomorrow;

OFB

