Mail

Self Before Service
JANUARY 16, 2012

The standoff between General V.K. Singh and the defence establishment over his date of birth has become a public spectacle. The biggest casualty is the institution of the chief of Army staff, and the reputation of an admired force.

After the controversy over the Army chief's date of birth, I won't be surprised if tomorrow we are told that India got its independence in 1948 and not 1947.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR,
Bangalore

The Age Debate
The date of birth controversy continues to linger and has caused schisms in the veteran community where good friends are going for one another's jugular ("Self Before Service", January 16). The biggest joke is that this is being touted as a matter of honour which is disingenuous (and juvenile) as is the accusation that this is a sinister Machiavellian plot by the civilian babus and/or Deepak Kapoor. Honour is in keeping your word and not going back on it at the first opportunity! This is like shooting the enemy after having waved the flag of truce. The uniformed fraternity does not need any help from `civilians' to make asses of themselves and this is proved in the socalled `Sukna Scam',

which was also a General's creation.
CARL H. GOMES, via www.intoday.in

REUTERS

Unsafe Abroad
Anuj Bidve's brutal killing ("Murder in Manchester", January 16) is something that has truly shaken the nation. What is particularly distressing is the fact that the legal machinery has moved very slowly on this matter. It is sad that a young life with so much promise has been cut short so brutally. Our government needs to take this incident up very strongly with the UK government.
MILIND KHER, Mumbai

I do not agree with your views on General V.K. Singh's date of birth. General Singh is one of the finest generals of our country. You think he will lie for just one extra year of service? The Government of India and the Ministry of Defence have not handled this controversy in a dignified way. They should not have allowed it to become a public spectacle.
P. ANANT, Pune

The promising career of Anuj Bidve was brought to a brutal end by mindless racism. Bidve's killers must be brought to book and dealt with as per the law.
S. LAKSHMI, Chennai

Gen V.K. Singh could have avoided raking up the issue at this stage, particularly after he had agreed to an earlier date on two earlier occasions when being considered for promotion. It is also not desir-

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

10

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

``

``

Mail
able for the chief to waste his time on these issues
K PREMCHANDRAN, Kerala

35
speeches show that there are no signs of him being a good leader. Besides, his needless comments on Rahul Gandhi smack of opportunism and his intention to play divisive politics with no commitment to serving people.
K.R. SRINIVASAN, Kochi

checking the greed of China and its allies in North Korea and Pakistan.
MANI SHUKLA, New Delhi

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
F E B R U A RY 1 6 - 2 8 , 1 9 7 7

It is a pity that General V.K. Singh's birth date cannot be verified, thus resulting in an unnecessary controversy. Before it damages the reputation of the Army any further, it is desirable that the controversy is resolved soon to the satisfaction of one and all. One also wonders if there are more officials or VIPs out there with similar irregularities.
SANJIV GUPTA, Australia

Helping Hand
Irrespective of the recent downturn in India-Iran relations in the light of India's negative vote on the Iranian nuclear programme, it is heartening to note that India has boldly reached out to Tehran ("On the Right Track", January 16). The rich mineral wealth across the Hindukush mountains will determine regional equations in the forseeable future.
MRIGANKA, Agra

The King Maker
It is difficult to pin a label on Bobby Kooka. Chairman of Hindustan Thompson Advertising, Chairman of the Indian Motion Picture Export Corporation, and Chairman of Air India Charters, Kooka divides his day equally between all three challenging jobs and still manages to find time to sit on the board of Air India and write the,airline's latest inflight guide for passengers, "This Makes No Sense" . In fact, it is probably his hoardings and posters for Air India that he is best known for, as well as his creation of one of the most successful "product personalities"in advertising history--the Air India Maharaja.A quiet, modest man of 64, Kooka sits in a magnificent office on top of Bombay's Air India building. Despite his rather "pucca" education--at St. Peter's, York, and the prestigious Brasenose college at Oxford, he displays a perceptive understanding of the Indian attitude to humour, and involves himself in several social service projects--protecting wildlife and beautifying Bombay among them--with a sincere dedication that makes for concrete results rather than screaming headlines.

Health Hazard
The story on hookahs ("Let's Chillum", January 16) was a real eye-opener. Most of us have always assumed that the hookah is harmless. This is why many women who would otherwise not smoke are quite alright with taking drags from the hookah. Cigarette manufacturers have always felt the heat from the Government. Now, the Government must do the same with respect to hookahs. They need to take prompt action before this habit becomes more widespread.
GANTI MAHAPATRUNI RAO , Visakhapatnam

Another Prince
The welcome transformation mooted by Akhilesh Yadav was long overdue if his party was to survive in these changing times ("Rise of the Other Prince", January 16). The party must have realised that by merely playing the pro-minority card and patronising the OBC community, it may not acquire the political and electoral sustainability needed to upstage its opponents in the state. To wrest power again in UP, the MulayamAkhilesh duo should also convincingly prove that the Samajwadi Party does not work for just them and their relatives but shows commitment towards "samajwad".
MANJU SRIVASTAVA, Ghaziabad

No Headway
It is a matter of great consternation that the number of pending bills is rising in Parliament ("Graveyard of Bills", January 16). Does it mean that most of the bills drafted by the Government are anti-people or against the interests of the nation? If yes, then the ability, prowess and the functioning of the Government gets called into question. Although Parliament is a place of discussion and debate, unfortunately, it has also become a venue for obstructionist agendas to play themselves out. It has only witnessed logjams, standoffs and boycotts. It is the responsibility of the people of this country to vote judiciously.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

Power Comeback
Kanwal Sibal did a good analysis of the present state of affairs ("The Strongman Cracks", January 16). It is in India's best interest for Putin to come back to power to check the belligerence and overbearing attitude of China and the US from steamrolling us with its staunch supporters in high places in the Government. Russia under Putin is capable of

Yadav Junior's aim may be to grab power at any cost, but his campaign

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

KOOKA-- "INK IN MY BLOOD"

12

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

