Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

LOSTIN INDIA,FOUND IN BHUTAN
Steeped in poetic mysticism, Pavan Varma's first novel begins with romance and ends in redemption
By Gillian Wright

WHEN LOSS IS GAIN
byPavan K.Varma Rain Tree Price: RS 395 Pages: 206 BETWEEN THE COVERS The writer-diplomat's interest in Kabir,the Kama Sutra and Krishna comes alive in his novel set in India and Bhutan.

avan K. Varma is no ordinary diplomat. Hailing from Ghazipur, the UP town on a bend in the Ganges that has produced remarkable men of the like of Rahi Masoom Reza, the author and Urdu poet who penned the dialogues of B.R. Chopra's Mahabharat, S.P. Singh, the greatly respected pioneer of Hindi television journalism, and Sarju Pande, the communist MP who is reputed to have hunted down cruel zamindars from the back of an elephant, Pavan too seems to recognise few barriers. In his literary career, he has translated the poetry of Gulzar, and Kaifi Azmi, chronicled the life and times of Ghalib, documented the lamentably few remaining havelis of Old Delhi, dissected India's middle class, examined what it is to be Indian, revelled in the love of Krishna and the Kama Sutra, and now--perhaps rather late in the day--has written his first novel. When Loss is Gain is not about joining weightwatchers, nor is it directly concerned with that great phrase of the Isa Upanishads `tyag purvak bhog'--the rewards of detachment. In fact, to start with, it seems Pavan has decided to take a leaf out of the very successful book of Chetan Bhagat. There is something Chetanesque in his protagonist, Anand, a Delhi lawyer working for a much richer and more glamorous one. Anand's first person account of

P

his life, delivered in short staccato sentences in simple English and the moments of homespun philosophy are reminiscent of Bhagat. Then there is the frustration of a second rate overstressed life, the humiliation of the underdog, the pursuit of one woman by two friends, and above all, the fast pace at which the story proceeds. Two of Bhagat's strengths are an easy read and a robust storyline. Both are to be found in the first half, which at times astounds and at times is comfortably predictable, like the plot of an old Hindi film. However, at half time, the novel changes gear-- and, rather like the hero and heroine of an old film might find it necessary to set off for Shimla or Kashmir, our hero Anand sets off for Bhutan. Well, why not? The author is currently the Ambassador there, and very well placed to write about it. So suddenly we find description enough to depict the scenery for readers who still know little about this wonderful country on their borders. As Anand works out what is important in life in Bhutan, he falls in love with a would-be Buddhist nun. Suddenly you realise that the book is not so much Chetanesque as pure Pavan. Even Anand's nausea at the partying elite of Delhi in the first part of the book fits with Pavan's analysis of what ails the privileged classes of India. The tension between the nun and the newly liberated Anand, between discipline, self-control and the joyful plunge into life's every experience, leads to long debates between the two. Pavan illustrates these debates with references to his established interests--Urdu poets, Kabir, the Kama Sutra, the stories of Krishna and other texts. But the most interesting intervention comes when he introduces the songs of the divine madman of Bhutan, Drupka Kunley. Kunley's symbol is the phallus, a symbol of fertility and power, and Anand and the nun find themselves influenced by the holy man's mysterious presence. Which of the two ultimately wins the debate? Well, to say that would be to ruin the tale spun by the author. Suffice it to say that the end is a mite too neat, but the author is too mischievous to mind. 

SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

