GLOSSARY
OPRAH WINFREY WITH NEHA DHUPIA

Glitz, Gold, Galas
As the glitterati display their Golden Globes in their Los Angeles mansions, we move on to the next big thing--the Oscars. Who will take the hardware home on February 26? BEST PICTURE
The Descendants Directed by Alexander Payne, Oscar nominated for Sideways, it stars George Clooney, who now has enough grey hair to qualify for the Lifetime Achievement Award. Plus it has a hint of the exotic, having been shot in Hawaii. The Artist It's French, not a
very popular country in the US. But Oscar loves movies about movies. Especially if they're silent in the era of noisy blockbusters.What's not to like?

BESTACTOR
George Clooney He insists he will never marry again or be a dad. In the movie, he plays a put-upon dad whose wife is on life support. Oscar, give the man an award. Michael Fassbender He suffers for his art, spending most of Shame naked. But will family-friendly Oscar like to endorse an NC-17 movie where Fassbender's member is always on display?

SUPPORTING ACTOR
Christopher Plummer Hey, he's 82.And he was Captain von Trapp in The Sound of Music. He plays a gay man in Beginners. Oscar loves straight men playing gay. Albert Brooks The affable comedian turns evil in Drive. He has a good chance especially because Drive has to win something. Co-star Ryan Gosling is too young, too blonde and too cute to win.

WEIRD GESTURE OF THE DAY

BEST ACTRESS
Meryl Streep Oscar loves posh English accents. It also loves Streep when she does accents. In playing Margaret Thatcher, it gets both. Ooh! Award heaven. Michelle Williams She did her time in purgatory for splitting up with Heath Ledger.After going naked for Blue Valentine, she plays Hollywood's tragic queen in a Harvey Weinstein movie. Perfect.

SUPPORTING ACTRESS
Octavia Spencer The feisty Minny Jackson of The Help is black and overweight.That got Gabourey Sidibe a win for Precious in 2009. Bérénice Bejo Oscar loves talented French women.That is why Marion Cotillard won for La Vie Rose though they couldn't understand a word of what she said. Could Bejo in The Artist take it away?

COLORS SCREEN AWARDS

O, OH, OPRAH
 Her Sari The orange and pink sari that Oprah wore to party with our desi celebrities was a gift from Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, says The Hollywood Reporter. Ugh!  Her Charm Even the police couldn't resist going to this party. But for entirely different reasons. They visited the venue thrice as Parmeshwar Godrej's neighbours complained about the loud music.  Her Royal Carriage The Bachchan clan drove her to the party with Big B himself turning chauffeur and Aishwarya guffawing with her in the backseat.  Her Reflected Glory Tuesday saw celebrities racing to be the first to declare their `I was there with Oprah' moments.  Her Snub While twitterati couldn't stop talking about her, Oprah decided she'd had enough of B-town and paid Shantaram author Gregory David Roberts a visit in Colaba the next day. From swish to slumdog in a day.

Ranbir Kapoor made a dive to touch Deepika Padukone's feet at the Colors Screen Awards as she handed him the award for the best actor. Everyone knows the exes are now friends but this is taking things too far. Or too low?
OF THE

MERYL STREEP
AFP

GEORGE CLOONEY
GETTY IMAGES

VIOLA DAVIS
GETTY IMAGES

WEEK

Kalki Koechlin: "What's an AK 47? Anurag Kashyap tweeting on an empty stomach ;)"

Q& A

SUDHISH KAMATH
DIRECTOR

"Bollywood is uninhibited now"
Sudhish Kamath, 34, had creativity and a limited Rs 30 lakh budget. With that, he made Good Night Good Morning, a film that summarises the eight stages of a relationship in one phone call. Q. How did you come up with GNGM? A. I wanted to make a film where the audience knew everything a couple said or didn't say to each other. A phone call was perfect for that. Q. Can you fall in love over a conversation? A. Yes. I think you get to know a person only over the phone. When you meet, say for coffee, there are other things going on. Q. Which is the one film you want to remake? A. Jerry Maguire set in Bollywood. It will be a complete Bollywood film about Bollywood. Q. You have called 2011 the year Bollywood grew up. Why? A. Like a child who grows up, Bollywood got uninhibited in 2011. Things like a guy going down on his girlfriend (Delhi Belly) and the female character taking the lead to kiss the guy (Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara) never happened before.
by Avantika Sharma

FIRST LOOK OF THE WEEK
The posters of London Paris New York leave little to be imagined, or anticipated--a love story spread over three cities. Anu Menon's film with Ali Zafar and Aditi Rao Hydari bears striking similarity to the Julie Delpy-starrer Before Sunset, and does the whole spoilt rich boy, grounded middle-class girl and opposites attract routine. We are still looking for something to get excited about.

OBITUARY
By Sabeena Gadihoke

HOMAI VYARAWALLA

1949-2011

I first met Homai in 1997, when I was working on a film on women photographers. I saw a small news item on her and landed up at her house in Baroda, where she lived in isolation and anonymity. This would've marked 15 years of knowing her. Even after completing my film in 1997, I would go back just to be around the brilliant, strong personality that she was. This interaction reached its fruition with my book Camera Chronicles, a biography of Homai's work through her decades as a photojournalist. The only "Mrs." in the Press Information Bureau picture archives, Homai finally gave up this distinction in 1970 to concentrate on things she'd missed out on. She wanted to be a home-maker and a

mother. The thirst for a commemoration brought the spotlight back on her. When India turned 50, there was a scramble for her pictures. Her poignant work came from her patience--she waited till the others had finished to get FOTOCORP the perfect shot. For Homai, the history she photographed was her most important work. But what I admire most are the pictures she took in Bombay in the 30s and 40s with her husband Maneckshaw. My professional relationship with Homai was enriched from my arguments and discussions with her. The picture I'll carry with me is from her birthday last year, when I spent a leisurely day with her, just talking. Sabeena Gadihoke teaches at Jamia Milia Islamia, Delhi

by Nishat Bari, Avantika Sharma , Shilpa Rathnam and Olina Banerji
JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

72

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

73

