NEWSMAKER 2012

THE

ANGRY INDIAN
The Citizen Outraged migrated from the street to the consciousness of a nation scarred by the profanities of the system and the immoralities of power
By S. Prasannarajan

T

he monumental arch in the heart of Lutyens' Delhi exudes memories of martyrdom and liberation. It is where the Republic parades its military virility for maximum visual impact, and it is where a wintry sunset becomes the flaneur's perfect backdrop, and it is the site from where the street fighter dares authority and demands action, if not mercy. It is the vantage point from where you can also see the edifices of India's political as well as constitutional power in their majestic indifference. This winter at India Gate, the cry that pierced the December fog carried the rage of a generation against a regime with a frozen conscience, and the fists of fury that soared above the multitude that braved the barricades declared the loss of faith in a ruling Establishment whose only defence was triangulations. They defied tear gas, perhaps the only chemical weapon governments everywhere

GETTY IMAGES

YOUNGSTERS PROTEST NEAR RASHTRAPATI BHAVAN IN DELHI ON DECEMBER 22 AGAINST THE RAPE OF A 23-YEAR-OLD GIRL

NEWSMAKER 2012
PANKAJ TIWARI /www.indiatodayimages.com

A Million MUTINIES NOW



Streets of India erupted in anger in a year that put the citizen against the state

Anti-rape protests in Delhi
WHEN December 19 onwards WHY A 23-year-old girl was
PTI

Protests against Kudankulam plant
WHEN All of 2012 WHY Opponents say that



over one million people are at danger in case of a leak. STATUS Protesters were baton-charged and tear-gassed. Plant to be operational soon. Peace march against ACP Vasant Dhoble
WHEN June 24 WHY To denounce the moral policing against the

20



Guwahati molestation case WHEN July WHY A 21-year-old woman was stripped in full public view by 15 people. STATUS Eleven accused were given twoyear jail terms on December 7. Assam riots protest in Mumbai WHEN August 11 WHAT A rally at Azad Maidan to protest the killing of Muslims in Assam and Myanmar turned violent.Two persons were killed and at least 55 injured. STATUS Sixty-four people were arrested.




Jal Satyagraha in Madhya Pradesh
WHEN August 25 to September 10 WHY To demand a lowering of the

water level of the Omkareshwar dam to 189 m, and compensation. STATUS A three-member ministerial panel is looking into the matter.
PTI

brutally raped in a bus by six men on December 16. RESULT The Government has proposed all-women fast track courts to hear rape cases on priority.

MANDAR DEODHAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

Protests against FDI in multibrand retail is detrimental to traders, farmers, hawkers, small industries, consumers, labourers. STATUS Passed by Parliament.
QAMAR SIBTAIN /www.indiatodayimages.com

city's nightlife by the controversial ACP. Protesters also demanded repeal of archaic laws, chiefly the Bombay Police Act, 1951. STATUS Police registered cases against the protesters but no arrest was made.
MID-DAY



WHEN Since September WHY Opponents says it


Protests over two girls' arrest over Facebook post
WHEN November 19 RESULT Countrywide protests

prompted police to drop all charges against the two girls.

AFP

deploy against their own citizens; they suffered the baton; and they refused to be calmed by the platitudes of the politician. It was the snapshot of a new liberation movement in a country without justice, and in its vanguard was the Indian abandoned by hope but powered by anger. The latest ignition was a young woman brutalised on the mean streets of Delhi. The agitators at India Gate knew their struggle would never match the ordeal underwent by her-- too dehumanising to be spoken. She was one of them, another young Indian, twenty-first century India's greatest demographic asset, dreaming a secure future in the Capital of possibilities, till she boarded a bus that turned out to be a horror chamber. And--face it--her tormentors too shared the same demographic profile, only the ghettos that constituted their address separated them from the newgeneration conscience-keepers. The justice seekers, their action too spontaneous to be capitalised by any civil rights revolutionary, were disowning an India that was incompatible with their aspirations, their attitudes, and their ideas of freedom. In that India, a lone woman cannot walk on the street; the weakest and the vulnerable are permanent victims of violence; your identity, whether it is ethnic or gender, is your destiny; and life is the only cheapest item

in the market. They are outsiders in a state de-legitimised by its own immorality. In India 2012, their legion multiplied along with their causes. Their anger was rising at a speed that could have only been matched by the growth rate of systemic apathy. In the beginning, dissent spectacular, as displayed in Delhi's Jantar Mantar and other sites of protest, had only one target: The corrupt politician. The cancerous spread of the malady exposed not just the moral deficiency of the ruling class. It showed why in the Republic of Looters modernity is pretence, and the finest sophistry of defence is no defence at all but artful diversion. As CAG, with the alacrity of an earnest bookkeeper, rolled out instances of the loot in awesome figures, the first response of the state was always denial. A. Raja, of Spectrum vintage, or a Suresh Kalmadi, of the Commonwealth Games con, happens only once in a while. In popular perception, punishment never matches crime, and all the institutions of a civil society, whether it is Parliament or judiciary, have somehow let down the citizen, who has begun to see himself as the most disabused stakeholder in a democracy savaged by the elected. In 2012, the street became the last battlefield of the disenchanted. Still, the Angry Indian who rages against corruption is

not without a leader. Last year, the satyagrahi in a Gandhi cap was the sole leader of anger management. As the state sank deeper in lies and the politician lost his last veneer of credibility, the Gandhian became the most inspiring icon for the street fighter. This year, Anna Hazare's protégé has tapped the groundswell of resentment and taken the protest to the next level--the political arena itself. The anti-corruption movement, even though sustained by the power of anger, needed a choreographer. The choreography of Arvind Kejriwal borrows its movement from the discredited art of realpolitik he has been campaigning against, and the idyll of a sub-rural Ruritania he projects as an alternative is so distant from the world India's youth aspire to inhabit. In that sense, even the anger that convulsed the North-east in the wake of the tribal bloodlust in Bodoland was political fodder for the leaders of the dispossessed. That of course did not minimise the horror of ethnic politics, and the exodus of marked outsiders was not the best possible advertisement for the cultural polyphony of modern India. In retrospect, the Citizen Enraged has always had a ringleader, who more often than not was an unsolicited benefactor with a political agenda. When economic mismanagement of the state aggravated inflation, the marketplace became forbidden to

a majority of Indians, and their anger was duly exploited by parties whose economic vision was far from being a viable alternative in a globalised world. In the cheerless 2012, only the politician laughed; the battered citizen cried for life's essential dignities.

W

hen the cry overcomes fear and acquires the force of spontaneity, it shatters the make-believe of the powerful and scares the remorseless. The latest protest that rocked Delhi was led by emotion and idealism; it was untainted by the self-righteousness of a Kejriwal. It was very twenty-first century, not just in its accessories. Technology carries the slogan forward faster; some may even argue that a Facebook post or a tweet can spawn a revolution. In the end, though, it is not the possibilities of the medium but the power of the message that makes a difference, for better or worse, as in Cairo's Tahrir Square or elsewhere in the Middle East. India is a different place, but not a wretched place where freedom is the privilege of a few; what is at stake here is not democracy itself but its management by the elected class. The Angry Indian who dominated prime time television and the front pages pro-

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

JANUARY 7, 2013  INDIA TODAY

21

NEW

NEWSMAKER 2012
ARTI SINGH MANDAR DEODAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

1

2

1 ARTI SINGH 32 HOMEMAKER The Delhi December 16 rape She's the classic aam aadmi, not affiliated to any political party, but outraged enough by the brutal rape of a paramedical student to `occupy Raisina Hill' .

"When you have six MPs --people who run the country--accused of rape, that itself tells the story."
2 M.RASHID ANSARUL 20 HAWKER Mumbai protest against Assam violence The Bandra (East) youth participated in the Azad Maidan protests on August 11, 2012, in which several policemen were assaulted and two protesters killed in police firing.

"My brother was shot dead. His only fault was that he was protesting."

3

4

3 M.PUSHPARAYAN 44 SOCIALACTIVIST Anti-Kudankulam nuclear plant protests He has spent 17 years fighting for Tamil Nadu's coastal communities. The Russian-built plant is set to start operations but he believes the struggle was worth it because it "has succeeded in creating mass awareness against nuclear energy" .

"Nuclear plants cannot be built with impunity anymore."
4 KAVITATALUKDAR 23 STUDENT The Guwahati molestation case The protest against the July 9, 2012, incident was a first for her. The outcry forced the government to arrest culprits promptly, she says.

M PUSHPARAYAN

GITIKA TALUKDAR

"I joined the protest to let the world know that we don't take such incidents lying down."

vided the most captivating image of democratic India in denial. The medium, no matter social or traditional, exaggerates the anger. It also brings out the contrast between the enraged and the unabashed. In 2012, the heroism of the Citizen Outraged was pitted against the overwhelming passivity of the Politician Outcast. There was no one in South Block whose words could have sounded credible-- and reassuring--to the occupiers of India Gate. After all, a recurring theme in the back pages of resistance is the romance of the dissenter. His story does not always end in happiness. Jackboots of the state can silence him. His martyrdom is as inspirational as his triumph. Many regimes built on graveyards of protest have also been

brought down by the power of questions. What the dissenting romantics on the streets of India, one of democracy's most lasting as well as volatile examples, can achieve is not a regime change. They can make a cultural change in politics. Their anger can make the art of politics less dark. The Angry Indian who migrated from the street to the conscience of India is our Newsmaker of a heartbreaking year because his rage redeemed politics, made the politician answerable, and, most tellingly, brought to sharp focus the profanities of an imperfect system. The Angry Indian is the brand new politician of freedom. 
To watch the Angry Indian speak, tap on your iPad edition

22

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 7, 2013

