OF TH EK NO W N

Judiciary
husband to jail for driving his wife to suicide with taunts over her "dark complexion". "He is the most compassionate judge of the court," say lawyers recalling his landmark cases: in 2007, he dismissed the plea that activist Medha Patkar was working for foreign powers; in 2008, he restrained the Narendra Modi government from arresting political analyst Ashis Nandy for an article ("If a journalist cannot write, who else will?"); in 2009 he famously said, "Once an arrow leaves a bow, we can't take it back", about the Gujarat government's hasty ban on expelled BJP leader Jaswant Singh's book on Jinnah. "I don't know a more down-to-earth and grounded family than them," says a family friend. That could be because this Sunni Muslim family has, for generations, bypassed orthodoxy in private life. Mixed marriages with Hindus, Christians and Buddhists have given this family a unique culture of sharing values. Humayun Kabir's wife, Shanti, a freedom fighter, belonged to the progressive, anti-caste Brahmo sect. Their children, Leila and Prabahan Kabir, are married

FE AR

Conscience Keeper in Age of SCAMS
Justice Altamas Kabir speaks softly and keeps a heavy judicial stick curtained by a gentle demeanour
By Damayanti Datta

ustice Altamas Kabir wears an amiable expression writer, educationist and philosopher, he and listens to lawyers with such patience that it is was a Union minister under Jawaharlal impossible to tell which way his decisions might lean. Nehru, Lal Bahadur Shastri as well as Indira He shares this trait with the Chief Justice of India Gandhi. His father, Jehangir Kabir, was also (CJI), Sarosh Homi Kapadia, the man he is slated to influential in Bengal politics. Justice Kabir shares the same values as CJI succeed after September 28, 2012, when the CJI retires. It's surprising how many lawyers miss the cue--as on Kapadia. If the catchword in Justice Kapadia's court is December 8, 2011, when he stunned the court with a sharp "integrity", in Justice Kabir's court it's "ethics". In a warning to lawyer Prashant Bhushan against "reckless" scam-ridden era, top judges of the apex court have captured remarks on corruption in the judiciary. He takes immense public imagination by their passionate and even provocative pride in the "new court" shaped by CJI Kapadia: "This defence of honesty in public life. But judicial hard knocks judiciary has withstood pressure of all kinds. You may come wrapped in gentlemanly tones at two of the 15 exclaim `Oh! There is massive corruption'. But you will just courtrooms in the Supreme Court--in court 1 of the CJI and, next to it, in court 2 of Justice Kabir. And it's the "simple" weaken a strong pillar of democracy." On May 12, 2010, when CJI Kapadia took his oath, the questions they ask that trigger long battles of nerves with nation celebrated his story: a Class IV employee who rose to the Government. As it did when CJI Kapadia questioned the be the chief justice, entitled to perks like a Lutyens' bunga- legality of appointing P.J. Thomas as the Central Vigilance low in Delhi. But Justice Kabir "arrived" even before start- Commissioner (CVC) in November 2010: "We wonder ing out. He was born into an aristocratic Muslim family of whether he will be able to function as CVC with the tag of an landed gentry from Faridpur, now in Bangladesh, where accused on him." In October 2011, Justice Kabir similarly titles of Khan Bahadur, social visibility, status, influence and punctured Maharashtra government's decision to ban barelite education came as a matter of course. dancing with his candid query: "If women can be models He studied in the best of schools and colleges: Mount why can't they be bar dancers? Are there moral assumptions Hermon School in Darjeeling, Calcutta Boys School and in the state's constitutional choices?" Presidency College in Kolkata. He had enough role models Though he dines in dinner jackets with the Prime on offer within the family. Politics would have been the Minister on formal occasions, the first principle in his easiest choice. In post-Independence private life is "humility". He is most comfortBengal, politics was in the firm clutches able in khadi kurta-pyjama, say his friends. of the Kolkata elite, and the branch of At a national seminar on transgenders in the Kabir family that chose to stay in India Delhi in February 2011, participants recall after Partition lived in the limelight. His his visible embarrassment when the discusthe apex court have uncle, Humayun Kabir, had studied at sion gave way to hushed silence at his apcaptured public Oxford and was a close associate of pearance. In August 2011, lawyers say, it imagination by their Congress president Maulana Abul Kalam created quite a stir in Bangalore when word passionate and even Azad. Humayun was the editor of Maulana's spread that the SC judge had put up with provocative defence of biography, India Wins Freedom, and transsoiled linen, torn towels and reluctant servlated it from Urdu to English. Scholar, ice at the state-owned Kumara Krupa guesthonesty in public life.

J

If every court reflects the personality of the presiding judge, Justice Kabir's exudes affability. He smiles, nods and on occasion leavens proceedings with a touch of humour.
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Judges of

house without a murmur. Justice Kabir began as "an outstanding lawyer on both civil and criminal sides". He became a permanent judge at the Calcutta High Court in 1990. And he proved himself to be "a very moderate judge with little ideological baggage". Kolkata remembers his intervention on behalf of Dr Jack Preger, the British doctor who devoted his life to free medical service, when the Foreigners' Registration Office denied him a visa in 1995. He became the CJ of Jharkhand High Court in 2005. The same year, at a relatively young age of 57, he was invited to join the Supreme Court. Under CJI Kapadia, he has emerged as the "social conscience" of the court. "The Constitution affirms equality in all spheres but the moot question is whether it is being applied", is what he said at a panel discussion organised by the National Legal Services Authority in February 2011. His judicial philosophy is influenced by the 19th century theorist Friedrich Nietzsche's "aristocratic individualism", point out lawyers. It is premised on the idea that court decisions have a crucial role to play in the enrichment of individual lives. His verdicts reflect his faith: proposing open courts for the mental health of prison inmates, fast-tracking problemsolving lok adalats, framing a wider definition of domestic violence, upholding equal rights for transgenders, prohibiting the use of muscle men in recovering financial dues to issuing notice to enhance compensation for the 1984 Bhopal gas tragedy victims. In a judgment in 2008, he sent a

to Christians. Jusice Kabir's wife Minna, a child rights activist, is a Mangalorean Christian. The untimely death of his mother, Syeda Halima, taught Justice Kabir and his five siblings to be independent early on. They grew up in a rented house on Congress Exhibition Road in Kolkata. With their father often away on political work, they learnt to divide household chores and cope with everyday practicalities. The young Altamas's vast repertoire of songs, ranging from Harry Belafonte to Muhammad Rafi, kept everyone happy. As did the dishes he rustled up on a primitive chulha. This early experience developed into a lifetime passion for cooking, baked crabs and Anglo-Indian minced pie panteras being his signature dishes. He met his wife, Minna, in the 1970s after her family moved in as fellow tenants in the same building. Their children, Anamika, 34, and Deep Chaim, 26, both studied law. Anamika, a teacher, chose to work with children. If every court reflects the personality of the presiding judge, Justice Kabir's court exudes courteousness and affability. He is a rare judge with a sense of humour, report lawyers. He allows lawyers to argue, listens attentively and asks detailed questions. In 1992, the Supreme Court set rigorous standards for judges: "He should be conscientious, studious, courteous, patient, punctual, impartial, fearless of public clamour, regardless of public praise, and indifferent to private, political or partisan influences." Justice Kabir comes closest to that definition. n

58

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

JANUARY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

59

