Nation

CRICKET

HITWICKET

A consortium of banks offered BCCI a guarantee of Rs 2,000 crore without sufficient collateral from Nimbus Communications
REUTERS HKRAJASHEKAR BHASKAR PAUL

(LEFT) ACTION FROM THE FIRST TEST BETWEEN INDIA AND AUSTRALIA IN MELBOURNE; (ABOVE-LEFT) BCCI PRESIDENT N. SRINIVASAN; NIMBUS CHAIRMAN HARISH THAWANI

By Shantanu Guha Ray

he Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) believes a consortium of banks that offered a Rs 2,000 crore guarantee to it on behalf of Nimbus Communications for domestic cricket telecast rights, did so without sufficient collateral from the broadcaster. As a result, claims the board, the three banks--Union Bank of India, Punjab National Bank (PNB) and Indian Bank--are now unwilling or unable to meet BCCI's demand to encash the guarantee of Rs 1,600 crore. Nimbus owes this much to the board. This is the third default by Nimbus. If the banks had agreed, BCCI would have claimed Rs 1,600 crore of the Rs 2,000 crore contract which

T

was signed in November 2009 for six years. The balance of Rs 400 crore is for matches yet to be telecast during the remainder of the contract. BCCI's working committee cancelled the contract with Nimbus on December 12 after the broadcaster failed to pay Rs 50 crore, part of an instalment of Rs 74 crore which it owed BCCI for the 2011 season. Nimbus sought a 45-day reprieve; it had already paid BCCI Rs 24 crore. BCCI refused to budge and wanted the entire Rs 1,600 crore, citing two previous defaults by the channel. "We would like to seek legal recourse at the highest level and also raise this issue with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and seek its intervention to recover the money owed to us," says BCCI legal head P.R. Raman.

He claims the board informed the banks about earlier defaults. When Nimbus defaulted for the third time in November, the board demanded that the banks pay them Rs 50 crore from the margin money retained by them. The margin money is 10-15 per cent of any contract, and is retained till the account is settled. The banks are either silent or evasive about their deal with Nimbus. In Delhi, PNB CMD K.R. Kamath said it was their prerogative to decide what to seek from a company as collateral. On December 22, PNB, along with the other banks, told the Bombay High Court that they would not pay BCCI the guarantee money. An email from INDIA TODAY seeking answers from Indian Bank and Union Bank went unanswered.

30

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

NEW

Nation
In a note emailed to INDIA TODAY, Nimbus said the banks followed norms that were prescribed by RBI. "The banks also took first charge on receivables of Nimbus from BCCI matches, charge on physical assets as well as several other additional securities," said Nimbus Chairman Harish Thawani. He, however, refused to give details of the assets pledged to the banks. In a note to BCCI Treasurer Ajay Shirke, a senior official of Union Bank of India, the lead bank in the consortium, said the guarantee could not be invoked because the BCCI did not mention the nature and extent of default by Nimbus.

VHP

REDDYFOR REVAMP
The new VHP chief wants to broaden the organisation's base among the masses by 2014. And he has hit the ground running.
e will travel for three days every week. He wants to build the organisation from the grassroots up so that it is a formidable force by 2014--its golden jubilee year--by meeting cadres, recruiting people and raising finances. Meet the new Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) chief Gullampalli Raghava Reddy, 55, who took over the reins from ailing octogenarian Ashok Singhal, the organisation's face for the past nine years. He was appointed at a meeting of the VHP board of trustees at Kochi on December 18. Before the elevation, Reddy was chief treasurer of the organisation, a position he acquired in 2007. "During these visits I hope to select karyakartas where we do not have any, and also approach donors for paying the salaries of full-time activists. If we have full-time karyakartas, then we can create greater awareness about Hindutva, at the grassroots level," he says. Reddy has big plans. He aims to increase the number of VHP-run single-teacher primary schools from 33,000 to 50,000 by 2014. He also plans to provide education and health facilities through the 215 charitable trusts and societies affiliated to the VHP. The new chief has a tenure of two years. The appointment signals a generational change as Reddy has age on his side. The appointment of the owner of a chain of sweet shops in Hyderabad signals a status quo in relations between the VHP and the Rashtriya

H

A PRABHAKAR RAO

REDDY

MISSION 2014
G.R. Reddy plans to strengthen the VHP at the grassroots level Appoint full-time karyakartas in all talukas of the country Raise funds for paying salaries of full-time workers Increase VHP-run single-teacher schools from 33,000 to 50,000 Provide more health and educational facilities through VHP-affiliated bodies
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). The move also indicates that the RSS wants to retain its hold over the VHP as it used to while Singhal was at the helm. Reddy is a candidate acceptable to both the VHP ranks and the RSS. It helps that the new chief has good relations with RSS boss Mohan Bhagwat. But Reddy lacks oratorical skills, something which is expected to be compensated by fiery leader Praveen Togadia, 56, who has been appointed the VHP's working president. Togadia will remain the stern face of the organisation. Whether Reddy can fill the shoes of his predecessor Singhal, who guided the organisation through the past decade, only time will tell but for now, the new saffron leader is confident of altering the perceptions of his detractors. by Amarnath K. Menon

"I will not be able to tell you what collateral we sought from Nimbus."
K.R. KAMATH, CMD, Punjab National Bank

Raman claims that BCCI became aware of Nimbus's poor financial health only when the broadcaster sought a refund of Rs 250 crore for the cancelled India-Pakistan series in March 2012. Nimbus told BCCI that the refund would help it clear its dues worth Rs 50 crore. BCCI officials are worried that the current controversy could affect the board's future arrangement with broadcasters. "If a bank refuses to honour a guarantee on a technicality--the invocation was made after the termination of the contract and not before as stipulated in the agreement--it will set a bad precedent," says a senior board official. In the high court, Justice S.J. Vazifdar referred the case for arbitration after the banks stood firm. The world's richest cricket board's cash dilemma continues. I

32

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

NEW

