Soc iety EXPENSIVE PETS

JOHN, A TARANTULA, WAS BOUGHT FOR

GUINEA PIGS MARY AND GEORGE COST

Rs 2,000
EACH

Rs 10,000

So did you really think Chihuahuas were exotic? Not anymore. Indians are now spending more than ever to bring home a `friend' to shower their love on.
By Sonali Acharjee

LIZARD FOR SALE. FOR JUST Rs 50,000.
They are patient and can be easily tamed. I made a house for Newton and Einstein out of a cardboard box. We feed them mice food which is available at most pet stores for around Rs 2,000 per kg. I enjoy pampering them," says Malavika Sharma, 24, a journalist from Delhi. Judging by the way people are spending at his shop, Indians are spending almost five times more on pets than they did 10 years ago, says Sudhir Sharma, owner of Petland, New Delhi. "When I set up Petland 10 years ago, people would use Rin soap to bathe their dogs, use a rope leash and feed them kitchen scraps," says Sharma. From skin therapy shampoos (Rs 1,800 per gallon) to diet dog food (Rs 3,000 per kg), Rin soap and kitchen scraps are history. "There are over 200 varieties of pet deodorants, shampoos and conditioners available in the market. One can even buy dressing tables for hamsters and raincoats for cats. I had a customer who spent Rs 1.5 lakh on imported snacks, collars, leashes and toys. We had to make two delivery trips to her farm. Such is the demand we see today," says Sharma. Noticing the rise in demand for pet products and services, C. Sudhakar, 38, launched India's first pet spa in Chennai in 2010. Today, Cho Chweet has branches in Coimbatore and Kochi, and clients have gone beyond dogs to cats, geese and even the occasional goat. For Rs 1,500, one can get the basic Cho Chweet package, which includes a haircut, spa bath, wash, nail trim, teeth clean, ear wipe and dab of cologne. "With the rise of nuclear families, pets are in great demand. Naturally, they would want the pet to be in top condition," says Sudhakar. It doesn't stop at hygiene. Pet owners also want the best diet and nutrition for their charges. Having completed a course in Dog & Cat Nutri-

EMUS COST BETWEEN

Rs 5O,000 Rs 1 lakh
58
INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

AND

very morning, John, a onemonth-old Chilean rose tarantula, wakes up to a breakfast of freshly-caught flies. "Tarantulas are incredibly fastidious about their diet and environment. I have an automatic fly catcher that I bought off eBay for Rs 4,000. Every night I set it up in my garden. In the morning we release the flies into John's cage, which is controlled for temperature and moisture. Electricity and maintenance cost of all equipment is about Rs 3,000 a day," says Mumbai-based Merchant Navy officer Shawn Fernandes, 26. He bought John for Rs 10,000. John is not the only pet enjoying the benefits of a growing demand for exotic animals. "I adopted two white mice from Friendicoes SECA, Delhi. I know rodents are not considered good pets, but hamsters, guinea pigs and mice make fantastic companions.

E
SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

CHANDRA DEEP KUMAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

BOSS, A ST BERNARD, WAS BOUGHT FOR

Rs 60,000

CHANDRA DEEP KUMAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

tion, Rashee Kuchroo, 28, launched Doggie Dabbas in Gurgaon. She provides home-cooked meals twice a day as well as one-time treats. Her menu includes dimsums (Rs 200/six pieces), cupcakes (Rs 120/six pieces), mint candy (Rs 120/24 pieces) and chicken quiche (Rs 200/six pieces). No salt, artificial colouring or flour is used, making it safe for dogs. Kuchroo also cuts the vegetable and meat into small bite-sized pieces for easy digestion. And for Rs 6,000-Rs 8,000 a month (depending on the breed), she charts out special diet plans for dogs. These range from weight-loss plans to skin replenishing diets. An ardent dog lover herself, Kuchroo has four dogs: A St Bernard, a Poodle, a Labrador and a Pekingese. "Dogs make wonderful companions but some breeds can be very expensive and difficult to maintain. My St Bernard eats 1 kg of chicken every day and requires 24-hour air-conditioning in summer. But every penny spent is worth it," she says. Those who can afford it seek more exotic pets such as iguanas, tarantulas, emus, albino pythons and llamas. There are over 500 breeders and importers of exotic pets across the country. These animals can be kept as pets under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act of 1972, provided they are not of Indian origin. "We have had an up-

ARE YOU WILLING TO PAY FOR THEM?  Adult Tibetan Mastiff Rs 50 lakh  Adult Black Palm Cockatoo Rs 4.5 lakh  Adult Emu Rs 1 lakh  Adult St Bernard Rs 60,000  Baby green Iguana Rs 50,000 DRESS YOUR PETS UP  Rs 10 crore for Amour Amour diamond collar with 1,600 hand-set diamonds  Rs 1.7 lakh for 22-carat gold thread pet mattress  Rs 1 lakh for Swarovski pet collars  Rs 50,000 for mink fur coat for dogs  Rs 40,000 for gold leaf food bowl

surge in the demand for reptiles this year. In the past few months I have had orders for iguanas (Rs 50,000), snakes (starting from Rs 20,000) and tarantulas (starting from Rs 5,000)," says S.A. Sohail, owner of Fur n Feathers, Hyderabad. Wet Pets, a pet store in Bangalore, reported a rise in demand for exotic fish. "Breeding in India has tripled in the last five years. The more exotic and personalised the purchase, the more they will spend," says Abdul Wahab, who opened Wet Pets in 2007. Wahab, who specialises in custom-made aquariums, recently sold an eight-ft-tall aquarium tank for Rs 20,000 to a private buyer. Exotic birds such as macaws and cockatoos have also gained popular-

CHARLIE, A COCKATOO, WAS SOLD FOR

KRISHNENDU HALDER

ity. Larger birds Rs 45,000 such as emus and ostriches can cost as much as Rs 1 lakh per adult bird. There are currently around 250 emu farms in Hyderabad and Bangalore alone. These farms sell emu meat, eggs, feathers, chicks and oils. "Emus are active and watching them run around can provide hours of entertainment. These birds are expensive to maintain though. Food and shelter can cost around Rs 5,000 a month. One must have ample space, hired help and resources to keep the birds," says S.K. Poojary, 40, who keeps 50 emus at his three-acre farm near Bangalore. Keeping a pet is now proving to be an expensive source of amusement. 

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

