GLOSSARY

TWO BIRTHDAYS & AWEDDING
It's time to celebrate as Bollywood gears up for its biggest events this year

Amitabh Bachhan
His 70th birthday on October 11 will have a lavish red velvet décor and 1,000 guests at a plush Mumbai hotel with Anil and Tina Ambani as hosts. Designers Abu Jani and Sandeep Khosla are doing his clothes, and Canadian entertainment company Cirque du Soleil will amuse guests. We hear Jaya Bachchan has also commissioned artists to make portraits of Amitabh Bachchan for the event.

BALAN IN THE DIRTY PICTURE

THE QUEENS OF BELLY DANCING
Watching Rani Mukerji throw off her Maharashtrian sari and break out into a fast-paced dancing frenzy in Dreamum Wakeuppam is like seeing Vidya Balan in Ooh La La on fast forward. Gone is Naseeruddin Shah, the pot-bellied ageing star trying to be a stud. He has been replaced by a hunkier, six-pack Prithviraj, and Mukerji's expressions are wildly comic as opposed to the seductive lip biting that Balan did. Can't say if we preferred Balan's perpetual bosom heaving in The Dirty Picture, but the vigorous wiggling in the Aiyyaa number surely gets more laughs.

FAMILIAR GROUNDS
Make way for Ravi Shankar's other daughter. Norah Jones, 33, finally finds her way to India for a three-city tour that kicks off in Mumbai on March 3 next year at A Summer's Day, a new one-day music festival. She moves on to New Delhi on March 5 and Bangalore on March 8. Known for her albums Come Away With Me and Feels Like Home, she has nine Grammy awards under her belt.

MUKERJI IN AIYYAA

Saif and Kareena
The pair will finally tie the knot on October 16. Saif's mother and sister, Sharmila Tagore and Saba Ali Khan, are at the helm though the exact plans are a closely guarded secret. Manish Malhotra is dressing Kapoor for a small family function in Mumbai and a Delhi reception. Rumours abound that the extended Pataudi family is giving the wedding a miss.

3

RUNWAY SUCCESS
Even boys have fairytales. Look at Siddharth Malhotra, 24, one of the three newcomers Karan Johar will soon be dishing out in Student Of The Year. He has landed a film deal with Balaji even before his debut film rolls out. He assisted Johar in My Name Is Khan, was second runner-up in a Gladrags Mega Model Manhunt before that and there are enough pictures floating around to show that he has been working hard on at least his physique. But we still don't see what makes him special.

Yash Chopra

1
GETTYIMAGES

2
by FOTOCORP Photographs

Yash Chopra turns 80 on September 27, and completes 50 years in the industry. The Chopra family has an extravagant party planned, and all of Chopra's past heroines are expected to attend. There will be a choreographed performance on songs from his blockbusters and he will reveal the promos of his latest film Jab Tak Hai Jaan. Theatre director Mohit Takalkar's The Bright Day follows Shiv, a young man on a soul-searching journey across India.

CHOCOLATE VOCALS
Kiran Shergill, a Canadian-Indian singer, has signed up with one of Canada's mainstream record companies Hi Bias Records and released the video of her first single ChoKolate Soda. She has also done the rounds of Bollywood, dancing as an extra with Priyanka Chopra in The Hero and in Kash Aap Hamare Hote in 2003. The obeisance to her roots done, she moved on to performing at stage shows for Justin Timberlake, Jennifer Lopez and Shakira.
by Nishat Bari

THE HIP TRIO
Three independent films by first-time Indian directors stood out at the Toronto International Film Festival

Anand Gandhi's Ship Of Theseus is a philosophical paradox of identity and change explored through three lives.

Mumbai Cha Raja is the story of a friendship between two boys from Mumbai's slums by Manjeet Singh, a mechanical engineer by training.

YOGEN SHAH

70

GETTYIMAGES

S PAT O F T H E W E E K The claws are out. Kareena Kapoor said that Heroine was a bigger film than Fashion, and that she didn't care for National Awards. Now Priyanka Chopra is calling it a case of sour grapes.

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

