NET FLUX
net point

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

star of the week

Realty Check
Vikas Malpani, co-founder, Commonfloor.com, tells us about India's first website that caters to gated communities. Q. What is the website about? A. It is a free destination portal that puts you in touch with brokers, builders, owners and potential neighbours in apartment complexes. Q. How is it different from other real estate websites? A. From moving in to paying bills and organising meetings, the website facilitates better living. Q. Where is this service available? A. In all the metros and 120 cities across India.

Hitting the Right Notes
Meet Shankar Tucker, the unofficial prince of fusion music. Tucker, 25, who attributes his first name to his parents'spiritual guru Mata Amritanandamayi, breathes new life into Indian music through the clarinet. His videos on his YouTube channel, TheShrutiBox, which feature the clarinetist along with Hindustani and Carnatic singers, have more than 11 million views. Mumbaibased Tucker, who trained under Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia, gained nationwide fame when a mash-up of O Re Piya by Rahat Fateh Ali Khan and Adele's Rolling in the Deep exploded online.

TUCKER

app alert

Top of the Lot
Fashion Kaleidoscope catalogues latest fashion outfits from around the world and tells you where to buy them from. Gojee offers recipes for food and drinks based on what you have in your pantry.

webwow
THE APP BASED ON THE FILM BARFI

This week's app round-up is for foodies, fashionistas and DIY enthusiasts. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps.

viral video

It's Barfi Time!

A STILL FROM JIMMY KIMMEL'S VIDEO

This week, comedian Jimmy Kimmel gave some Americans the chance to review the new iPhone5. However, this turned out to be a prank when he revealed that the phone they were `reviewing' was actually an old iPhone4S, showcasing the ignorance of the average smartphone user. Other popular videos included a screaming sheep and a slow motion montage of snowboarders.
People are awesome

Make actor Ranbir Kapoor your puppet--watch him dance, sing, cry, laugh and flirt through an innovative YouTube app based on his superhit film Barfi! The app How to Paint has two settings--`The Flavour Anything gives you stepof Barfi!'has Kapoor enact the by-step directions on many moods of his character how to paint anything-- Barfi; the other,`Barfi's from walls to flower pots. Patao-shala'imparts tips on how to impress girls.The app has quite a huge fan follownew tech ing online with more than The latest gadget from Apple, the iPhone5, 100 million video has been launched and this is it in a nutshell: views and 74,602 The new iPhone is taller, 18 per cent thinner subscribers and also lighter.The phone is also faster and has a already. longer battery life and won't break as easily--the glass back panel has been replaced with aluminium.

web tips
Smartphones are amazing, but have a frustratingly low battery life. Some simple ways to conserve power: Lower your screen brightness. Disable wi-fi if you don't intend to use it for a while. Close the apps that you are not using. Avoid GPS-intensive applications such as mapping tools.

2 million views
The screaming sheep

tweet tweet

3.7 million views
Kimmel and the iPhone5

Winning Formula
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on September 18 Netizens were avidly following (and tweeting) updates about the IndiaPakistan T20 match. The Reserve Bank of India's decision to cut cash reserve ratio by 0.25 per cent had the web buzzing. Supporters wished and detractors criticised Gujarat CM Narendra Modi on his 62nd birthday. Two of the most frivolous trends include people confessing items they stole in their childhood, and what they love about dawn.

Indvspak
1,051,276

#RBI #Happy bdayNaMo
294,342
*Figures denote number of followers

8.03 million views

752,884

#Childhood chories
149,735

#Suprabhat
108,095

*Views from when videos were uploaded

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

