Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

THE POLITICS OF WEALTH

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

I

n an age when recession is the word that defines global economy, it is not glorious to be rich, certainly not in the cracked citadels of capitalism. In the negative campaign of Democrats against the Republican challenger Mitt Romney, his biggest disqualification to lead America is the size of his wallet rather than the sweep of his ideology. President Barack Obama, a conviction politician to the core, makes no effort to be defensive about his socialist weltanschauung--and the poetic public speaker has no words to spare in the praise of pinstriped plutocrats. So it was a whiff of fresh socialist air when I opened the Daily Telegraph in London last week: The young British Labour leader and prime minister-inwaiting, Ed Miliband, abandoned the customary leftist clichés and welcomed the inevitability of capitalism. Charles Moore, in his conversation with the 42-year-old Miliband, asked him: Is it good to be rich? "Yes, if you make it the hard way," replied Miliband. You would not have heard these words from Gordon Brown, who presided over the stagnant Stalinist interregnum in British politics between Tony Blair and David Cameron. Is it that Miliband, a dapper socialist who doesn't carry the ideological baggage of his Leftist colleagues of a certain vintage, is fashioning himself as the true Blairite? After all, Blairism itself was the Third Way, which was, for all pragmatic purposes, compassionate Thatcherism. The smartest of socialists have always been idea thieves: Didn't Bill Clinton the new Democrat owe a lot to Reagan? So when Miliband says "capitalism is the least worst system we have got", he is only honing his survival skills to keep pace with the zeitgeist. And his repudiation of doctrinaire Leftism comes in the wake of the new business

minister and unadulterated Conservative Michael Fallon's tribute to the business class. "We salute those who risk their own money to create jobs... Entrepreneurs are Olympian champions," he said, and called for an "end to the politics of envy in this century". These are courageous words from a western politician staring at the gloomiest global market. The conventional wisdom--the fashionable one as well--is to blame the greedy few for the plight of the rest. The banker as the bogeyman of the bazaar was born the day Lehman Brothers fell in 2008. In a world on the brink of bankruptcy, the erstwhile Master of the Universe was the stealer of our wealth--and happiness. The stereotype prevailed even as the market continued to wobble, mostly on account of bad politics. The so-called wealth creator was denied any kind of appreciation from politicians steeped in populism. Socialists such as Obama are not the only politicians who believe that it is a sin to be rich. In his autumnal isolation, our own prime minister, once upon a time a market-friendly economist of some repute, badly needed a semblance of redemption. So we have got some reforms in economy, at long last--and be grateful, we are being told. Like every other tokenism from this government, this one too is not an act of conviction but a sign of desperation. Maybe Dr Manmohan Singh wants one, just one, good profile in a foreign publication. What separates the short-term opportunist from the long-term visionary is boldness, not a piece of tokenism from your political deathbed. No Indian politician in power is likely to borrow the immortal lines of Deng Xiaoping and say it is glorious to be rich. Poverty still suits the slogan of the last Indian socialist. 

IN A WORLD ON THE BRINK OF BANKRUPTCY, THE ERSTWHILE MASTER OF THE UNIVERSE WAS THE STEALER OF OUR WEALTH-- AND HAPPINESS. THE STEREOTYPE PREVAILED EVEN AS THE MARKET CONTINUED TO WOBBLE, MOSTLY ON ACCOUNT OF BAD POLITICS.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Former RSS chief K.S. Sudarshan, 81, who headed the outfit from 2000-2009 and rankled BJP brass with his hardline views and comments on its leaders.
SUDARSHAN

NAMED Indian-American astronaut Sunita Williams as head of the International Space Station, becoming only the second woman in history to do so. WON The first round of the Davis Cup Asia

Oceania Group I by India against New Zealand. BAIL Granted to Nupur Talwar by the Supreme Court. She has been in jail for the last four months on charges of murdering her daughter Arushi and domestic

help Hemraj in 2008. FILED Mercy petition by 26/11 Mumbai terror attack convict Ajmal Kasab, to President Pranab Mukherjee.
KASAB

20

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

