Ci nema

PREVIEW

The Return of the Desi Girl
SRIDEVI IN ENGLISH VINGLISH

Sridevi puts the middle-aged Indian woman centrestage with a stellar performance in English Vinglish
she has ever been, returns to movies after 15 years. She couldn't have chosen a better vehicle. It suits the spirit of the times. The small town girl making it big in the bad old city is a narrative that has played out for far too long, and one hopes the commercial and artistic failure of Heroine has given it a much needed burial. In its place is the triumphant desi girl, striding through Manhattan with a Starbucks coffee, wearing a trendy trench coat teamed with a trendier saree. "It speaks to everyone who wants to be happy without crossing the line," says the film's producer, R. Balki. Unusually for Bollywood, the story is written and directed by a woman, Gauri Shinde, also Balki's wife. The 38year-old ad filmmaker felt compelled to tell the story of her mother, Vaishali Shinde, 62. Like Shashi, her mother too struggled with the language, and always felt inadequate though she ran a successful business from the home, making spices. This is Gauri's tribute to her, and it's what drew Sridevi to the movie. "I had been working since I was four, so the break I took to raise my girls was really worth it. I had travelled the world with my shows, but had never really seen anything. I did all the things I couldn't when I was working," Sridevi says. As a mother she responded instantly to Shashi. Not because of the struggle with the language, she says, in perfect English, but because as a mother one has to balance the demands of a husband, children, home. "As a mother, you sometimes ask yourself, why me?" she says. As a director, Gauri says she couldn't have found a better actor. "Sridevi understood the nature of who this woman was. A woman like one of us, with insecurities about ourselves," she says. But also someone who is able to adapt. It's what sociologist Shiv Visvanathan calls part of Sridevi's "problem solving" screen persona. Whether she was the professional dancer of Chaalbaaz or the journalist of Mr India, she was always quick with her wit and quicker with her fix. Wisely, the mature Sridevi is not trying to fit into the Louboutins of heroines half her age--though she can wear them off screen with even more élan. "After such a long time away, I wanted a role that was challenging, yet simple," she says. She was perfect for the '80s. She was flexible, she danced, jumped, laughed and cried, on cue when the heroes wanted. In the noughties, she can find liberation in a ladoo. by Kaveree Bamzai

er bindi is smaller than that of Krishna Tirath, minister for women and child development who made a halfhearted attempt last month to claim the female vote with the suggestion that men pay their wives for housework. But Sridevi has struck a more powerful blow for all middle-aged women stuck in families that take them for granted. "I don't need love. What I need is respect," she says in English Vinglish, which releases on October 5. Middle-aged women on screen usually attain liberation through what the Victorians politely called a paroxysm. Sridevi's character, Shashi Godbole, is dissatisfied with life. She runs a small business from home, making and selling ladoos, but finds that her busy executive husband turns to her for food and sex, but little else. Her daughter scoffs at her for not knowing English, and her young son, well, he's just a boy. But Mrs Godbole shows them all-- she learns English in a four-week course in New York, making a delicious French chef fall in love with her coffeecoloured eyes (played by well known French-Algerian actor Mehdi Nebbou). Sridevi, precariously positioned at 49 but more beautifully proportioned than

H

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

