ARCHING AHEAD IN THE
WORLD OF EDUCATION
Sri Sai University, Palampur and Sri Sai Group of Colleges Badhani - Pathankot and Manawala, Punjab

I

n a Multitude of institutes opened across the nation and choosing one of those that meets all the academic ambitions and also enhancing your career prospects can be a brain- storming problem. India, today is on the brink of a IT revolution, where every second individual is a professional. Education, at that point, becomes extremely important. One such institute that has been in the business of creating competent professionals is the Sri Sai University in Palampur that was established in 2010. Under the dynamic leadership of Chancellor and Chairman, Er S.K.Punj and Managing Director Smt.Tripta Punj, the group of institutes was founded by Shri Ram Iqbal Bhardwaj with a dream to provide world class education. Today, the group stands well organized after the Government of Himachal Pradesh accorded approval through legislation to establish Sri Sai University in Palampur 2010. The university provides excellent quality education, scientific and technical research and development in new technologies, which is helpful to professionals in the field of engineering, technology, education, law, sports, pharmacy, management and information technology with practical interaction. The university aims at, "Transforming Dreams into Reality,' by developing competent professionals with expert guidance armed with world class infrastructure and inculcating a passion for learning in the student.

 PAR EXCELLENCE STRENGTH Sri Sai Group of Institutes commenced its journey in 1996 by establishing a Polytechnic college at Badhani on the Pathankot- Dalhousie highway. The group decided to expand further and gradually it burgeoned into a group of institutes with the motto "Quality education at Affordable price". The 72 acres campus situated in Badhani has today grown into 19 professional institutes, 59 professional UG/PG courses, 2 mega campuses in Pathankot and Amritsar, 1 University at Palampur. The university has student strength of 12000+, 1000+ highly qualified staff members, 6 hostels each for boys and girls, well equipped labs and well stocked and catalogued library. The university has recorded 100% placements of all its students who benefit from studying in an eco-friendly environment situated on sprawling 250-acre campus.

nnimPACTpeature
 ACADEMIC PROGRAMS The university has divided its various disciplines into departments, schools and centers. The role of the departments is to organize and conduct undergraduate programmes in computer science, electronics and communication, civil, electrical and mechanical streams. The departments also provide postgraduate programmes. Besides the Polytechnic College, the Group also has various other institutes like Sri Sai College of Management and Computer Application, College of Engineering and Technology, Degree College of Pharmacy, Diploma College of Pharmacy, College of Education and Sai Technology Campus Amritsar. All the colleges are affiliated to Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar and Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Chandigarh. The College of Education is affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar and approved by National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE), Jaipur and State Government of Punjab.

CHANCELLOR AND CHAIRMAN

 How did you plan to set up this group? I was born and brought up in Tarn Taran (Punjab). After completing my studies from Mumbai, I taught in a village school Laddowal, Punjab I worked with Sh. Ram Iqbal Bhardwa j for 8 years. I observed during my childhood days that students are made to study under force and duress and teachers teach so much which is enough to get pass-marks. The knowledge portion is ignored. I shared my views with Bhardwaj ji and we started a polytechnic institute in Badhani to cater to the needs of the educationally backward area. My wife, Tripta Punj has supported us and we later expanded into technical and arts colleges in Badhani, Manawala and finally now this university at Palampur. Our aim is to remove this drawback and lacuna.  How well have your services been appreciated?

TRIPTA PUNJ
NAGING DIRECTOR

"Service before self" is my motto and I have been highly appreciated for my work as teacher. Administrator and social worker. I have been honoured with many awards by renowned organizations from time to time, like the Jewel of India Award, Pride of India Award, Rastriya Rattan Award, Brahmin Sewa Award and many more.  What is the USP of your group of the university? We concentrate on the students and try to build their knowledge in academics, sports curricular activities. Apart from this, we enhance their overall personalities by introducing personality development classes where trained psychologists help them to develop positive attitude and build confidence. We celebrate all festivals like Teej, Holi and Diwali where all teachers and students join in the celebrations as one family. Our biggest USP is our transparency and approachability. We encourage open communication between our students and their mentors. That is something I follow closely in personal life as weli.when my daughter can reach me any time after 5pm, when I become her father from Chancellor, Otherwise if she has to get across to me she will have to go through the regular visitor's line. We do not encourage bullying, hence our institutes have been ragging free for the last 10 years.  What message would you like to give to your students? There is no shortcut to success. Work hard and sincerely and your dreams will become realities. Live with determination, dedication and devotion.  What are your plans about the future? I will work for total autonomy of university, so that we are able to work on syllabi that are practical and moving with the times, as is the demand to create a global student. Soon our Badhani campus will also be recognized as a university. I will carry on working towards making quality education suitable for national as well as international students.

