UP FRONT

DEVASHISH MITRA

FDI IN RETAILMEANS MORE JOBS
he recently announced reforms allowing 51 per cent vents most people from travelling even a few kilometres foreign direct investment (FDI) in multi-brand retail, for their groceries. Besides, small local stores provide permitting up to 49 per cent foreign ownership of personalised services along with home delivery, which Indian air carriers and raising the cap to 74 per cent on FDI supermarkets just cannot do. A very insightful study by in broadcasting were fairly bold and much needed. The Rajeev Kohli and Jagdish Bhagwati at Columbia University reform process that started in the early 1990s had, in the makes these points in considerable detail. My view is that last few years, first slowed down considerably and then vir- most of the local `kirana' stores will survive. At the margin, tually stalled. Coupled with the recent slowing down of there might be some exit. However, losses from such exits economic growth, this policy paralysis was leading to con- are expected to be negligible compared to the benefits siderable pessimism about India's prospects and, in turn, a from foreign multi-brand retail. The operation of foreign multi-brand stores can decline in investor confidence. Rapid growth in the capital stock located in India is employ hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of people. In needed to sustain the 8-10 per cent growth that Indians China, Walmart alone employs more than a hundred have recently become used to. The new round of reforms thousand people. At the same time, cities like Shanghai will go a long way towards that end. These reforms will also and Beijing have a large number of local stores doing signal India's seriousness about further economic reforms very well. Even in the US, the small mom-and-pop stores do quite well in big cities. and instil investor confidence. In India, farmers get squeezed by middlemen and a sigA basic argument that has been put forward by the opposition is that FDI in multi-brand retail will throw small nificant proportion of their produce perishes before reachstores (`kirana' stores) out of business and lead to greater ing the final consumer. Foreign supermarket chains, by unemployment. Any policy change, at least in the short run, eliminating these middlemen, can split the resulting surplus between themselves, the farmers creates both winners and losers. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com and the consumers, i.e., farmers And the desirability of a policy will receive a higher price and change does not just depend on consumers will pay a lower price. whether or not it creates any losGetting rid of middlemen will be ers. The gains to the winners have in the interest of foreign superto be evaluated against the losses market chains. If they don't exto the losers. In a democracy, it pect to cut these middlemen out, also becomes essential to see they won't enter. If, upon entry, whether the winners outnumber they cannot do without the midthe losers. In a welfare state it bedlemen, they will exit. These comes essential also to compare chains rely on their own investthe changing economic status of ments in huge networks of cold the winners relative to the losers. storage, transportation and disFDI is associated with growth, tribution, the viability of which is and the last two decades of renot compatible with operating form-induced growth and through middlemen. Clearly poverty reduction show that then, FDI in multi-brand retail is growth does trickle down. Going to specifics, there seems to be no going to benefit farmers in rural evidence suggesting that foreign areas and urban consumers. supermarkets are going to disThat said, the current labour place the small neighbourhood regulations have constrained the grocery stores. The lack of space expansion of India's labour-inin houses in most big Indian cities tensive manufacturing. For susIn India, farmers get squeezed by middle- taining an 8-10 per cent growth, (where foreign retail stores will men and a significant proportion of their it is absolutely essential to reform locate) coupled with refrigeration problems (due to the small size of these regulations. produce perishes before reaching the refrigerators and frequent power final consumer. Foreign supermarket cuts) constrains bulk purchases. Devashish Mitra is professor of chains, by eliminating these middlemen, Additionally, the current state of economics at the Maxwell School of can split the resulting surplus between public transport along with Citizenship and Public Affairs at themselves, the farmers and consumers. extreme traffic congestion preSyracuse University

T

10

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

