Profile

LESZEKBORYSIEWICZ

MAN WITH ATALLDREAM
By Damayanti Datta

The 345th vice-chancellor of Cambridge University and one of the world's top immunologists wants more research partnerships and scientist interactions with India
per cent of all cervical cancers," he says. "It has a slow progression and if you are in the earlier stages, many of them spontaneously regress." The group that he headed in Cardiff began to explore the factors behind the regression. The push towards a vaccine to prevent cervical cancer came from the realisation that although potentially preventable, it was a huge problem among women the world over and especially in developing countries. From 2001, increasingly, administrative responsibilities came to the forefront, as Borysiewicz moved to the Imperial College in London as the head of its medical school. The responsibility for the overall academic and scientific direction of the college, apart from a number of appointments in higher education and science, gradually made him realise that the job was too big to do justice to the dayto-day interactions of clinical care. "My focus changed to helping others achieve and my job narrowed to two questions: Can I promote, can I help?" It is fundamentally the same role he is playing even now as the VC of Cambridge since October 2010. And it's a job that he enjoys the most. Will he open a new chapter between Cambridge and India? The university has a long history of nurturing Indian students, including three Indian prime ministers: Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajiv Gandhi and Manmohan Singh. From a trickle in the mid-19th century, when the first students from India reached Cambridge, they are now 240-strong. "They are very important to us and make excellent members of our community," he points out. But it's time to take that Cambridge-India relationship to the next level. "We can all learn from each other because we all find solutions in different ways," says Borysiewicz. 

A

t first glance, Sir Leszek Borysiewicz looks like any other academic. Toweringly tall, he greets visitors with a warm handshake and a gentle smile. It's hard to imagine him in flowing robes, murmuring graces in Latin, part of the job of being a vice-chancellor (VC) at the 800-year-old University of Cambridge, UK. But the 345th VC is also one of the world's leading medical researchers, instrumental in developing the cervical cancer vaccine. That explains why he is striving hard to set up research collaborations on cutting-edge science between Cambridge and India. "We have a wonderful flow of Indian students through Cambridge," he says. "We are now looking at flow of ideas, creation of networks and spread of academic influence." That means, about 250 active projects for research partnership between Cambridge and India. Consider the new initiative on chemical biology and molecular therapeutics at the Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine (inStem) in Bangalore. Funded by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) of the Government of India, researchers in this project will explore cellular abnormalities that cause diseases like cancer, and find therapeutics to combat those. DBT has agreed to provide £11 million (Rs 96 crore) for the project. A team-driven effort, it will combine methods from genetics, chemistry, cell biology, biochemistry and imaging. The multidisciplinary environment is also expected to train young researchers and physicians to channelise fundamental research towards clinical application. "This is a fact-finding opportunity," says the immunologist who was knig-

Medicine in Cardiff. "The first couple of years in medical school made me realise how much is unknown and how much needs to be discovered." But in a chequered career, he spent time both in the ward as well as in the laboratory. "There is nothing that compares with the immense satisfaction of dealing with patients as individuals," he says. "Yet you feel that if only you knew a little more, you could do so much more." Research, for him, was a long-term investment to help a greater number of people. He also moved across countries, UK to Africa, and across specialisations: Viral immunology, infectious diseases, cell-mediated immunity, virusassociated malignancy and vaccine

"WE HAVE A WONDERFUL FLOW OF STUDENTS. WE ARE NOW LOOKING AT FLOW OF IDEAS, NETWORKS AND ACADEMIC INFLUENCE."
BORYSIEWICZ
VIKRAM SHARMA / www.indiatodayimages.com

hted in 2001. Food security, water, energy, drug discovery, healthcare and life sciences are key areas of prospective partnerships. "Cambridge has a lot of strength in these areas and we are identifying institutions in India that have complementary strength. We want to put them together," he says. But it's not exclusively about science and technology. Scientists of the future

cannot rely merely on telling people about new technology, he explains. They have to work towards making people appreciate that technology. That's the biggest challenge for him. "And for that, we need to understand society," he says, "hence the importance of humanities." It's not surprising that Cambridge under Borysiewicz should focus so

much on research. "I was always very clear about one thing, that I wanted to go into research," he says. The inspiration did not really come from his parents, Polish immigrants who had settled down in the UK during World War II. Until age five, Borysiewicz couldn't speak English. But his research temperament was fired up once he joined the Welsh National School of

development. "I was particularly interested in persistent human viruses, about 20 of which we carry in our body but somehow stay in balance with them," he says. He focused on human papilloma viruses (HPV): How the immune system defends against the viruses that cause cervical cancer. "HPV is a very widespread infection and accounts for 99

66

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

67

