Mail

The Job Stealers
S E P T E M B E R 1 7, 2 0 1 2

``
Employment Freeze
The job market has been affected by recession ("The Job Squeeze", September 17). Our past experiences tell us that recession is a cyclic phenomenon worldwide. After every boom, the bust follows. In casting optimism in employment, we sincerely hope the present cycle will not last very long. Nevertheless, the Government should at least ease the bottlenecks choking the domestic market.
SANJIV GUPTA, Perth, Australia

The Government's impotence in easing the recession has made the future very gloomy for all job seekers.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR,

being experienced not just by India but also other economies across the globe. Young executives and job seekers should practise austerity and save as much as possible to fight the monstrous job recession that we may experience ahead.

Peace Volunteers
The Central as well as the state governments ("Land and Loathing on Brahmaputra", September 17) have so far failed to address the catastrophe and take measures against the wrongdoers in Assam. The basic reason for this communal violence is the imbalance in population percentages in the region. Political parties encouraged this exodus because of vote-bank interests. The lack of adequate employment opportunities in the region also seems to be responsible for the present ethnic violence.
RANJIT SINHA , Delhi

RAMESH SINHA, Gurgaon

The cover story mentions disappointing surveys by FICCI and ASSOCHAM for young professionals. Not only the economic slowdown, but also the threat of job recession looms large in the coming months. As the cliché goes, when America sneezes, the world catches a cold; the same is

Assamese actor Zerifa Wahid said she met hundreds of children and that they couldn't possibly cross the border. Children cannot possibly cross, but their parents can. The Government needs to investigate the demographic changes to stop the violence between the communities.
JAIDEEP GUPTA, Kolkata

A nearly frozen state of new job openings can be attributed to an inert expansion of the employing units, retarded pace in fresh investments and political instability presently looming large over the country. In fact, the sagging global economic scenario has been compelling business sectors to downsize their workforce. To achieve economic prosperity and windfall of fresh job opportunities, it is vital to ensure the nation's political stability, which, unfor-

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

``
Bangalore

Young job seekers are staring at disaster as employment shrinks in once superstar sectors.

Mail
tunately, India seems to lack presently. All parties need to unite and ponder over the issue before the ongoing unemployment crisis deepens further.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

35
and a Suicide", September 17) is an outcome of laxity in enforcing regulations regarding firearms, coupled with zero tolerance in today's youth with regard to dissent: A dangerous combination in the densely populated urban areas. This, despite the multiplicity of governance bodies in the ever-expanding NCR region.
AMITABH NIGAM, Delhi

a large country taking up cudgels against a newspaper article has a touch of incongruity.
BISHAN SAHAI, Patna

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
N OV E M B E R 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Facing the Facts of Life
How times change! A shift in the power structure and yesterday's firebrand ideologues turn overnight into down-to-earth realists. After the latest jaunt abroad--his fifth since he took over as industry minister-- George Fernandes announced with a straight face that foreign companies and multinationals are a fact of life and cannot be wished away. It is now only a matter of time before Charan Singh, his strong-minded Gandhian Cabinet colleague, comes out in favour of heavy industry and the public sector, since both are facts of life and stride the Indian economic scene like a colossus. Out of the Rs 125,000 crore that have been sunk into the economy since 1951 when the first Plan was launched, just under Rs 75,000 crore, or 60 per cent, has found its way into the public sector. Of this vast sum, roughly Rs 15,000 crore has gone into building the industrial infrastructure which, along with the Rs 12,000 crore worth of investment in private sector industry, has turned India into the eighth largest industrial country of the world almost from scratch. It would call for a strong sense of self-denial on the part of any government-- particularly an administration like the Janata which is still struggling to find its feet-- to wish away Rs 15,000 crore worth of industry, even if the bulk strongly offended the "small is beautiful" instinct of the Gandhians in the ruling party.

Trust Issues
After Sathya Sai Baba's death in April 2011, controversy has started between the godman's caregiver Satyajit and his nephew Ratnakar over his Rs 40,000 crore assets ("Power Struggle Over Sai Empire", September 17). All the assets given to Sathya Sai Baba by his devotees are placed under a trust for public welfare and charitable purposes. All persons concerned should respect Sathya Sai Baba's declaration. If the struggle continues, it would definitely send a wrong signal to his devotees and the public. The trustees should ensure that Baba's ideals are kept and his work continues.
R.D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

Rural Role Models
Your article on the stories of the rural youth ("India Becomes a Village", September 17) who have turned inventors and reformists is very inspiring. They are the role models for the rest of the young people of our country. Their outstanding work is worthy of emulation. They have proved that the decision we make can bring about any success we dream of. Such stories should be highlighted more often.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

India's growth story has been lopsided with a gaping urban-rural divide symbolised by farmer suicides in villages, so it certainly brings cheer to the country that the prototype image of rural India being woefully underdeveloped is changing for the better and the winds of change that have been sweeping urban areas in the country are finally reaching its villages as well.
NALINI VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Thiruvananthapuram

Clearly the murders and suicide is a case of extreme passion, unfathomable ambition and utter frustration. Obviously the police has limited role in this case. But it is a challenge and matter of consternation for society; especially for social scientists to analyse and suggest precautions to be kept in mind while bringing up children.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

Crisis Management
The petulant reaction of the Prime Minister's Office to the Washington Post's article on the Prime Minister ("Manmohan Posts an American Loss", September 17) is amateurish, to say the least, and counterproductive too. No factual or judgmental lacuna has been pointed out in Simon Denyer's article, so to fault it on the ground that the Prime Minister's rationalisation does not figure in it is ridiculous. The very notion of the Government of such

Corrigendum
The story, "Out of Suspicion Orbit", September 24, wrongly says "All scientists bar Nambinarayanan were exonerated in 1998". It should have read: "All the four accused, including S. Nambinarayanan, were exonerated in 1998." The reprieve that he received now is the high court's directive to the state government to pay him interim compensation. The error is regretted.

Killed by Love
The bizarre shooting sequence ("Five Murders

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

FERNANDES-- CHANGING WITH THE FIRST SNIFF OF POWER

10

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

