Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

DEMOCRACY 24/7
SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

I

t is a common fallacy to equate democracy and elections. Our politicians do it all the time. Of course, periodic elections are a necessary condition for democracy. They are not sufficient. Accountability cannot, and should not, be confined to a once-in-five-year time frame. Government must be held accountable for every decision it makes on each day of its term in office. In theory, this is what Parliament is supposed to do. In practice, its record is rather dismal. That is in part the nature of a Westminster-style system of government where the government of the day always has a majority in Parliament and the ruling coalition has a majority on almost every parliamentary committee, including the investigative joint parliamentary committees. The system is built to protect rather than expose the government. At any rate, democracy is too precious to be left exclusively to politicians. From time to time, the people of India, whether through civil society or media, must ask tough questions and demand accountability from their rulers. Whatever you might think of Arvind Kejriwal as a politician, he has done a great service to democracy by asking difficult questions to people in power. The questions have rattled the powerful. Robert Vadra indicted his own by calling India a Banana Republic, a term usually used to describe a country with undemocratic rulers and rampant crony capitalism. Salman Khurshid did worse when he said he would not take questions from "people on the street", the very people who elected him to the powerful office he occupies. If the Congress and its leaders are irritated with the litany of allegations they face from Kejriwal and civil society, they have only themselves to blame. UPA has run a rampantly

corrupt, and an incredibly incompetent, Government. In the circumstances, even frivolous allegations stick. Then, UPA has run roughshod over every institution within the system of government that is charged with enforcing accountability. It made a mockery of its chief anti-corruption body, the Central Vigilance Commission, by appointing a tainted candidate for the top job. The Government denigrated its own auditor, the Comptroller and Auditor General, and accused the constitutional body of producing motivated reports. Its main investigating agency, CBI, has no independence. Even the supposedly independent Public Accounts Committee of Parliament was reduced by UPA to a partisan farce over 2G. Those agitated by corruption had no forum left in the `system' which could discipline an errant UPA. That gave Kejriwal an opening. He is exploiting it. Public agitation over corruption and misgovernance cannot be just wished away. The power of communications technology, as the Arab Spring showed, is fatal for despotic regimes. The same technology can be lethal for democratic regimes which turn unresponsive to their citizens. India is finally demanding a 24/7 democracy. That is, of course, bad news for politicians who like to operate opaquely behind closed doors. It is worse for politicians who think that it is enough to campaign in the run-up to elections and then disappear to foreign lands to recuperate from the exertion. And it is terrible news for those politicians who have seceded from the "people on the street" lulled into a false sense of exclusiveness in their Lutyens' Delhi bungalows and red-light Ambassadors. India is engaged. It is for politicians to respond, sensibly. 

THE POWER OF COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY, AS THE ARAB SPRING SHOWED, IS FATAL FOR DESPOTIC REGIMES. THE SAME TECHNOLOGY CAN BE LETHAL FOR DEMOCRATIC REGIMES WHICH TURN UNRESPONSIVE TO THEIR CITIZENS.

S I G N P O STS
AWARDED Union Minister for New and Renewable Energy, Farooq Abdullah, with `Great Cross of Civil Merit', the highest honour accorded by the ABDULLAH Spanish gov-

ernment to individuals for service to their communities.

BANNED Twenty-five doctors for three to five years from medical practice, by the Medical Council of India, for showing themDROPPED Sedition charges selves as full-time teachers against cartoonist Aseem Trivedi, by the Maharashtra in medical colleges in order to get clearance when they government. He was araren't part of the faculty. rested in September for insulting national emblems and the onstitution. AWARDED Membership of the

Order of Australia to cricketer Sachin Tendulkar. TENDULKAR The iconic cricketer will become the first Indian sportsperson to be conferred with the honour that is rarely bestowed on non-Australians.
OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

17

