OT EVENT

GLOSSARY

JUST MARRIED
IT'S DONE. Bollywood's best known couple has finally got married.
The wedding of Saif Ali Khan, 42, and Kareena Kapoor, 32, was expected to be Bollywood's biggest event and it did not disappoint. The nuptials were a simple affair, a registered marriage at their Bandra home on October 16 and an exchanging of vows later that day with a party at Taj Mahal Palace, Colaba, Mumbai. But the secrecy that shrouded the entire five-day extravaganza spanning Mumbai and Delhi starting October 14 only flamed the urgency to know what happened. Tiring of trying to find out what she wore, what he promised and what they danced to, the empty spaces were but naturally filled with jokes. Like the one about Kareena congratulating Saif at his earlier wedding as an 11-year-old child, to which he supposedly replied, "Thank you beta." There were also snide suggestions that Shahid Kapoor woo Saif's 16-year-old daughter Sara.

hot event

CASTING COUP
Tamil actor Andrea Jeremiah, 27, is on a roll. Her most recent co-star was the legendary actor Kamal Hassan in his soonto-be released magnum opus Viswaroopam. The Chennai actor's next project is Endrendrum Punnagai with the current chocolate boy of Tamil cinema, Jiiva. The Tamil film has her playing a popular model and will be directed by Mueenuddin Ahmed, with music by Harris Jayaraj. Will she match up to the others?

THE FIRST CUT
From intriguing love stories to poignant tales of child trafficking, five new Indian filmmakers test the waters at the 14th Mumbai Film Festival, on from October 18 to 25.

SAPTAPADI (GUJARATI)
Produced by Amitabh Bachchan's ABCL,this tale about an orphan brings veteran actor Swaroop Sampat back to the screen.Directed by TV producer Niranjan Thade,it also stars TV actor Manav Gohil.

DIGANT (KONKANI)
Digant, meaning infinite in Konkani, is a film by documentary filmmaker Dnyanesh Moghe. It takes us on the journey of a homeless boy from a neglected and backward shepherd community of Goa, who, defying all odds, grows up to become an architect.

GANGOOBHAI (MARATHIHINDI-ENGLISH) Written and
SAIF AND KAREENA AFTER THEIR REGISTERED MARRIAGE
GETTY IMAGES

OASS (HINDI) With a few
scenes shot in the real brothels of Old Delhi,newbie filmmaker Abhinav Tiwari highlights the menace of child trafficking in India.It is inspired by the true story of Kiku,a 15-year-old victim.

PAANCH ADHYAY (BENGALI) Film critic Pratim
D.Gupta directs Dia Mirza and Priyanshu Chaterjee in this romantic drama about the relationship of a modern Bengali couple in Kolkata.

YOGEN SHAH

GETTY IMAGES

94

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

by Nishat Bari, Prachi Rege and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

MEDIA RAMU

Adil Hussain, 49, is quite the on-screen husband if his three screen diva wives are anything to go by. He was Vidya Balan's elusive husband in Ishqiya, Sridevi's insensitive tormentor in English Vinglish, and will soon be seen opposite Tabu in Ang Lee's Life Of Pi. But playing husband to divas isn't all that he does. A theatre actor from Assam, trained at the National School of Drama, he has Partho Sengupta's Sunrise next with Tannishtha Chatterjee.

WELL MATCHED
Tahira Kashyap, 28, is already a published author with her first novel, I Promise, released last year. But what made the launch of her second book, Souled Out, a collection of 10 short stories, more interesting was hubby Ayushmann Khurrana sending out the invites and John Abraham reading excerpts. The mass communication professor may be a good writer, but the most eye-catching detail for now is that Khurrana helped her with the title.
TAHIRA AND AYUSHMANN

GETTY IMAGES

THRICE OVER

cool couple

directed by film editor Priya Krishnaswamy,this is the story of a domestic from Matheran,an elderly widow who toils and saves for years to buy herself an expensive sari.

first look

STAGE LIGHTS
When the silver screen failed her, Maanu Durah, 35, turned to the stage. Last seen in a film in 1998, the Assamese actor produced and acted in her first play, a trilogy called Bheeshma-- The Grandsire. The first part was staged last year with Rajinikanth in attendance. She is now ready with the second episode, Shakuni, that releases later this month. Looks like when a camera is turned off, a spotlight is turned on.

The first peep into Vishal Bhardwaj's Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola is hilarious, with sample dialogues like Jab dil saand ho toh har ladki bhais dikhai deti hai, a grinning pink buffalo and Anushka Sharma's back tattooed with "dekho magar pyar se."

