(FROM LEFT) NARHARI AMIN, SHANKARSINH VAGHELA AND ARJUN MODHWADIA OF THE GUJARAT CONGRESS
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

CAMPAIGN OFSOPS
Promise of a bonanza for voters and sustained attacks on Modi are giving a combative Congress hope in Gujarat

Teflon Target
Virbhadra Singh seems untouched by various corruption charges swirling around him. He is accused of taking Rs 2.28 crore as bribe by Ispat Industries. While BJP burns his effigy across the state, he refers to himself as the Iron Man who does not break. He also faces corruption charges in a local court, but has won over his main accuser, Vijay Mankotia, by offering him a ticket. Mankotia says, "By taking me back, Virbhadra has taken one step. I'll now take 10 steps to help him."
VIRBHADRA
SHAILESH BHATNAGAR

I

t is a clash between a resurgent Modi and a combative Congress in Gujarat. While the party has not fielded a chief ministerial candidate against Modi, it is the state Congress chief Arjun Modhwadia who is spearheading its attack. With a campaign titled `Hisab Do, Jawab Do (We Demand Accountability, We Demand Answers)', the party hopes to cash in on a possible anti-incumbency wave. Congress is portraying Modi's regime as of and for rich businessmen; one that gives away cheap land to industrialists. Says Modhwadia, 55, "We're confident we'll end Modi's misrule." The Porbandar MLA, an Ahmed Patel loyalist, has carved a niche for himself by winning two consecutive Assembly polls, despite stiff opposition from Modi. Helping Modhwadia are Leader of Opposition in the Assembly, Shaktisinh Gohil, 52, and ex-BJP man Shankarsinh Vaghela, 73, the poll campaign committee chair-

man. They have put aside their rivalry to take on Modi. With Modi not hiding his prime ministerial ambitions, the Congress needs to contain him in Gujarat. A series of populist promises are strengthening the Congress campaign. Its masterstroke was the Ghar Nu Ghar (Own Your House) scheme that promises poor urban women low-cost housing. This was Vaghela's idea, and fetched three million applicants. Another scheme promises free 100-yard plots to the rural poor, and a 50 per cent subsidy on the building cost for houses. This got 1.6 million applicants. A third is Modhwadia's brainchild, the promise of free laptops to college students, which has logged over 240,000 registrations. Modi, though, is unmoved. "If my 18 hours of daily work over 11 years is to be erased by empty promises, I'd better leave politics," he said. Now isn't that what Congress wants? by Uday Mahurkar

40

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

ROCKYTERRAIN
The infighting in Himachal BJP ranks has spilled out in the open. As soon as Chief Minister P.K. Dhumal coined the slogan,`Kaho Dil Se, Dhumal Phir Se' for the soon-to-be-held polls, the rival camp, led by former chief minister Shanta Kumar, came up with `Kaho Dil Se, Bhajpa Phir Se' , that has now become BJP'S official slogan, much to the chagrin of the Dhumal camp. There are other sideshows. Khushi Ram Balnatah, sitting MLA from Rohru, has joined the Himachal Lokhit Party, while Kangra MP Rajan Sushant has charged Dhumal with nepotism and corruption. Clearly, the route to the Himachal peak is not quite smooth for BJP.

MAHARASHTRA

Wordsmith's Fatal Blow
VIKRAMADITYA ANURAG

Battle of GenNext
As Chief Minister P.K. Dhumal takes on the challenge thrown by former chief minister Virbhadra Singh, the two grand old men are getting logistical support from their sons. Dhumal's son, 38year-old Anurag Thakur, is MP from Hamirpur. The media-savvy Thakur is busy highlighting accusations of bribery against Virbhadra. This is countered by an earnest Vikramaditya, the 23year-old son of Virbhadra, who accuses Dhumal of selling the state."By relaxing Section 118 of the Tenancy and Land Reforms Act, he has made it easy for realtors to buy land," he says, pointing out that in Solan alone, 13 private universities have come up in the last five years."These are owned by private players and not recognised by UGC," he adds.

Editor of daily absconds after shooting guard
rakash Pohare, editor-in-chief and managing director of Daily Deshonnati, is on the run. He was booked for murder of a security guard, Rajendra Dupare, at the newspaper's printing press at Gondkhairi near Nagpur. Pohare, 58, stands accused of inciting his bodyguard, Harikrishna Trivedi, to open fire at employees, including Dupare, who were protesting against layoffs. Pohare's firm, Vidarbha Publications Private Limited (VPPL), had entered into an agreement with Nishant Satellite Communication Network (NSCN), owned by his son, to print Deshonnati at Gondkhairi. On September 8, they decided to disband the agreement, and NSCN workers were laid off. Pohare hired Hindustan Security Service and Central India Security Service to guard the printing press after the layoffs were announced. On October 13, when Pohare was inspecting security arrangements on the premises, NSCN workers started protesting. That's when the firing took place. Nagpur Rural Police has formed four teams to look for Pohare. "Eyewitnesses say Pohare himself fired the bullet. We searched his residences, farmhouses and relatives' houses, but he is untraceable. Right now, we're strengthening our case so that he doesn't get anticipatory bail," Sub-inspector Dinesh Labde, the police spokesman, told INDIA TODAY. Pohare, who was a leader of farmers, bought Deshonnati from its founder Nanasaheb Vairale in 1992, in order to "give farmers a platform to raise their issues". The newspaper has 16 editions with a circulation of two lakh in Vidarbha and Marathwada regions. by Kiran Tare

P

The Speechmeister
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

MODI

WAR OF WORDS
Will Narendra Modi campaign in Himachal Pradesh? Even though his own state Gujarat is going to the polls, there is a demand from the Himachal Chief Minister to campaign in the hill state. The pressure is on Modi, especially as he has been P.K. Dhumal's mentor, and helped install him as chief minister in 1998, against opposition from senior Himachal BJP leaders. Modi was a national BJP office-bearer at the time. While Modi's office is not giving out any dates yet, they say he could head for the hills end-October. Clearly, Modi is in a mood to cross borders. Virbhadra Singh

"I'm lucky to have a staunch devotee like P.K.Dhumal.He has been reciting my name for four-and-a-half years.If he had taken God's name instead,he could have attained moksha by now."

Vs
Prem Kumar Dhumal

"Virbhadra is a dreamer.He is fantasising about becoming chief minister.But the people of Himachal have suffered nightmares of his corruption.They are ready to retire him from politics."
by Uday Mahurkar and Man Aman Singh Chhina

42

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

