SCHOOLS
STUDENTS AT IIM, AHMEDABAD

Special

SHAILESH RAWAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

IIM, Ahmedabad 1

India Inc's CHOICE
The IIM-A tag opens all corporate doors. The institute reclaims pole position in this year's B-school rankings with a bouquet of courses specifically designed for the market.
By Devika Chaturvedi

f you are a graduate of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad (IIM-A), you are `branded' for life. The tag opens many corporate doors in India and across the world-- and with a good reason. IIM-A is the undisputed big daddy of management education in the country. It regains numero uno position in the 2012 BTNielsen rankings, climbing two places from last year. What explains the ascent? IIM-A has a sharp sense of what Corporate India wants. Sample some

I

of the new electives in the 2012-13 postgraduate diploma programme, IIM-A's flagship course: Real estate management, sports marketing, coaching and counselling skills for team and leadership effectiveness (CASTLE), media investment management and marketing management in high technology and innovation. The institute also rolled out an elective course called `Introduction to Contemporary Film Industry: A Business Perspective, in 2009 in which this year's focus is on the Rs 100-crore club of megahits and the role social media

plays in promoting a film. The market-ready course structure--the full-time two-year MBA course costs Rs 15.5 lakh--brings its dividends. "There has been a phenomenal increase in IIM-A's collaboration with foreign universities, from four in 1990s to 60 at present," says Ishita Solanki, the institute's manager, global partnerships and corporate affairs. More than 100 students opt for the student exchange programme every year. As for recruitments, IIM-A is consistently the industry's preferred destination for new hires. At the

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

SCHOOLS

Special
G U E S T C O L U M N Rashmi Bansal

2012 campus placements, an IIM-A student got an offer of Rs 39.81 lakh annually while the average salary of the batch was Rs 16.44 lakh. IBM emerged as the top recruiter among 120 companies that came knocking, picking up 21 students. Says IIM-A Director Samir Barua, 61, who has a month to go before his fiveyear stint ends: "The quality of the academic processes in the institute was maintained despite the unprecedented increase in the batch size due to OBC expansion (from 314 to 381). The criterion for selection at IIM-A has never been based entirely on CAT scores; it's always multi-dimensional." An alumni roster of names such as the Government's Chief Economic Adviser Raghuram Rajan, sports commentator Harsha Bhogle, popular author Chetan Bhagat and ICICI NonExecutive Chairman and Infosys Chairman K.V. Kamath attests to the rigour and quality of programmes at IIM-A. Dancer Mallika Sarabhai, an alumnus of the 1974 batch, whose father Vikram Sarabhai was behind the institute's foundation in 1961, feels there is a huge lacuna in teaching ethics and social commitment. "My father's dream was not to create technocratic billionaires or bankers but to create social entrepreneurs," she says. It's not something IIM-A is oblivious to. It will introduce by February 2013 a new course titled `Investigating Corporate Social Irresponsibility' in the executive education programme where students will be taught about links between excess consumption and environmental degradation, the ill-effects of industrial agriculture, land acquisition and rehabilitation issues and more. The intensity on the 165-acre twin campus is intimidating but the institute also has a lighter side to it, from a canteen named TANSTAAFL (short for `There ain't no such thing as a free lunch') to dorm names like Khujli, Tintin, Kaaliya, Disco or Burger for each fresher. And when the going gets too tough, there's always Rambhai's `Kitli' (tea stall), a stone's throw from the main gate, to stop and stare at life. 

What they did not

TEACH ME ATIIM-A
Grades are not everything. The really successful people in life, the trailblazers, are never the nerds in your batch.
t's rather obvious that the most important lessons of life cannot be learnt in a classroom. Nevertheless, here are a few things I wish my seniors had mentioned to me back then. First of all, grades do not really matter. Well, I'm told they have a role to play if you want to get shortlisted by McKinsey or Goldman Sachs. But the really successful people--the trailblazers--are never the nerds. The youngest CEO of my batch was not an I-Schol (Industry Scholar). He was a simple, jovial fellow by the name of Ved Prakash Arya. Sadly, he passed away last year in a tragic accident. Ved brings to mind another important lesson we were never really taught--the art of building relationships. The secret of his success was the ease with which he could connect with everyone from his bosses to the bachcha who joined office yesterday. What `HR' (human resources) ultimately boils down to is just being a good human being. MOST Another thing I realise IIM-A OFWHATWAS did not touch upon was the TAUGHT IN THE different career paths that CLASSROOM PASSED men and women would need to take. Men can take the OVER MY HEAD, straight path while women THOUGH I SCRAPED will have to create a zig-zag THROUGH THE one, taking into account EXAMS. motherhood. But because nobody ever talks about it, many of us don't know how to cope. And that's why so many talented women MBAs--including my own classmates--have simply `dropped out'. The MBA programme is all about having a goal and figuring out how to get there. But today I realise it's more about the journey than the destination itself. If you aren't enjoying the journey then change the destination. It's never too late to find and involve yourself with something you truly love. For many MBAs, the goal is making the maximum money. The placement process is brutal and only a few get their `dream job'. But looking back, you see it was all a mirage.To sum it all up, most of what was taught in the classroom passed over my head, though I scraped through the exams and got the diploma. What stayed with is the confidence that I can solve any problem that comes my way. And that is the ultimate gift of a great education.

I

Rashmi Bansal is a best-selling author and an IIM-A Class of '93 graduate

58

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

