GRAND PRIXSPECIAL

Steve Slater
GUEST COLUMN
Steve Slater has been the voice of ESPN-Star Sports' Formula 1 coverage since 2000 sion the following week to sign for the next five years with rivals Mercedes is open to conjecture. More likely, a multimillion dollar pay rise swung the deal. What is beyond debate is that for the remainder of the 2012 season, Hamilton and his McLaren teammate Jenson Button are driving the quickest cars on the track. Either could be contenders for victory at the fast Buddh International Circuit. Meanwhile, it seems the ultimate irony is that Michael Schumacher, the most successful racing driver in history, with 91 victories and 7 world titles, will soon be out of a job. After being dropped by Mercedes to make way for Hamilton next year, he has chosen to retire for a second time from F1. Schumacher's return from retirement has been a disappointment. Three years of hard work have brought just one win for the Mercedes team-- and that came for teammate Nico Rosberg. However Schumacher still has a point to prove, could his elusive 92nd win come in India? Two other drivers will also look to India as an opportunity to make their mark. Both were tipped as future contenders for a seat at Mercedes, before Hamilton muscled in. Nico Hulkenberg and Paul di Resta both drive Mercedes-powered Force India cars and their mid-season performance has marked them as potential top-three contenders. In Singapore, di Resta's fourth place was not only a career best for the Scot, it could perhaps have been even better. Di Resta was unfortunate that his pit stop strategy was compromised by a safety car period. Without that, di Resta was sure Force India would have battled Alonso's Ferrari for a place on the podium. If that battle is repeated in New Delhi, what a spectacle it would be!
AHEAD OF THE INDIAN GRAND PRIX, AT LEAST THREE DRIVERS STILL HAVE THE 2012 TITLE WITHIN THEIR GRASP

PHOTO-FINISH AHEAD
Paddock reshuffle spices up the Indian Grand Prix

T

he recent reshuffle among drivers and teams ahead of the 2013 F1 season has added spice to the Airtel Indian Grand Prix. Come race day, at least three drivers could still have the 2012 title within their grasp. The news that McLaren's Lewis Hamilton will join Mercedes, who in turn will drop seven-time champion Michael Schumacher, has added drama to one of the most unpredictable and close-fought Championship battles in F1 history. The man who has led the points for most of the season is Ferrari's Fernando Alonso. It is a tribute to his gritty determination and sublime control that the Spaniard has won so many races despite not having the best car. Even Alonso did not expect to be leading the title race. After an unexpected win in Spain earlier this season, I asked him whether any more `surprise' victories

are in prospect. "To be honest," Fernando confided with a broad grin, "each victory I have scored for Ferrari has been a surprise to me!" While this year's Ferrari is not the quickest or easiest to handle, it has been reliable. With the exception of the Belgian Grand Prix, when an errant Romain Grosjean crashed into him, Alonso had scored points in every race this season and was rarely far from the top. That consistent record is something his closest rivals have lacked. Sebastian Vettel, last year's world champion and winner of the inaugural Indian Grand Prix, has had his 2012 title bid blunted by electrical failures that sidelined his Red Bull in both Spain and Italy. Alonso and Vettel's fellow rival in the title chase, Lewis Hamilton, suffered a gearbox failure after dominating the early stages at the Singapore race. Whether the disappointment of Singapore influenced Hamilton's deci-

60

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

GETTY IMAGES

