SIMPLY DELHI

Elsewhere

HEADING OUTOFTHE CITY? TRYTHESE PLACES

BANGALORE
Chumbak meaning 'magnet' in Hindi, is the ideal stopover to pick up kitsch stationery or that last minute birthday gift. Photo frames, passport covers, key chains, fridge magnets and more stating 'I love Bangalore' are hot favourites. Other hot sellers are the tin boxes, flip flops, boxer shorts and car fresheners. Shubhra Chadda, founder-owner of Chumbak says the idea for the business came from her personal fridge magnet collection, since everytime she travelled, she brought back a fridge magnet. But she realised one day that she didn't have one for India. Thus began Chumbak--her company for India-inspired souvenirs. She started off by retailing the merchandise at airports and a handful of quirky standalone stores. These products are now available online and across the country. Unmistakably desi yet highly contemporary, Chumbak products are a reflection of next-gen design coming of age. CostRs 150 onwards AtSapna Book House, 80 Ft Road, Indiranagar Tel080 40455999

DARIO'S ESPRESSO
This recently opened restaurant has a heavy dose of non-vegetarian fare on the menu. Standing bang in the centre of the East Block of the Amanora Town Centre shopping mall, the cafe is a place you can simply saunter into--since there are no doors! On the menu, Chef Dario Dezio has put soups, grills, risotto, pizzas and pastas with a generous range of chicken, tenderloin, tuna and prawns. Being part of a mall, there are quick bites as well such as sandwiches, burgers and crepes. A meal here isn't complete without the homemade desserts so wind up your meal with the airy cheesecake, fresh tarts or pies. Average meal for two Rs 1,2 00 At Amanora Town Centre, Hadapsa Kharadi Bypass Tel 67260431

City-based entrepreneur Meghna was only 22 years old when she decided to open a store filled with all of her favourite things. Ten years later, the store is a bigger success than she had ever imagined. It's where Bangalore's students and young adults, the fashion forward and the oh-so-bohemian go to get the latest 'in' look. At present, Levitate stocks works by 35 young designers from across the country. Also on sale are framed posters of old iconic Bollywood films, organic cotton T-shirts that have been hand painted by out-of-work cinema billboard artists and restored antique jewellery. There are wallets made out of recycled tetra packs, terracotta jewellery, jutis and printed bags. The haphazard display isn't a mess, instead it is rather inviting and vibrant. Cost 50 onwards At Mezzanine floor, 100ft Boutique Restaurant, Indiranagar, Bangalore Tel 09448145071

Levitate

KOLKATA
If you like sweet golden rings with creamy frosting and glaze, served deliriously warm, then The Donut Baker is the place to head to. The international donut chain made its debut in Kolkata this May, and has been an instant hit ever since, with over 26 varieties of donuts on offer here. The decor is bright, with cheery orange hues dominating the 50 seater restaurant on Park Street. Apart from ring donuts like plain honeydipped ones with a choice of frostings like chocolate fudge, strawberry, maple, pista and chocolate swirl, there are also tart donuts available. Among their bestsellers is the chocolate bavarian donut which has a luscious layer of chocolate spread on top. Apart from this, a collection of sandwiches and croissants are also on offer. CostRs 35 to Rs 40 per donut, without taxes At 57 Park Street, Shop T3, 14 Park Mansion, Opposite Mocambo Restaurant Tel 033 40031347

The Donut Baker

Navsar Class Apart
If you are looking for accessories to dress up your home without burning a hole in your pocket, Navkar Class Apart is just the right store for you. Filled with handmade home decor products, the store has hand-woven carpets piled on the floor and some of the more interesting ones have textures of little pebbles, grass beds or flower petals on them. There is also a limited range of imported crockery, including glass decanters with exquisite cutwork designs. The highlight of the store, however, is the range of Firozabad lamps, which look like Moroccan lamps. Cost Rs 500 to Rs 5,500 for Firozabad lamps AtR-33 C Hindusthan Road Tel033 40048606
ormur.ii 2 0 1 2 » SIMPLY DELHI

s-63

