GLOSSARY
OLD NAME, NEW LUCK
Jiah Khan, 24, used to be Nafisa before she made her bold debut opposite Amitabh Bachchan in 2007 with Nishabd. Not that it did her any good-- she managed only two more films after that. Now she has gone back to her old name Nafisa Khan, her fortunes have turned--she has signed a three-film deal with Siddhartha Jain, co-producer of Ragini MMS.The films will be announced in December but there is already talk of at least one of them being an erotic period drama.

THE CONTENDERS

Bigg Boss 6 promises to be anything but a "family entertainer"

FOTOCORP

NAVJOT SINGH SIDHU
The former cricketer, MP and commentator is known for matching his brightly coloured turbans to his ties, but more for being a motormouth spouting one-liners labelled `Siddhuisms'. Most likely to drive everyone up the wall with his Siddhuisms and freely doled out wisdom.

KARISHMA KOTAK
A British-Indian model and one-time Kingfisher Calendar girl with a repertoire of commercials, music videos and fashion shows. A relatively unknown face, she finally gets the chance to be discovered. Most likely to be one of the first to be eliminated. She is glamorous but pretty dull.
FOTOCORP

KASHIF QURESHI
The first and only non-celebrity in the reality show thus far. This `common man' is a professional psychological counsellor from Hyderabad and a martial artist. He has started warming up to Karishma Kotak already. Most likely to deliver the cheesiest lines on the show. He told Kotak she looked like "fresh fruit".

SANA KHAN
A banned underwear commercial, steamy deodorant ads, steamier item numbers, she has it all. She was the Billo Rani item girl from Dhan Dhana Dhan Goal and has a string of films in the south. Most likely to flirt and dance her way to keep audiences hooked and avoid elimination.

GETTY IMAGES

(FROM LEFT) AMITABH, JAYA, NIKHIL NANDA, AGASTYA NANDA, SHWETA NANDA, ABHISHEK AND AISHWARYA

HAIR RAISING

THE BIG BASH
THE GUESTS
Host Jaya Bachchan welcomed the 800-odd guests. There was everyone from Rajinikanth to Shashi Kapoor, industrialists Adi Godrej and Anil Ambani, politicians Praful Patel, Mulayam Singh and Akhilesh Yadav, and most of the film industry. Missing were the three Khans, Karisma and Kareena Kapoor and Rani Mukerji.

Amitabh Bachchan's 70th birthday celebrations in Mumbai, on the eve of his October 11 birthday, became the biggest Bollywood party of the year THE PARTY
An Indian contemporary ballet by Bangalore-based Nritarutya kicked off the celebrations at Reliance Media Works studio at Film City. It was performed to Harivansh Rai Bachchan's poems recited by Amitabh Bachchan. He also launched a book of poems and artwork by eminent artists based on his life.An elaborate sit-down dinner followed.

THE HIGHLIGHTS
Aaradhya, on Jaya Bachchan's arm in between her grandparents, was the centre of attention while the multi-tiered cake was cut.A documentary film on Bachchan's life was a surprise feature of the blacktie event.There was also a performance by international DJ Donna D'cruz, who has performed for Prince Albert of Monaco and Valentino.

Someone please tell us what happened to Tanushree Dutta? Last we checked, there was more of her hair and less of her, and she was immersing herself in the world of yoga and spirituality. She emerges frightful, and with a film in hand--Shrikanth H.R.'s Kannada film Yenidu Manasali with sister Ishita. While her little sister plays the homely girl, she will take on the glamorous role. ISHITA & TANUSHREE (RIGHT) Please let this be a joke.
YOGEN SHAH

Q& "I usually don't know what I will be A doing before going on stage"
Manish Paul, 31, is TV's new favourite host--cheeky, funny and highly entertaining. With back-to-back shows Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 5 and India's Got Talent 4, there's also lots of him. Q. How do you work? A. I usually don't know what I will be doing before going on stage. I barely use a script and do a lot of things impromptu. I never mug up jokes. Q. When did you start impersonating others? A. It started in school in Delhi. I would mimic my teachers in front of them. Q. How often do people get offended? A. This is how I know there is a God because no one has ever taken offence. Q. How are you when the cameras aren't rolling? A. I do have some serious moments but I am mostly how I am seen on shows. Q. Any other talent that helps you? A. I pick up accents very fast. I unintentionally start talking like the locals anywhere I go. Q. What does your wife think of your flirting on shows? A. My stars are bright. My wife has had no problem with it. Q. Karan Johar gave you a `naughty boy' award covered with kisses at the Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa finale. A. I have kept it physically hidden in my cupboard. Q. But it was seen on national TV. A. Yes, but I don't want people to see it at home.

GENERATION GAP
If the actors are going to get older and their pretty young things younger, don't we at least deserve an Alec Baldwin equivalent? Not quite. Now that Govinda, 48, has lost oodles of weight for his football film Avtar, director Pahlaj Nihalani is rewarding him--by way of an 18-yearold girl, Raika, as his co-star. She even strips down to a swimsuit to splash about in a pool. Hmm. And we thought it was a film on football.

AGE NO BAR
Age isn't getting in the way of Sarika being a sexy siren. At 50, the actor is doing an item song in Bejoy Nambiar's bilingual film David starring Vikram, Neil Nitin Mukesh, Lara Dutta and Tabu. She will be dancing to a Sufi qawwali number, a remix of Dama Dam Mast Qalandar. The director has kept things classy by shooting the song in black and white. Sarika even helped with the choreography.
YOGEN SHAH

FOTOCORP

by Nishat Bari and Lakshmi Kumaraswami
70
INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

FOTOCORP

