AnimPACTreature DOOM BUSINESS SCHOOL -DEHRADUN

Creating ready to deliver functional Managers.
ocated in the beautiful surroundings of Shivalik greens and Ganga and Yamuna on its two sides in Dehradun,, Doon Business School tias moved ahead from being a regional player in business education to a highly industry integrated management institute known for creating functional managers who with hand on experience and ready to be productive from day one of joining company. We are recognized amongst the top Management Institutes of the Country with in a short span of 5 years because of our focus on producing functional managers who can work at the grass root level at the same time are technically strong and conceptually sound. Doon Business School was chosen as The Most Innovative Business School of India1 because of its Integration of high level value added certification programs in regular university MBA along with continuous internship for two days a week in the final year. Certifications like SAP, six sigma green belt, French, ICFM, and practical exposure of working with the company for one year makes the student ready to deliver from the first day of joining a company. DBS has focus on bringing in the corporate culture and work experience in the student while being in the college. In its unique pedagogy i.e. learning by Empowering' the entire campus is managed by the students. Here the students in various committee meet as the 'Board of Director Stake independent decisions from planning to execution, maintain minutes of meeting, raise funds and maintain accounts etc. Students feel, think and act like corporate manager & take no time in becoming part of the when they join the jobs. The new micro specialization initiated by DBS are very niche and highly job oriented especially for engineers and science graduate. These include International Logistic Management, Global Project Management, Manufacturing Management, Knowledge Management, Hospital Administration, Media and advertising Management etc. The combination of the basic specialization and unique super-specialisation works simultaneously for stability and growth.

ACCURATE GROUP OF INSTITUTIONS, GREATER NOIDA

Spreading the Light of Education
n ISO 9001:2000 and ISO 14000:2001 certified institution; the institute is located in a 16 acre lush green campus at 49, Knowledge Park-3, Greater Noida. The Institute has various engineering and management programmes i.e. PGDM, MBA, MCA, and B.Tech. All programmes are approved by AICTE, Ministry of HRD, Govt. of India and all degrees are awarded by Uttar Pradesh Technical University. The Institute was established in the year 2006 and the Awards, Ratings & Recognitions are the evidence of the height of excellence which ACCURATE has achieved with in a very short span of five years. The Accurate compromises of a rich pool of highly qualified and dedicated team of faculty members with rich industry experience and research background. The institute is imbibed with modern infrastructure with 24x7 Wi-Fi facility and technological support to facilitate teaching, learning and personality development. ACCURATE has made rapid strides in the last five years facilitating academic excellence and industry interface. For wider dissemination of knowledge among the business community and academia and in its knowledge creation and

A

dissemination activity. Placement is on top agenda at campus for all. The entire gamuts of academic activities are oriented to provide the best possible placement in leading corporate houses/MNC. Last year a total of 201 companies and corporate including Public Sector Banks namely Bank of Maharashtra and Oriental Bank of Commerce participated in the placement activities and multiple job offers were achieved for individual students. In the words of Ms. Poonom Sharma, the Group Director of the Accurate Institute of Management and Technology, "Accurate has a vision to produce the students having the knowledge comparable to the top Institutes of the Country Our motto remains to impart vibrant, comprehensive and innovative learning to our students enabling them to be managers, entrepreneurs and leaders with strong cultural values and to provide an ideal teaching environment and ambience to develop their skills to meet the challenges of the global environment.

