UNDETERRED BY DOUBLE TROUBLE
Septuagenarian Virbhadra Singh wants to win Himachal, as well as the blessings of 10 Janpath
or Virbhadra Singh, 78, the challenge is not so much in winning Himachal Pradesh as it is winning Delhi. The five-time chief minister is the Congress's most popular leader in the hill state. For this reason alone, he doesn't have the Gandhi family's backing. Both Sonia and Rahul Gandhi bear a deep mistrust of grassroots leaders. Speaking to INDIA TODAY while in Delhi to finalise tickets for the state's 68 seats, Virbhadra said, "The biggest challenge is to win the state. Everything else will follow." However, there is a fear that Sonia may repeat the Uttarakhand experiment in Himachal, and instal a rubber stamp chief minister, overlooking the claims of a grassroots leader. "I'm a disciplined party soldier," says Virbhadra with a shrug, when asked how he would react if Sonia overlooks his claims for chief ministership in case of a Congress win. He is quick to add,

F

"It's not for me to accept, but for the people." The warning is veiled by a soft, cultured tone, but it's prudent not to underestimate this old fox, who traces his realpolitik to Indira Gandhi's Cabinet. The state Congress is divided into two camps. The one led by Virbhadra Singh is more powerful. His strongest challenger is the 67-year-old former PCC chief Kaul Singh Thakur. There are other chief ministerial hopefuls from the second rung, including 58year-old Union Cabinet minister

VIRBHADRA FEARS SONIA MAY REPEAT UTTARAKHAND IN HIMACHALAND INSTAL A RUBBER STAMP CHIEF MINISTER OVER HIM.

VIRBHADRA SINGH
YASHBANT NEGI / www.indiatodayimages.com

Anand Sharma and former state minister G.S. Bali. The 57-year-old Bali's appeal is limited to Kangra. He recently undertook a yatra against unemployment as proof of his strength. Sharma has the Gandhi family blessings but he lost the only poll he fought from the state in 1982, and is now a Rajya Sabha MP from Rajasthan. Himachal is currently helmed by a faction-ridden BJP, whose Chief Minister P.K. Dhumal is being challenged by national BJP Vice-President Shanta Kumar. Congress hopes to make a comeback in this state, where anti-incumbency plays a major role. Aware of this, Virbhadra is already making his moves to secure the top job. Last month, he forced a reluctant Sonia to make him state PCC chief. Having had his way, he can now be dismissive: "It's an onerous job at election time. I could easily have done without it." He resigned as Union Cabinet minister end-June, when a Shimla court framed corruption charges against him. "I was not asked to, but I resigned. I know the charges will be proved baseless," he says. If the charges are dropped, it will be difficult for Sonia to stop him becoming chief minister in a Congress government. Virbhadra is not running short on charisma or confidence. Unfortunately, the way the Congress works, these are the very factors that could go against him. by Priya Sahgal

Bagging Vajpayee
When it comes to polls, nothing sells for BJP like the good old Atal Bihari Vajpayee. But Big Brother has been watching. VAJPAYEE PDS BAGS On October 8, Chief Election Commissioner V.S. Sampath summarily halted Himachal Pradesh Chief Minister P.K. Dhumal's `cunningly original' scheme to woo weaker sections with `Vajpayee bags'--free cloth bags printed with Vajpayee's face, to carry home PDS rations from fair price shops. by Asit Jolly

Curious Candidate

VIJAY SINGH MANKOTIA

Mad Hatter's Party
The Himachal Assembly polls are as much about the Himachali topi as about familiar concerns. Old-timers swear they can decipher swings and foretell verdicts by counting caps of different hues. It all began with BJP'S Shanta Kumar, whose Kullu topi has a zig-zag band embroidered in lamb's wool. But that's not all. The battle royale pitches Congress's five-time chief minister Virbhadra Singh's cap with its velvet green band--a sign of his Kinnauri lineage--against incumbent BJP Chief Minister P.K. Dhumal's burgundy band --that identifies him as a Himachali--edged with, what else, saffron. The buzz is, this time, even punters are counting caps. by Asit Jolly
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

GUJARAT SLOGAN WAR
Congress

DANCE OFDEMOCRACY
A new wave is sweeping Gujarat, Gangnam style. Arvind Vegda, 38, took Gujarat by storm, and has now been roped in to add spunk to BJP'S campaign. With flamboyant looks, outrageous moves and peppy music, Vegda is expected to woo the youth. The singer's popularity rose last year when he sold more than 200,000 CDS of his album Bhai-Bhai. It was Vegda's satirical lyrics on issues that landed him the job. Interestingly, he is an electrical engineer, and runs a cooling solutions firm. BJP is happy to cash in on his cool quotient.
by Devika Chaturvedi

ARVIND VEGDA

`Disha Badlo, Dasha Badlo (Change direction, change fortune).'
Narendra Modi

`Sauno Saath, Sauno Vikas (Development for all, with support of all).'

Virbhadra Singh stunned his party by wooing old rival Vijay Singh Mankotia back to the Congress. An itinerant Congressman, Mankotia notoriously procured and made public a CD incriminating Virbhadra in a corruption case. It allegedly contains conversations on monetary transactions between Virbhadra, his wife Pratibha, former IAS officer Mohinder Lal, and other industrialists. In June 2012, a local court framed corruption charges against Virbhadra. Yet, he lobbied for Mankotia's return, and ensured he got a ticket from Shahpur in Kangra. Keep your friends close, but your enemies closer?
by Priya Sahgal

44

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

