BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

BANANA SHAKE FOR MANGO PEOPLE
he seasoned wit and raconteur Robert Vadra believes masquerading as a contest of principles, and a means of that Indians do not have a sense of humour. That using public affairs for private advantage. Robert Vadra is may or may not be true, but it is distinctly better than not only a distinguished member of India's most powerful political family, but also nurtures a desire for high office in having no sense at all. Humour is complicated. One man's wit is so easily an- his own right. The mango and banana will follow him on other's insult. Folklore, and general conversation, indicate any election trail. They also hurt the prospects of his wife that Indians are pretty good at both murky ethnic jokes as Priyanka Gandhi, who is slated to inherit the Rae Bareli conwell as the noble habit of laughing at the powerful. How stituency from her mother, Mrs Sonia Gandhi. We do not know too much about Mr Vadra's educational would you rate this SMS that raced around after details about Vadra's triumphant rise as the most famous real estate qualifications. He could easily be familiar with geopolitics dealer in Indian history went public? Rahul Gandhi despair- and the economic history of Latin America, where exploitaingly told his Mummy: `First CWG, then 2G, then Coal-G. And tion by multinationals through pliant family dictatorships now it's Jijaji.' Not bad. That Jijaji has just the nice twang gave the English language this eloquent construct, banana republic. Perhaps he is only aware of the colloquial interthat serves so well in north Indian chai shop chat. At this moment, however, Indians are not discussing their pretation, which means a country run by monkeys who sell own sense of humour but Robert Vadra's. Politics is a tough national resources at banana prices. It is not the wisest sport, not suited to thin skins. Invective has been part of its metaphor to use when there is a debate raging in India unwritten rules ever since elections evolved into an art form about what multinationals might do through foreign direct in the fatherland of modern democracy, America. I just read investment. Someone certainly woke Vadra up to the dark an op-ed in an American newspaper which listed the lan- side of possibilities, for he took those remarks off his guage used in the age of electoral infancy. In 1800, Thomas Facebook page pretty quickly. He will not however be able Jefferson, an architect of the American Constitution and to efface them from public memory, not least because his much quoted for his defence of a free press, was accused of tormentors will not allow anyone to forget them in a hurry. Mr Vadra's party, Congress, is struggling with uncerrunning a "Congo harem" at his estate. Jefferson did not turn the other cheek, like a good Christian. His supporters ac- tainty. Its spokesmen first tried to threaten Arvind Kejriwal, cused his foe, John Adams, of smuggling British prostitutes who turned the story into a public fact; and tried to portray for his personal needs. Mark: British! That is equivalent to Vadra as an innocent who had been wronged by evil manipcharging an Indian politician today of running a brothel of ulators. They soon discovered that Kejriwal was immune to fear, and soon backed his accusaPakistani women, or vice versa. The SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com tions with more documentation. best riposte came in 1884 when Moreover, each reaction from a Grover Cleveland was charged with Congress worthy only managed to fathering an illegitimate child, inkeep the story alive on that dreaded spiring a ditty that followed him on oblong box called television. the campaign trail: `Ma, Ma, where's It took a couple of days for the full my Pa?' Cleveland gave his answer implications to sink in. This is the after he had won: `Gone to the White first time since Bofors in the 1980s House, ha ha ha!' when the Gandhi family is being But it is one thing calling your foe charged with corruption, and mud is names, and quite another sneering turning into glue. The Commonat the chaps who voted you into ofwealth scandal involved Congress fice and its luxurious benefits with a leaders, but not at the high rungs; pun, deservedly described as the during telecom, Congress managed lowest form of humour. The comto distance itself and direct blame mon man will get a bit tetchy about towards an ally, DMK. Coalgate was being called a mango married to a Robert Vadra is not only a banana republic (in Hindi `aam' has harder but the responsibility went to two meanings, both common and the government and the Prime distinguished member of India's mango). This sort of joke turns sour Minister. Robert Vadra is family. most powerful political family, pretty quickly. Nor is it a very good The Vadra crisis has also dambut also nurtures a desire for idea, unless of course you have inaged the Congress effort to shift the high office in his own right. The vested in sarcasm as a profession, debate from corruption to economic mango and banana will follow like the bilious Ambrose Bierce who reforms. The principal attention is him on any election trail. called politics a strife of interests back on sleaze. 

T

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

