SCHOOLS

Special
at improving both the quality of students and the quality of teaching at the institute. "The best business schools are all part of a university. Universities expose students to different fields of study as opposed to stand-alone institutes where only one subject is taught," says Dhankar. "At the micro level, my goal is to revamp the school in accordance with industry demands." Dhankar's plans are already showing results. In 2011, for the first time, FMS admitted students based on CAT results instead of their own admission test. "CAT provides a relatively accurate measurement of intellect. It is then up to business schools to hone this intellect as well as develop personality. FMS has the best of both worlds," says Rajiv Burman, HR director, Microsoft IT India. Dhankar has introduced some changes in individual courses as well. The evening part-time MBA now requires a minimum of five years of work experience instead of three. The course curriculum has also been modified and now offers a second-year specialisation in finance, HR, marketing, healthcare or international business. These changes have sparked a 30 per cent increase in applications for the course this year. Additionally, a new consultancy course, new workshop schedule and weekend
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

FMS, Delhi 3

Change is

IN THE AIR
By Sonali Acharjee

With a new campus in the works, improved programmes and modified curriculum, FMS leaps seven places from last year
practical skills," says Nimit Mehra, 26, general secretary of FMS. With an annual fee of Rs 10,000 and 100 per cent placement records for the fulltime MBA programme in 2012, FMS certainly holds its own in the competitive world of B-schools. Established in 1954, the school has since occupied the same two-storey red brick building and delivered the same curriculum. But that's all set to change. Raj S. Dhankar, 52, dean of FMS, took over in 2011 and has already set into motion a series of new initiatives aimed

t's easy to spot a student of the Faculty of Management Studies (FMS) among the bustling crowds of Delhi's North Campus: Just look for someone dressed in a sleek Louis Vuitton or Zara. India's first school to offer a full-time MBA programme keeps its students on their toes through year-round placements and industry exposure. "FMS does not limit students only to theory. We are also taught presentation, speech, networking and

I

STUDENTS OF FMS , DELHI, WITH THE DEAN, RAJ S. DHANKAR

SCHOOLS

Special
G U E S T C O L U M N Ajay Mahajan

lectures have been introduced for fulltime MBA. "We now have access to a finance lab which allows us to use live trading channels and stock markets. We can invest, study portfolios and engage with the practical side of finance in real time," says Sujoy Dutta, 26, a second-year student. FMS has the largest number of doctoral management students among B-schools in India. Over 15 PhDs are awarded every year. Research papers submitted in 2011 ranged from studies on HR management in Ethiopia to the development of trauma care systems. "We plan to provide our 130 research students with the best facilities from next year. First is a conducive working environment with individual working desks, computers and book cabinets. We'll also create a platform where students from other schools can come and share their research," says Dhankar. In July 2013, the institute will launch its new full-time Executive MBA programme in International Business, for which only professionals with over eight years of experience will be eligible. "The programme will include a semester abroad and a semester working in their own company. Having experienced professionals from different industries interacting with each other will be beneficial," says Dhankar. But the biggest project on FMS's plate is the construction of a new campus. "Our present building was not built to house 1,300 students," says Dhankar. UGC has sanctioned Rs 20 crore for a building in DU's South Campus, which will be four times larger than the current campus. Even after the new campus is ready next year, the institute has no immediate plans to significantly increase seats that currently stand at 226 for the full-time MBA course. "I come from IIT, Kharagpur, where we had nearly 600 students in one batch. I chose FMS because of the small batch. Competition is not only less but you also get to know your classmates better. I've also had the chance to engage with more extracurricular activities and projects," says Sudhanshu Sinha, 26, president of the Finance Society, FMS. Small is definitely useful in this case. 

How I learnt to LOVE THE MONEYMARKET
A business school may not be able to teach you everything you need to know, but it can help you realise what you are good at

I

remember entering the MBA programme at FMS Delhi with a lot of unreal expectations. Most of us thought an MBA degree would provide a magical solution to all our professional anxieties. We imagined that at the time of passing out two years later, not only would we know how good we were for marketing or finance, or banks or industrials or any other sector but also success would be underwritten. Quite obviously, things didn't turn out that hunky dory. The business school did help in building confidence as we learned through experiences gathered while being on several projects, case studies and training. In that sense, we were fortunate to have received academic training supported by reasonable business experience. I liked some courses more than others. An example is financial management, managerial economics and international finance. I enjoyed learning about the way financial markets function internationally and later got an opportunity to learn and contribute at work in the same space. So, in a sense, the school helped me find my aptitude in markets business. The key advantage of professional education is that it helps one in making a choice from the many options in one's professional life. One learns to make the THE selection based on skill required for executing that choice. INTERACTION The flip side is that a school canBETWEEN THE not teach many things even if it wants CORPORATE WORLD to. Every conceivable situation one AND BUSINESS faces at work cannot be simulated at SCHOOLS IS GROWING. a business school. But one thing they should take up in earnest is `How to THIS IS AWELCOME lead people and make decisions under DEVELOPMENT. stress'. This is the greatest challenge faced by managers today. People look up to them during problems which every business faces from time to time. And it is under these trying circumstances that the men get differentiated from the boys. Another key area where a lot more emphasis needs to be given is entrepreneurship. Many of us were under-exposed to what it takes to get started on one's own. A greater exposure on campus would have probably helped us in translating several possible ideas into executable projects as well as address comprehensively various facets of risks. With each passing year the interaction between the corporate world and most leading business schools is increasing. This is a very welcome development as some of us did not have the opportunity to work with Corporate India so intimately through our academic programme. Today, students have a much better idea of the world they are stepping into, which puts them in far greater stead. Ajay Mahajan is the founder & CEO, FICC Capital, a financial advisory firm

66

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

