GRAND PRIXSPECIAL

105,000

THE SPEED DEMONS ARE BACK
GETTY IMAGES CORBIS GETTY IMAGES GETTY IMAGES

is the number of people expected to watch the race live this year, as compared to the 95,000 who thronged the Buddh International Circuit in 2011.

Grid girls, after parties that are the talk of town, and blistering pace on the track. India is set to renew its date with Formula One this month-end.
By Varoon P. Anand

Rs

for a three-day combined grandstand ticket. The price of tickets has come down by Rs 14,000 this year.

21,000

t has been a long Indian summer and as Delhi sniffs out winter and heads for the great outdoors, the stage is set for the return of one of the city's biggest sporting events. The 2012 Airtel Indian Grand Prix this year is 17th on the Formula One season's list of 20 races. That makes the October 26-28 event crucial, with Ferrari's Fernando Alonso and Red Bull's Sebastian Vettel just four points adrift on the leaderboard after the Japanese Grand Prix on October 7. But more than the teams and their drivers, the Buddh

I

Rs

is the estimated annual revenue earned by Formula 1 from sponsors and Rs 2,295 crore from TV rights globally.

4,524 cr 245 cr

Rs

is the licence fee paid by Jaypee to F1 Administration. Last year, Jaypee had to shell out Rs 175 crore for a licence.
(Estimate based on industry standards)

International Circuit (BIC) in Greater Noida is crucial to the future of the sport. F1 has been reeling from falling attendances in crisis-stricken Europe and a failure to court the American audience. This year, organisers of the European Grand Prix at Valencia, Spain, elected to remove grandstands due to reduced demand for tickets, and still couldn't sell out. At Monaco, the jewel of F1's crown, sunshine beat uncomfortably on unoccupied grandstand space. The Formula One Administration, or FIA, earns Rs 4,524 crore in revenue annually and Rs 2,295 crore from TV rights. India, the nation of a billion-plus and the world's fastest growing luxury market, could do to F1 what it has to cricket, yet the question to ask is, after the high-octane guest list and frenzied billing that characterised India's debut Grand Prix in 2011, will this year be as promising or has fatigue already set in? The inaugural Indian Grand Prix at BIC on October 30, 2011, was a resounding success overall but had its share of logistical problems, from lack of entertainment and food options for fans to inadequate sanitation facilities, transportation problems from far-flung parking areas to the venue, and even a dog straying a tad too far onto the race track. Many would say it's all part of the
(FROM LEFT) LADY GAGA; SEBASTIAN VETTEL; A DRIVER AT THE BUDDH CIRCUIT; AN AIRTEL GRID GIRL

FINAL

GRAND PRIXSPECIAL

D-DAYS

FROM DELHI

DRIVERS' DELIGHT
For racers, the BIC track is as good as it gets
Sebastian Vettel, 25
Germany, Red Bull Racing

THREE DAYS OF
CRUISE TO CIRCUIT


OCT 26 OCT 27 OCT 28
PREMIUM STAND NORTH

Practice 1
10 a.m.-11.30 a.m.

Practice 2
2 p.m.-3.30 p.m.

NORTH & WEST ZONE GATE

Practice 3
11 a.m.-12 p.m.

NON-STOPACTION
From parking to parties, this year's race promises to be a bigger, better affair than the inaugural 2011 Grand Prix
Parking for 10,000 vehicles has been arranged, as against 4,000 last year.  Shuttle buses from BIC designated parking place to BIC, Noida City Centre Metro Station, and Knowledge Park.  The Circuit lies on the newly functional six-lane Yamuna Expressway which further connects to Delhi by another six-lane Noida-Greater Noida Expressway. Access to the circuit is much better than last year.  A special crowd control initiative has been put in place. Vehicle check point at Yamuna Expressway and Noida-Greater Noida Expressway interchange will maintain a smooth traffic flow. In case of traffic congestion, your vehicle will be diverted straight to Pari Chowk from where you can take Surajpur-Kasna Road, near Knowledge Park, to reach the Circuit.  The newly done-up grass carpeting around the Circuit will ensure that drivers and spectators don't have to inhale the dust, unlike last year.

Qualifying
2 p.m.

Race Day
3 p.m.

"The track combines slow corners and highspeed straights. Last year, I visited the Taj Mahal and I'm really looking forward to going back to India."

ONE Z H T NOR
W1 N4 N6

N1 N3 N5 N2 Bus Mall North
AD R RO INNE

PADDOCK ZONE GATE

Mark Webber, 36
Australia, Red Bull Racing

CLASSIC STAND NORTH

YWWEXIT2B

Indian package, yet people will be far less forgiving in year two. In comparison to the last time, this year's build-up is a much tamer affair. There are only a few weeks left before the big party whizzes back into town but neither of the big two behind last year's success-- Sameer Gaur, MD and CEO of race host Jaypee Sports International (JPSI), and Bollywood heartthrob Arjun Rampal, the owner of after parties host LAP Lounge--want to drop any hints about who's coming. At a time when budgets are tight and everyone wants to make that extra buck, splurging on big interCORBIS

YAMUNA EXPRESSWAY

WEST ZONE

F1 VILLAGE
CLASSIC STAND 2 WEST
MAIN GRANDSTAND

Sergio Perez, 22
Mexico, Sauber

"I immediately liked the circuit. It is challenging and I'm confident it will suit our car. India is a fascinating country.Time is always limited, but I would like to see the Taj Mahal."

CLASSIC STAND 1 WEST

W4 W11

PADDOCK ZONE

"The circuit is quick. It's going to be warm, which is a challenge for tyres. I love cricket. India has amazing cricketers and I'd love to watch Australia play here someday."

BUDDH INTERNATIONAL CIRCUIT
W9 W10 W2

Warm Up in Style
Just before the race weekend, popstar Enrique Iglesias will be performing at the HUDA Grounds in Gurgaon on October 19, as part of the three-city (Pune on October 17 and Bangalore on October 21) India Tour.

N7

NIC H PIC NORT D N STA

W3

W12 W5

BIC TRACK
INNER ROAD CLASSIC STAND EAST

Nico Rosberg, 27
Germany, Mercedes AMG Petronas

PARTY PIT STOPS
As against last year, F1 organisers JPSI, in collaboration with nightlife hotspot LAP, will host all F1 after parties at LAP Lounge in Samrat Hotel, New Motorcycle Delhi."This year, it's going to be a more West exclusive event with only 500 to 600 Motorcycle covers and a line of international DJs South S7 that will fit the club atmosphere," says Arjun Rampal, owner, LAP Lounge.
S6

Bus Mall West W13 W7

"I like the track very much.A lot of things are still new as we raced there only once. Last year, I visited the Old Delhi spice market and even drove a rickshaw! Maybe we can see the Taj this time."

NATU RAL S TAND SOUT H

INNER ROAD

S5
STAR STAND 3 EAST STAR STAND 2 EAST

STAR STAND 1 EAST

W6

W8 S8

S4

E5

Bus Mall West

S3 S2

E4 S1 Bus Mall South
PREMIUM STAND SOUTH PICNIC STAND SOUTH

E3

E2 E1

India, HRT Formula 1 Team

SOU TH Z ONE
Taboo, founding member of the six-time Grammy Award-winning group The Black Eyed Peas, will be performing solo at Amber Lounge at Claridges Surajkund in Delhi as a part of the after party event on October 27 and 28.

E7

E6

EASTZONE SOUTH ZONE TAXI GATE

Taxi

FROM AGRA

INDEX

Graphic: SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

"The track has been in use and won't be as dusty and finishing touches have been done.This year, I'll be 100 per cent focused on my driving and hope to improve on my 17th place finish from 2011."

EASTZONE GATE

Narain Karthikeyan, 35

Bollywood musicians VishalShekhar and Shaan will be performing at BIC, along with college bands during Rock the Race event.

national pop icons doesn't make business sense. The other big changes this year are all at the track. JPSI has promised to create an entire F1 village starting with the expansion of the facilities behind the main grandstand. "We want to bring a carnival atmosphere to the event and offer more to the fans," says Gaur. The idea is to keep fans hooked and offer them an enhanced experience that goes well beyond the track. Speaking of which, all is well with the 5.14 km BIC track. Designed by German engineer Hermann Tilke, it affords plenty of overtaking opportunities that drivers relish and fans can't get enough of. The only modification is a 10-m widening on hair-pin turns 6, 7 and 8, where Ferrari's Felipe Massa had a collision with Mercedes's Lewis Hamilton in 2011. To ensure a clean track, the same mechanised sweepers used at the Bahrain Grand Prix in February have been imported. The big question is money: JPSI paid an estimated Rs 175 crore as licence fee to FIA last year and Rs 245 crore this

YAMUNA EXPRESSWAY

ENTRY POINT

PARKING

F&B

TOILETS

ATM

SHUTTLE BUS

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

FINAL

GRAND PRIXSPECIAL

RACE tech
F1 innovations used in daily life

All-terrain Wheelchairs
At the 2012 Paralympics, BMW used F1-inspired wheelchairs, made of a tough carbon-fibre material called `monocoque'; for Britain's basketball teams.

Anti-slip Shoes
F1 tyre and tread pattern have been used to make soles with anti-slip protection for people working in areas with wet and greasy floors.

Hi-tech Leg Support
Hydraulic dampers from F1 cars are used in a special lightweight leg support. The brace has been successfully tested on US marines.

year. Is its investment paying off? "You can't hope to recover it in a couple of years," says Gaur, "We think we can break even in 5-7 years." It's an ambitious target, considering the $450 million (Rs 1,700 crore) cost of the track and licensing fees to FIA that rise by 10 per cent each year. The revenue from TV rights, the big money-spinner, remains tightly controlled by F1 supremo Bernie Ecclestone. With tickets at the main grandstand also down from Rs 35,000 in 2011 to Rs 21,000, JPSI looks to generate money from sponsors and trackrelated events. Airtel's Rs 34-crore title sponsorship deal runs till 2016, with Mahindra, Hero Motocorp, Mercedes Benz, Reliance Industries, and Gillette as partners to cover operational costs. That leaves JPSI to make its money back from events throughout the year. It has pitched BIC as the go-to destination for all vehicle launches and found takers in Ferrari, Audi, BMW, General Motors, Mercedes, Maruti and MRF. Jaypee has also used the track throughout the year for Open Track days, inviting enthusiasts to experience racing on the track. The 2012 Airtel Indian Grand Prix host's big catch is a four-year contract from 2013 to 2016 for the

Superbike World Championship with its promoters, Infront Motor Sports (IMS). Across the world, F1 has always been as much about the leggy grid girls, adrenaline-pumping after parties and sprays of champagne. In 2011, Rampal brought pop diva Lady Gaga for her first Indian performance on the sidelines of the Indian Grand Prix at a specially created venue in Greater Noida. The gig was a hit but a logistical nightmare. This year, most of the after parties will stay in the Capital, at the LAP Lounge's actual location, Hotel Samrat. Rampal says there's no Lady Gaga repeat. "This year, we will bring an internationally renowned DJ," he says. The Amber Lounge at the Claridges hotel, Surajkund, will also host F1 parties at its nightclub where Taboo, the lead rapper of the band Black Eyed Peas, will perform on October 27 and 28. As for food, Jaypee's hotel division, in association with restaurateur A.D. Singh, will supervise the food stands behind the main grandstand and it will include Indian, Mughlai, fast food and vegetarian options. Additional fast food areas have also been created behind the North, East, and South stands. The area behind the main grandstand will

Greener Future
Sauber and Lotus F1 team are pushing ahead with developments in solar power at their factories, aimed at reducing the teams' carbon footprint.

`Drivers Seemed Like Gods'
Volunteer at the first Indian GP gives us a ringside view
During race week, the drivers seemed like gods descended on earth, the cars like machines from an advanced alien space race, and the track and our training like an unconstrained window into the world of Formula One. A race was something many of us had previously only experienced on our television sets. Three events in particular remain in my memory. The first was seeing my first-ever F1 driver in person. Amazingly, it was the legend himself, Michael Schumacher. The second was hearing the unimaginably loud roar of the engines during the first practice session. This was followed by the cars themselves racing towards us like a pride of lions. Finally, I remember running with my heavy fire extinguisher, adrenaline pumping, to rescue a Team Lotus car that had gone off track during one of the sessions. Volunteering as an F1 marshal was the experience of a lifetime.

Fuel Conservation
Flywheel technology captures energy released during F1 car braking and stores it for later use. This can help reduce fuel consumption in future.

Patient Monitoring
The Ovei pod telemetric data transfer technology in F1 cars is now used in healthcare. The captured data is sent to doctors across the world.

Srinivas Madala was a fire and rescue marshal at the inaugural F1 Indian Grand Prix in 2011

50

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

FINAL

GRAND PRIXSPECIAL

Rear Wing
The only moveable part on the body is the Drag Reduction System (DRS), which is part of the rear wing assembly.

MEAN Machine

New rules and technology have reshaped F1 cars for the 2012 season

Diffuser
For the 2012 season, the Formula One Administration banned the double diffuser that was used over the last two seasons. The diffuser has to be without any holes.

Width Limitation
The maximum width measured at the side pods is now 180 cm. Also, no side skirts or any other aerodynamic devices are allowed.

Tyres Front Wing
The front wing should not flex or stall under any condition while the car is moving. Also, moving flaps have been banned.

Front Overhang
The overhang, including the nose assembly and wings, cannot exceed more than 120 cm from the wheel centre line.

Eleven sets of dry weather tyres are allocated to each race, along with four sets of intermediate and three sets of wet weather tyres.

by Vivek Mukherji, Auto Bild

also contain merchandising stalls sponsored by apparel giant Puma for the big-ticket teams such as Ferrari, Red Bull and Mercedes. JPSI also began a competition in early October called `Rock the Race' for college bands, winners of which get to play at the main grandstand all through the weekend. "We also invited acrobats and other entertainment acts and on Sunday (October 28) we will have a Shaan and Vishal-Shekhar concert at the track," adds Askari Zaidi, senior vice-president, corporate communication, JPSI. Parking is also expected to be a smoother affair, with three separate entrance points opened

VIRTUAL VROOM
Download the Airtel Indian Grand Prix 2012 app for more on F1. The free app gives you news, results and schedules of the race.

up from the Yamuna Expressway. "We've also tied up with Mahamaya and Galgotias University for parking space," says Kamal Ahmad, in charge of traffic movement. JPSI has also added more sanitation facilities for the 100,000-plus estimated turnout. The clinical organisation of the Indian Grand Prix by JPSI, a subsidiary of the family owned infrastructure con-

glomerate Jaypee Group, restored the nation's pride battered by allegations of rampant corruption during the 2010 Commonwealth Games. "Last year's F1 turned out to be one of the best races of the season. I got the feeling that I was dealing with a highly professional corporation which will guarantee the organisation of a successful race in India," says IMS Chairman Maurizio Flammini of his decision to bring superbike racing to India. If that endorsement is anything to go by, India's second instalment of Formula One racing promises to bring fans nail-biting action.
with Pierre Mario Fitter, R. Pallavi and Anushree Basu-Bhalla

52

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

FINAL

