BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE LORD OFTHE WRING
The Congress seems to have adopted two techniques he English writer G.K. Chesterton famously dismissed journalism as saying `Lord Jones is dead' to those who to deflect bad news: Bluff and aggression, as in Khurshid's had no idea that Lord Jones was alive. But journalists case; and self-pity, laced with threats against media and do become a trifle more useful when they find out what pre- officials, in the case of Robert Vadra. Perhaps the nadir cisely Lord Jones has been up to, particularly if Lady Jones came when Digvijaya Singh made the preposterous suggestion that families of the powerful should be kept has been caught with her hand in the charity cash box. Lord Salman Khurshid, doubly ennobled by an old stint at outside the corruption debate. It did bring to mind the fact that Vadra is not the only Oxford, dislikes bad news as much as any mere mortal; but he truly hates the messenger. Threats are the default position model for a son-in-law. Jawaharlal Nehru had a son-in-law of those who have forgotten the difference between author- as well. His name was Feroze Gandhi, and it is his surname ity and authoritarianism. When the dust of bluster at his press that is being used by the most powerful ruling family in the conference on October 14 had settled down, Lord Salman had country. Feroze was husband of Indira and a Member of a simple message for Aaj Tak, the news channel which broke Parliament at a time when Jawaharlal's personal power the story that made him front page news: `Off with your head!' was unquestioned. Feroze did not seek to enrich himself But pesky reporters know how to keep their heads, even with sordid land deals, encouraged by a kindly wife wearing a beatific smile, while the prime minister pretended that when all around them others are losing their cool. Such Lords like to believe that nasty journalists are nothing had happened. On the other hand, Feroze Gandhi impelled by malice. The primary motivation is rather less as MP exposed one of the major financial scandals in the dramatic, if more dangerous: Curiosity. Curiosity is a basic Nehru government. By today's standards, of course, the and rewarding human virtue, the inspiration for both the amount of money involved was pitiable. There are many in the establishment who believe that introvert in the laboratory as well as the extrovert searching through the topography of an arctic pole. It is entirely news can be suppressed; and that if no one knows the story, appropriate that NASA named its Mars robot Curiosity. It is it has not happened. You can shield information up to a point, also the primary reason why citizens read newspapers and but not beyond it. The oldest and most revered Indian epic, watch television. Yes, curiosity does occasionally kill the Ramayana, poses a question that it does not quite answer: cat, and there are occasions when a journalist working the How did a dhobi in Ayodhya know that there were rumours about Sita in Lanka? News travels, ledge leans too far, loses his balance and SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com and never faster than when by word lands in a mess. But for every fatal misof mouth. The Lord of India did not take there are 99 success stories. The threaten the dhobi, even when he exposé of Salman Khurshid was an exknew the dhobi was wrong, because cellent example of journalists doing their he understood that the credibility of job, untroubled by fear of revenge. his throne lay in his ability to elimiPerhaps Khurshid should be more nate both apprehension and misapworried by his real friends in politics prehension with reason and rather than imagined foes in journalism. evidence. That dhobi is nameless. But His senior Cabinet colleague and parthe cannot be eliminated from history ner on the UP election campaign, Beni because he questioned power, and Prasad Verma, a man who has clearly then went back to washing clothes. seen money arrive and depart, raised a India is greater than its governpiquant question: Why would someone ments. India has produced an astonso senior in Government think of stealishing citizens' revolution to ing a mere Rs 71 lakh? It is a very good challenge the passage of power into question. When talk of corruption under the grasp of pygmies. Each crisis the present Government swirls into hunThe Congress seems to point produces the hitherto undreds of thousands of crores, why pick have adopted two techknown revolutionary who takes a up petty cash? Khurshid is not a junior national mission forward. Ashok official in a minor Union territory; he is niques to deflect bad news: Khemka, the Haryana IAS officer who the Union Minister for Law, with an Bluff and aggression, as in Oxford degree. But the curious do have further exposed Vadra's land deals in Khurshid's case; and selfa different way of looking at facts. How Haryana, has just joined a growing pity, laced with threats do you measure the depth of an iceberg list of heroes who believe that if they against media and officials, unless you have done due diligence on do their honest duty, our nation will in the case of Robert Vadra. the tip? be safe. 

T

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

7

