Feature

Innovative Education at EMPI
Delivering intense professional programmes crafted by leaders of Industry
._.

~MPI Group of Institutions, founded in 1995 with Mr. Gurnam 1 Saran. former Director BHEL, Sr. Management Consultant Commonwealth (UK) & President IEEMA as its founder President, is a unique conglomeration of institutions/centres of excellence. EMPI has been continuously involved in job-market scan and developing befitting Post Graduate Industrial Training & Skills packaged professional programmes. The result of EMPI's endeavour has been very encouraging as AICTE has given approval for conducting the PGDM programme with an array of specializations in Advertising Communication, Business Analytics, Finance, Global Business, Human Resource and Organization Development, Innovation & Operations Management, Integrated Marketing Communication and Brand Management, Marketing and Media Marketing, Sales and Planning. The programme launched in October '95 after approval by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, has been granted recognition by the Association of Indian Universities (AIU) as equivalent to MBA Degree. Credit for creation of EMPI's rich learning environment in South Delhi's green pollution free setting, indeed goes to India's acknowledged icons - great achievers in Management, Academics, Bureaucracy, Judiciary and the like.

BIRLA INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT TECHNOLOGY 2011 of our institute around 2007-09 we explored the IN WITH possibilities of setting up a second campus at Gujarat,
Dr. H. CHATURVEDI
Director, BIMTECH

What are BIMTECH's plans for future? We are coming up with new and sister institution of BIMTECH at Bhubaneswar, Odisha. Government of Odisha has provided a sizable land to BIMTECH and Birla Academy of Art and Culture to open a university. The proposed university will be named as Birla Global University (BGU). It is proposed to set up a global level academic institution in the region with support of government and other important stakeholders. The institution has high expansion plans with quality teaching and research offering. It proposes to start from management education. This campus would be operational from July 2013. Where the campus is coming at Bhubaneswar? The Odisha Government has taken a decision and allotted 29.4 acres land located in a prime institutional area called Gothapatna. It is not far away from the city and the airport. The famous caves of Udaigiri and Khandgiri are in the neighbourhood of this location. Gothapatna has already been developed by the Infrastructure Development Corporation of Odisha (IDCO). Three renowned institutions Navratna National Aluminum Company (NALCO), India Institute of Information Technology (HIT) and International Management Institute (IMI, Delhi) have been allotted plots in the neighbourhood. HIT and IMI are already running their programmes from Gothapatna Institute Area. Why did you choose Bhubaneswar as a place to expand tivities of BIMTECH? art of expansion at pan India level under the Vision -

Rajasthan, Haryana or Odisha. We were offered land by the respective state governments, but we decided in 2009 to travel to Bhubaneswar, the blossoming state capital of Odisha. Going to Odisha and setting up another campus at Bhubaneswar has been part of our long term strategy to expand both inside and outside the country. Through the Bhubaneswar Campus, we would like to serve the higher education needs of Odisha, Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. Having seen the growth of Bhubaneswar as a big destination for higher education in Eastern India, we decided to set up our new campus at Bhubaneswar. Which all programmes would be offered at the Bhubaneswar Campus? The academic and industry strength of BIMTECH Greater Noida will create a synergy to establish the new campus with the same strength in academic and industry interactions. It is proposed to initiate a diversified profile of management education in the domains which demand professional manpower in volume. The domains of general management, design and mass communication and journalism are having immense potential and opportunities for fresh graduates in the areas. We intend to offer PGDM, Masters in Mass Communication & Journalism, Integrated Law and BBA. Approvals would be taken from competent authorities for each of the programmes.

