HEALTH

by DAMAYANTI DATTA

Between Memory &

Forgetfulness
It's World Alzheimer's Week. How well do you know the disease? From its early onset to its most severe stage, here's a quick guide.

3.7 million
INDIANS SUFFER FROM ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
STAGE I
LASTS 2-4 YEARS

1 in 20
Indians over 65 are at risk of being afflicted byAlzheimer's.The risk goes up to 1 in 5 in people over age 85.

Behaviour changes visible during the early or mild stage
Getting lost. Difficulty in managing money. Repeating questions. Taking longer to finish routine tasks. Losing or misplacing things. Mood swings and personality change.

That's 22 per cent of the global load. According to the World Health Organisation, more than 50 per cent people with Alzheimer's live in the developing world, slated to go up to 70 per cent by 2025. Alzheimer's Disease is a brain disorder, where nerve cells and connections vital to memory and other mental abilities get damaged. Age, family history and genetics are believed to be at the root of it. Research shows that people with heart ailments and diabetes might be prone to the disease. Dementia, loss of thought, memory, language and the gradual inability to carry out daily chores make it a dreaded condition. Research is inconclusive on causes and cure, although age, family history and genetics are found to be at work. People with heart ailments and diabetes are found to be prone to the disease.

70%
of all dementia cases can be attributed to Alzheimer's. However,not all cases of memory loss and dementia are Alzheimer's.

STAGE II
LASTS 2-10 YEARS

Changes during the moderate stage
Forgetting recent events and personal history. Disoriented and disconnected from reality. Trouble recognising familiar faces. Speech,reading and writing problems. Wandering.

2.1 million
women make the bulk of the patients.

Very early stage

STAGE III
LASTS 2-10 YEARS

Mild to moderate

Changes during the severe stage
Losing control over bodily functions. Memory almost non-existent. Will sleep often. Vulnerable to other illnesses.

As Alzheimer's disease progresses, neural tangles spread throughout the brain (shown in blue). By Stage III, the damage is widespread.

10 to 15
day care centres available in India
Awareness of Alzheimer's is dangerously low in the country.

Severe Alzheimer's
Graphics by PUSHVINDER KAUR /www.indiatodayimages.com

OCTOBER 13, 2008 N INDIA TODAY

00

