Nation

TAMILNADU

ALAGIRI STARES AT SONSET
Court refusal to grant anticipatory bail to son could affect DMK'S succession plan
proach the Supreme Court." The Madurai bench of the high court rejected the anticipatory bail pleas of both Dayanidhi and his business partner S. Nagarajan. They were booked for siphoning off huge quantities of granite from government land beyond the permitted area of 1.8 acres owned by Olympus. On May 16, Madurai Collector Ansul Misra's team reported that Olympus had quarried 468.243 cubic metres of granite from its own legally permitted area, but carted off 2,292.814 cubic metres. The charges include criminal conspiracy, trespassing and cheating. The investigating officers of the state police submitted to the high court that Dayanidhi was directly involved in the scam. The market value of multi-coloured granite is around Rs 30,000 per cubic metre, which means Dayanidhi's firm illegally gained Rs 44 crore, according to the report. Opposing Dayanidhi's bail plea, the investigators told the court that three officials of Tamil Nadu Minerals Ltd who were arrested in September attested to his role in the scam. The scam has led to 43 arrests after the then Madurai collector U. Sahayam's report in June said 175 licences were issued to mine granite from strictly specified areas. These were extensively used as cover to illegally quarry from other areas. The report said over the past 20 years, private quarry owners had caused a Rs 16,338 crore revenue loss to the state government. DMK sources said Dayanidhi had severed his links with Olympus in 2010, and had nothing to do with the scam. "He had clearly disassociated himself from that company well before all this happened," an insistent DMK spokesperson TKS Elangovan told INDIA TODAY. But the police refuses to buy this theory and said this was not corroborated in the departmental records. by R. Ramasubramanian

or Union Chemicals and Fertilisers Minister M.K. Alagiri, the Madras High Court refusing to grant anticipatory bail to his only son Durai Dayanidhi, 28, on September 25 could not have been at a worse time. Olympus Granites, Dayanidhi's quarrying firm, is accused of illegally mining Rs 44 crore worth of granite from Keezhavalavu, on the outskirts of Madurai. Dayanidhi has been dodging arrest after the police issued look-out notices to all airports in mid-September to stop him from leaving India. Dayanidhi's arrest could be a big blow for Alagiri in the DMK succession war with his sibling, M.K. Stalin. Stalin is DMK treasurer, a post with considerable clout in the party. He also controls the DMK's official mouthpiece, Tamil daily Murasoli, and Kalaignar TV. Party sources say Stalin, with a majority of the DMK's district secretaries and many MPs and MLAs backing him, is counting on Dayanidhi's arrest to erode Alagiri's support base. The ruling AIADMK would enjoy Alagiri's discomfiture, given how he had not allowed them any political space to operate in Madurai. Alagiri

F

DURAI DAYANIDHI, SON OF M.K. ALAGIRI

was also chiefly responsible for DMK winning all 11 by-poll seats from 2006 to 2011. Dayanidhi's arrest will be a slap in the face that a party riddled with scams can ill afford at this stage. Dayanidhi, who studied engineering at Chennai's Anna University, launched Olympus in 2007, followed by Cloud Nine, a successful movie production and distribution company, in 2008. Cloud Nine has produced and distributed 10 Tamil films so far, including the hit Varanam Ayiram. The last time Dayanidhi hit the headlines was in 2010, when the guest list at his wedding to lawyer Anusha included then Union finance minister Pranab Mukherjee, industrialist Vijay Mallya and actor Rajinikanth. The police say they don't have a clue about the whereabouts of Dayanidhi, who lives largely in Madurai. He owns a farmhouse on Chennai's East Coast Road as well. "We will intensify the search," said V. Balakrishnan, Madurai superintendent of police. Dayanidhi's counsel, Veerakadiravan, told INDIA TODAY, "We have yet to get the court order. We will decide whether to surrender or to ap-

46

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

NEW

