RETURN OFTHE REPARTEE
Modi's Assembly poll campaign is peppered with rhetorical flourishes against his foes

CHANNEL OF HOPE
The Gujarat chief minister's big worry is Saurashtra, where rival Keshubhai Patel is fanning anti-Modi sentiment among Leuva Patels and other castes. The Congress has also been playing up Gujarat's farmer suicides in its region in TV ads. With late monsoon rains giving some last-minute relief, Modi is trying to cash in. On September 25, he announced the third phase of the Saurashtra Narmada Irrigation Scheme, to cover most of the region's districts. A 13-minute film on it was shown at a farmers' meet at Rajkot. Will the Narmada canal wash away Modi's woes?

W

ith Assembly polls two months away, the rabblerouser is back with a bang. Faced with a combative and united Congress, Chief Minister Narendra Modi is reaching out to his voters through his oration. His Vivekanand Vikas Yatra is drawing huge crowds in most parts of the state, as he goes on a rhetorical rampage. "I'm struggling for 10 years to fill up the potholes left behind by Congress misrule," he told a rally of 60,000 at Dhoraji, the Congress stronghold in Saurashtra, on September 24. Reacting to the Congress statement that there was no comparison between Modi and Rahul Gandhi, he said at a youth rally in Rajkot on September 17: "How can there be any comparison? I am a regional leader. He is an international leader. He can fight elections even in Italy." At a meet in Surendranagar on September 22, he said, on `Coalgate': "We'd heard of theft of sil-

ver, gold and cash. We were never scared of leaving coal outside our homes as we could never imagine it could be stolen. The Congress-led UPA is stealing even that. Today, AICC stands for All India Coal Congress." At another gathering, he rephrased Abraham Lincoln to debunk the Centre's assertions on FDI in retail: "Manmohan has changed the definition of democracy. His Government is `of the foreigners, by the foreigners and for the foreigners'." The rhetorical flamboyance is accompanied by populism. New districts Somnath-Veraval and Aravalli are named to evoke regional pride--Somnath after the temple, Aravalli after the hills that witnessed Rana Pratap's exploits. Chota-Udaipur and Botad, two small towns, have been made headquarters of eponymous districts. New sops include a raise in the recruitment age for government employees and 50 per cent reduction in

MODI AT A CAMPAIGN RALLY

SHAILESH RAVAL / www.indiatodayimages.com

"If Modi thinks he is so important, let him try to fight Lok Sabha polls from Bihar. Let's see if Nitish allows him to enter there."
--Union Minister Anand Sharma on Narendra Modi's quip that Rahul Gandhi can even contest from Italy

loan interest for farmers. The Congress, too, has sharpened its attack. The party has called for the government's resignation following a Rs 400-crore fisheries scam involving Fisheries Minister Purshottam Solanki. The tainted minister is indispensable due to his command over Koli votes in Saurashtra. Congress's three

main leaders--Shankarsinh Vaghela, Shaktisinh Gohil and Arjun Modhwadia--have closed ranks in their fight against Modi. Says Vaghela, the Congress's election campaign committee chairman: "Modi is trying to cover up his poor performance by resorting to illusion. But voters have seen through his game now."

Nevertheless, Modi continues to portray himself as a victim. One refrain at his rallies is: "We face CBI and SIT probes daily. Congress too should face one on Coalgate, at the least. I'm fighting two entities, Congress and CBI." Modi is never short of words. They are his tried and tested weapons. by Uday Mahurkar

MODI VERSUS CENTRE

HIMACHAL PRADESH
BJP slogan

LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
The BJP government is leaving no stone unturned to woo the crucial 15 per cent tribal votes. Up to 25 LED vans with 12x15 ft screens and posters of Chief Minister Modi are traversing the tribal areas. A 50minute film is the highlight of the roadshow. It begins with a picturesque sequence of tribal boys lifting the bow against the morning sun, and has songs highlighting the successes of government schemes for the tribals. It also touts Modi's success in bringing the first science school to these areas, training 150,000 tribal youths for skilled jobs, and in enabling 20 tribal boys to become commercial pilots and a tribal girl to become an airhostess. The vans are drawing impressive crowds.

CUE FOR CONGRESS
Himachal strongman Virbhadra Singh is not prepared to wait for 10 Janpath to declare his name as the Congress's chief ministerial candidate. Giant hoardings of the five-time chief minister have sprung up across Shimla and other towns in the state."We've had a hand in all development here," announces a billboard on a wall outside Virbhadra's open-to-public home. They are strategically placed alongside or facing the ruling BJP'S own ads of CM Prem Kumar Dhumal's "achieve. All that is fine, but will 10 Janpath ments" name him as chief ministerial candidate? With polls round the corner, Modi and Congress are engaged in a no-holds-barred ad war.The Congress fired the first salvo, when two months ago they ran TV ads `exposing'tall claims of Modi's government.A woman tells voters,"Enough is enough. Come, let us change the direction as well as our fate."Modi took a month to hit back with the ad on the Centre's `injustice' , and another that accuses Delhi of scaring investors away from the state. by Uday Mahurkar and Asit Jolly

`Kaho dil se, Dhumal phir se' (Say from the heart, Dhumal should return).
Congress counter slogan

`Kaho dil se, corruption phir se' (Say from the heart, corrupt government should return).
48
INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

49

