NET FLUX
app alert

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

star of the week tumblr tales

Top of the Lot
Calling all music lovers, cricket fans and world travellers. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. Feed records, changes the pitch and manipulates audio files to make a whole new song. ICC Cricket gives you all the action from the T20 Cricket World Cup in Sri Lanka. Interpretravel breaks language barriers on trips abroad by connecting you with a human translator.
KHULLAR

A Spoonful of Sammy
He's a Canadian of Indian origin. He's a stand-up comedian.And no, he's not Russell Peters. Samir Khullar, better known as `Sugar Sammy', is the new funny guy on the block. Sammy, 36, has been exposed to a variety of cultures since childhood and his routine has him discussing everything from arranged marriages to sex, drugs and pop culture.While he has performed all over the world, the comedian has only recently gained celebrity status in India after his stand-up show was aired on TV (Comedy Central). Sammy has over 50,000 Facebook fans and 30,000 followers on Twitter.

RYAN REYNOLDS

Marital Diss

web wow
Don't let distance get in the way of your darshan. DivineIndia is a website that offers online streaming of prayer services of temples, shrines, mosques, churches and monasteries across the country. With over 50,000 subscribers paying Rs 200 a month, the site gained more popularity after it broadcast live streams from Lalbaugcha Raja pandal in Mumbai.

tweet tweet

Ruling the Roost
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on September 25 The Emmy Awards featuring Hollywood's finest topped trends. Cricket dominated the Web-- people discussed India's victory over England in the T20 World Cup and lauded Harbhajan Singh for his four-wicket haul. Ahead of the release of Akshay Kumar's film OMG Oh My God! tweeple shared what they would do if they were God. Many mourned the death of Malayalam film actor Thilakan.
#Emmyawards
2,840,810

"My friends are getting married, and I'm just 25 and drunk." So goes the statement on the Tumblr blog myfriendsaremarried, written by an unknown single woman in US.A hilarious take on how a single girl deals with her married and "boring"friends, the blog has captions with animations--from a graphic of a grimacing Britney app watch Spears with the caption `When Ola Cabs helps you my friend says WE'RE pregnant' book a taxi with your smartto a graphic of Ryan Reynolds phone. The app records rolling his eyes to `When your location automatically my friend shows me her and transfers it to the nearest available driver. baby's nursery' . The It sends you the taxi number and driver's name. blog has more than You can also monitor the cab via maps till it 5,000 followers. reaches its destination. Started by two IITians, Bhavish Aggarwal and Ankit Bhati, the free app is available in Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore.

viral video
2.4 million views
* Views from when videos were uploaded
85
FOOTBALLER PICKING UP THE EXPLOSIVE

Footballer picking up a grenade

Child singing Whitney song

933, 227 views

#Bhajji
1,84,575

#Indvseng
846,471

What grabbed eyeballs this week? Avideo of an Iranian footballer picking up a piece of debris from the field shocked netizens because it turned out to be an explosive.Videos of Billie Joe Armstrong from Green Day smashing his guitar,and a street child Green Day guitarist belting out a Whitney Houston song,also caught our attention. 1.2 million views

#Ifiwasgod
237,216

news now
Apple has come under a lot of flak for its newly released Maps application-- distances are off, places are missing and the directions are wrong. OMG Life is launching the world's first intelligent camera called Autographer. It would enable hands-free image capture, and goes on sale in the UK from November for £399 (Rs 34,600). Iran has blocked Google and plans to have citizens use a domestic Internet network instead.

#Thilakan
218,116

*Figures denote number of followers
OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

