GLASS HOUSE

by PRIYA SAHGAL

CALLING RAHUL

R

ahul Gandhi's `laptop boys' have found a way of keeping phone callers at bay. The telephone exchange at his home 12 Tughlaq Lane has been fitted with an answering machine. An officious voice tells you, "Thank you for calling the office of Shri Rahul Gandhi. You can dial 1 for Hindi and 2 for English." After which you will again be asked to dial 1 for appointments and dial 2 for others. If you want an appointment, you will be asked to state your purpose "briefly" after the beep. If you opt for the ambiguous "others" , then expect to be entertained by a long spell of elevator music after which an operator will take your call. And then Team Rahul wonders why India finds Rahul inaccessible.

BABA'S DAY OUT

H

owever, those trying to call Rahul Gandhi last week would have been doing so in vain. Having done his duty as an MP by visiting Amethi, the young Gandhi took off on a quick three-day visit to Singapore to watch Formula One. That's one way to prepare for his much-touted, mysterious "larger role".

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

SUGGESTION
O F T H E W E E K

Should the Congress core committee be renamed the Congress Crore Committee?

RETAILING TALL TALES
he Congress is still trying to sell FDI politically but that hasn't stopped Anand Sharma from celebrating. Barely able to hide his glee, Sharma held a celebratory lunch for commerce ministry bureaucrats on September 15, a day after FDI was given the go-ahead by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. There he told his captive audience in great detail how "Your Minister" had done it. Ah. Such modesty.

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

BROTHER BOTHER

T

N

N.K. SINGH

.K. Singh aka Nandu's domestic troubles are making his political graph quiver. The Rajya Sabha MP from Bihar depends on Nitish Kumar's goodwill but his estranged brother Uday Singh is planning to hold a rally in his constituency, Purnia, against the Bihar Chief Minister on September 30. Although Uday belongs to BJP, which is an alliance partner of JD(U), he says he will protest against Nitish's anti-people policies. For BJP the problem is political, but for Nandu, it's very personal.
JOSHI

TATKAL MINISTER
he obscure C.P. Joshi was given the railway portfolio on the eve of a Cabinet reshuffle for three reasons. The first and most important is that Joshi's name was suggested by Rahul Gandhi. Second, Manmohan Singh was not keen to hang on to the sensitive portfolio for a day longer than necessary. He was worried that in case of a rail accident, the Opposition might get another excuse to demand his resignation. And third, Congress MPs from West Bengal wanted it; after all, ABA Ghani Khan Choudhury held

T

SHARMA

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

the job for many years when Indira Gandhi was prime minister. Manmohan wanted to scotch such hopes. That is why Joshi got Railways on tatkal basis.

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

GLASS HOUSE
SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

SPEECH THERAPY

CONGRESS LEADERS AT THE CWC MEET

M

anmohan Singh's reshuffle is most awaited at the Congress's media cell. Topping the list of Cabinet hopefuls is Janardan Dwivedi, general secretary and chairperson of the cell. Dwivedi is hoping to get the HRD berth. But Manish Tewari and Renuka Choudhary are also tipped to join the Government, Tewari because of his performance in the JPC on the 2G scam and Choudhary simply because she is from Andhra Pradesh. Of the three, Choudhary is the most expendable. The party has enough crises to handle without dealing with those caused by her ability to talk her way into trouble.
CHOUDHARY

THE POWER OF TWO
ecently a Cabinet minister from the Rajya Sabha, known more for his wit than wisdom, was asked whether he was worried about the fallout of his "reckless"statements. The rather flamboyant minister replied,"I am not concerned about the impact of my announcements because I've a constituency of only two." He meant Sonia and Rahul Gandhi. Little wonder the Government cannot relate to the aam aadmi.

R

NO-SHOW GUEST
he Congress Working Committee (CWC) meet on September 25 had two special invitees. One was Delhi Chief Minister Sheila Dikshit, because the party is planning a mass rally in the Capital next month on the reforms binge. The other invitee was Home Minister Sushilkumar Shinde. This caused a lot of confusion because Shinde was away in the Maldives to attend the SAARC conference. This was public knowledge on the day the Congress decided to hold a CWC meeting. Why go through the trouble of inviting someone who was going to be out of town in the first place? The Congress works in curious ways to get its non-wonders to perform.

T

BEDSIDE
READ

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

UNDERDRESSED FOR THE OCCASION

JAYASWAL

M

anoj Jayaswal, chairman of the Nagpur-based Abhijeet Group, who has been named in three of the first five FIRs registered by CBI in the coal blocks scam, sneaked inside CBI headquarters undetected on September 18, giving the slip to hundreds of journalists and camerapersons waiting for him. Jayaswal put on a worn-out pair of jogging shoes, an old pair of trousers and a faded shirt. He got down from his car near the CBI building and walked to his destination. No journalist thought this illdressed person could be the beneficiary of thousands of crores.

L.K.Advani has three books on his desk currently: Indian Summer: The Secret History of the End of an Empire by Alex Von Tunzelmann, Ending Corruption? How to Clean Up India by N.Vittal and Shoba Narayan's memoir Return to India.

"I go abroad to gain knowledge. Knowledge does not increase if one is restricted within a small space."
TARUN GOGOI Assam Chief Minister

"Bandhs do not bring any solutions. They just create political pollution."
MAMATA BANERJEE

"It is wrong to suggest that a white paper is issued to highlight wrongdoings. Otherwise it would be called a black paper."
PRITHVIRAJ CHAVAN

CHAVAN

West Bengal Chief Minister

Maharashtra Chief Minister
with DEVESH KUMAR , SANDEEP UNNITHAN

22

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

NEW

