Mail

The Murder of Laughter
SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

Cartoonist's arrest on charge of sedition marks the decline and fall of wit in India. Why can't Indian politicians take a joke?

K. CHIDANAND KUMAR,

Jokes Apart
Undoubtedly the cartoons of Aseem Trivedi were cause of great discomfiture for Indian politicians and bureaucrats ("The Lawmakers' Last Laugh", September 24). But it is preposterous that the Mumbai Police acted despotically in registering the case of sedition and arresting him, misusing its inherent power. The right to freedom of expression must be protected tooth and nail; for this, all sections of society should become vigilant and act in concert. Otherwise some jittery politicians and bureaucrats, who are trying to modify the Right to Information Act, will also demand the abolition of freedom of expression from the list of fundamental rights in order to repress the common people.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

Who is to Blame?
The excuse offered by Tarun Gogoi seems to be partially correct ("Gogoi Gets Political Arithmetic Wrong", September 24). Lack of proper education has made illiterate Muslims the labour bank of Assam. Most children drop out of schools to join their parents at construction sites and brick kilns. The misconception of `more children means more income' is still stuck with them. This needs to be addressed urgently.
A. SRIKANTAIAH, Bangalore

Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi's remark is in bad taste and only shows how disconnected he is from reality. The Assam crisis would not have arisen if lawmakers, instead of begging for votes during elections, worked for the development of these areas wholeheartedly.
ANOWAR HUSSAIN, Assam

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

12

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

``
Bangalore

``

The Aseem Trivedi episode questions the freedom of expression that prevails in a country that has more comical politicians than serious ones.

We Indians do lack a sense of humour because we take ourselves too seriously. Laughing at ourselves is the greatest quality one needs to develop. Our politicians have become humourless. They cannot tolerate it if someone tries to have a little bit of fun at their expense. If anyone `dares' to do so, they will immediately close ranks to undermine that person. It may be a mere coincidence, but our polity is dominated by too many lawyer-politicians. If only they stopped to ponder that humour is an integral part of our lives and without it our lives would be a drab affair. A society that cannot laugh at itself cannot be said to be mature.
AMBAR MALLICK, Delhi

M.J. Akbar's essay hints at the status of present-day ruler-ruled political

Mail
humour which hit headlines in the recent past. I agree that there is much to fear but whatever might be in store for us, this is not the moment to lose the ability to laugh. Making fun of politics and politicians is a fundamental part of life, and as the author mentions, it has been going on since time of Akbar and Birbal. Instead of `murdering laughter' for mileage, the Government needs to learn from history. Cartoons are the best way to bring out wit, humour and satire, on issues political or social. They help people laugh away their tension and anger.
MAHESH KAPASI, Mumbai

35
contract, outsourcing and progressing ahead. And it's true that there is no competition from private players, definitely not for another 50 years, for who else is competent enough?
R.B. SINDHUR, Senior Manager, Coal India Ltd

Young Impressions
India Today Mind Rocks Youth Summit has become a platform where we, the young generation, can meet our idols, question them, and be inspired by them ("Stars in Young India's Eyes", September 24). This is the second time I am participating in it and I can't wait for the next one to take place. But one change that should be made is that more time should be given for youngsters to question the speakers, so we can learn from them.
RUJITA KUMAR, Delhi

Garbage Dump", September 24). The trash of 5,000 million tonnes a day put the health of Bangaloreans at great risk. It was just impossible to clean the city with a "shovel and 20 men", as claimed by Karnataka Governor H.R. Bhardwaj. The officials of BBMP are solely responsible for not following scientific methods of waste disposal. They should be punished for such serious laxity. The BBMP management needs to keep away from the politicians, so as to avoid dirty games for achieving their selfish motives.
R.D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
N OV E M B E R 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

The Airconditioned Duel
A cold war is raging at present in the hotel industry. The scene of the battle is New Delhi where the appearance of the multi-million rupee Maurya Hotel has sent a chill down the spine of established hotel chains. Both the Oberoi empire and the governmentowned ITDC hotels are baulking at this sudden, but not unexpected, assault from the India Tobacco Company's encroachment into the hotel business. At this stage, both the Oberoi and ITDC chains, which have virtually monopolised the trade for years, insist that the 370-room Maurya won't in the slightest be driving them out of any business. Whether these claims can be safely dismissed as another instance of smooth hotel PR or not, there can be no quibbling about where the real threat lies. In the last few months, both the Oberoi and ITDC groups have watched with growing uneasiness some of the most coveted members of their staff depart for pastures new. So far, 38 employees of Oberoi International--including two assistant managers-- have moved to the Maurya. Another 65 have quit the Sheraton in Bombay to join the ITC group. Virendra Kumar, general manager of the Oberoi Intercontinental in New Delhi, sees this exodus as a blessing. "It gives us an opportunity to take more people on our training scheme," he said.
by Sunil Sethi
THE MAURYA--UNFORESEEN LUXURIES ARE CAUSING DISCOMFORT

End of an Era
The passing away of Verghese Kurien, the father of the white revolution, plunged the nation in grief ("The Revolutionary Dreamer", September 24). His role in making Amul a household name cannot be forgotten. He will be always remembered for not only making India the largest producer of milk but also shaping milk processing into a profitable enterprise. His huge contribution to nation-building and making a difference to the lives of millions of milk farmers and their families across the nation, especially Gujarat, will be hard to replicate. May his life be an inspiration to the country's future and present generation.
ABHIJEET SHARMA, Hyderabad

`No one like CIL'
This is with reference to your article "Coal India Mines Failure" (September 24). I regret to note your findings on why Coal India Limited (CIL) ails. Surely our 400,00-plus employees will be pained to learn the picture of CIL your correspondent has painted. In one of the toughest professions, we are mining out coal with hardships most other professions wouldn't ever face. Corruption does not exist in CIL. State authorities are to blame for pilferage, but it is being passed on to CIL officials as if they are the culprits. It's the CVC, CBI, CAG and fear of RTI that is keeping our once-bold officers from taking decisions on procurement, purchase,

The young achievers made it clear that the power to dream took them places. They achieved success through sheer hard work. Every success is waiting to be captured by the determined souls. The real-life stories were highly moving. A life of significance is far better than very many lived sans any motive.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

In Need of Clean-up
It was a nightmare to walk on the roads of Bangalore over the last three weeks ("Garden City Turns

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

14

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

