The Big Story

UPAREFORMS

UPA's Last Gambit
Government surfaces from policy paralysis, unleashes wave of declarations
GENUINE REFORMS I Allows FDI in multi-brand retail, aviation, broadcasting and power trade exchanges Date of announcement September 14 Impact Will bring FDI of about Rs 20,000 crore over next five years. I Announces disinvestment in Hindustan Copper, Oil India Ltd, MMTC and Nalco Date of announcement September 14 Impact Expected to rake in Rs 15,000 crore, half of 2012-13 disinvestment target. I Hikes diesel price by Rs 5 per litre and limits supply of subsidised cooking gas Date of announcement September 13 Impact Will reduce annual oil subsidy by Rs 20,000 crore of total of Rs 2 lakh crore. REHEATED WELFARE SCHEMES
I Approves restructuring of Integrated Child

REFORM RUSH GIVES CONGRESS HOPE
It's a mix of genuine reform, housekeeping measures and handouts. With more announcements on the anvil, the Congress hopes it can go to the people with a winning agenda.

Development Services over next 3 years Date of announcement September 24 Impact Will reduce malnutrition in children and improve care of girls and women. Cost Rs 123,580 crore I Merges National Rural Health Mission with the Urban Health Mission Date of announcement September 24 Impact Will encourage opening of more health centres and attract private players. Cost Rs 1 lakh crore I Starts Rural Development Flexi-Fund. Date of announcement September 24 Impact Will give states the right to draw up their own rural development schemes. Cost Rs 40,000 crore (Centre to fund 70%) BAILOUTS/HANDOUTS
REUTERS

I Approves bailout package for state

By Devesh Kumar, Dhiraj Nayyar and Shravya Jain

n September 25, a delegation of Congress MLAs from West Bengal was in the Capital, visiting sundry Cabinet ministers, clearing projects for the state. As they walked into Union Rural Development Minister Jairam Ramesh's office, he exclaimed "Mukti (freedom)!" The entire delegation nodded in enthusiastic affirmation. Ramesh is not the only one heaving a sigh of relief at Mamata Banerjee's exit. There is a section of the Congress that feels a government

O

without Banerjee will be a more progressive coalition than one with her temperamental presence. Certainly, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and his team are not wasting any time mourning her absence. As one Cabinet minister puts it, "At least it has taken Coalgate off the headlines. If we have to go down, it should be on the positive note of economic reforms and not some scam." Besieged by Coalgate, the Congress had been trying to change the narrative for over a month. Suddenly, the Government is full of plans and promise. Governance is back on the agenda, in perception if not in reality. On September 25, Sonia Gandhi, in her

opening remarks at the Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting, endorsed Manmohan's reforms, enough to bolster the till-now dejected party cadre. It all began in the last week of June, once it was clear that Pranab Mukherjee would be elevated as the President. C. Rangarajan, chairman of the Prime Minister's council of economic advisers, began to lobby with his boss to bring P. Chidambaram back to the finance ministry. He is reported to have told Manmohan, "We already know what we have to do to fix the economy. We need politicians, not technocrats to get it done." In the first week of August, Ranga-

rajan got his wish. For the first time in UPA 2, the Prime Minister and the finance minister were on the same policy page and communicating with each other. The fact that Chidambaram also got along well with the Prime Minister's technocratic brains trust in Montek Singh Ahluwalia and Rangarajan--all were key players in P.V. Narasimha Rao's tenure as prime minister-- helped build synergy into the reformist agenda. The agenda would be made public within 45 days. On September 14, the Government surprised everyone by opening up multi-brand retail, aviation, broadcasting and power trade exchanges to for-

MANMOHAN AND SONIA AT A CULTURAL EVENT IN PANCHKULA, HARYANA

eign investment. On September 24, it unleashed another wave of announcements. The mood, by now, had turned optimistic within the team given the job of reviving the Indian economy. According to one senior official, a hyperactive Chidambaram was determined to make a difference in his first 100 days. The heat of Coalgate provided a window of opportunity within the first 50 days. "He's going to announce something every month from now on," says the official. With Chidambaram's support, the Prime Minister succeeded in persuading CWC to back his agenda.

electricity boards Date of announcement September 24 Impact Will result in savings of Rs 60-70 billion for discoms. Cost Rs 1.90 lakh crore (50% of the short-term outstanding liabilities will be taken over by state governments and the balance will be restructured by banks.) I Hikes Dearness Allowance by 7 per cent for Central government employees Date of announcement September 24 Impact Will benefit about 5 million employees and 3 million pensioners across India. Cost Rs 7,400 crore. I Approves one rank, one pension scheme Date of announcement September 24 Impact Will level the disparity in ex-servicemen's pensions. Cost Rs 2,300 crore

34

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

35

The Big Story

UPAREFORMS

More Foreign Connect
anmohan Singh's reforms mean that foreign retail chains can now open stores with a 51 per cent stake in ventures and minimum investment of $100 million (Rs 500 crore). The $447billion Walmart plans to open its stores in India with Bharti Group in two years. "We are currently studying the Government's notification," says a Bharti-Walmart spokesperson. UK-based £64-billion Tesco too is reviewing the FDI policy. France-based Carrefour and Germany's Metro AG are other possible entrants. Crisil Research anticipates investments of $2.5-$3 billion (Rs 12,500-15,000 crore) over the next five years in the food and grocery sector. Confederation of Indian Industry estimates that around nine million jobs will be created by 2020.

By allowing FDI, UPA hopes to remove the negative sentiment among foreign investors
ment has already infused money in the state-owned lossmaker. Seventy-four per cent FDI will now be allowed in broadcast carriage service providers. According to KPMG, broadcasting companies are expected to incur a cost of Rs 20,000Rs 25,000 crore in the expansion process. FDI investments will help get them the necessary funds. The one announcement that will have the least impact is allowance of 49 per cent FDI in power trading exchanges. India currently has two operational power exchanges--Financial Technologies and Power Exchange India. Shubhranshu Patnaik, senior director at Deloitte, expects no FDI to come within next five years. "None of the international players has evinced inby Shravya Jain terest," he says.

M

"In such a crisis situation, foreign investment is good for correcting balance of payments," says Akshay Mathur of Gateway House, a foreign policy think tank. Allowing foreign airlines to acquire a 49 per cent stake in Indian airlines is another important reform announced by UPA. Etihad, Lufthansa, Emirates and Singapore Airlines could be interested parties. PWC's Dhiraj Mathur is unsure if announcements will be made in the next two years but any deal will create an inflow of at least $400 million (Rs 2,000 crore). Vijay Mallya has confirmed that the Rs 8,500-crore debt-ridden Kingfisher Airlines is in talks with foreign airlines. But experts are pessimistic. Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh has said Air India will not benefit either as the Govern-

With growth falling to 5 per cent, employment opportunities shrinking, investors fleeing abroad and inflation consistently high at over 8 per cent, the Government had to signal intent. The political price of doing nothing and letting stagflation persist would have been too high for the Government, much higher than the short-term political price it has to pay for reformist measures like raising the price of diesel, cutting LPG subsidy or raising power tariffs. It is still probably too late for the Government to reap real benefits--policy measures only work with a time lag. Still, the Government now has a leg to stand on whenever it goes to the people for a renewed mandate. A large part of the pronouncements made by the Government in the past fortnight could be dubbed as genuine reforms, aimed at sending a clear message to the international community, but there were also housekeeping measures that require no extra spending, or reforms of the delivery of existing welfare mechanisms, and steps aimed at lifting the market sentiment.

Reforms for Real
FDI,diesel price hike show UPA means business

AHLUWALIA

Analysts say the FDI announcements are geared more towards energising the party, signalling intent to foreign investors, and preventing a further downgrade by rating agencies. The Government has achieved its two short-term goals, but on September 25, Standard & Poor's further reduced its growth forecast for India to 5.5 per cent. The impact on GDP will take time to yield results. "The likely FDI inflows in retail are modest in the context of overall FDI inflows of $190 billion (Rs 950,000) over the past five years," says Binaifer Jehani, director at Crisil Research (see box). The diesel price hike and the cap on purchase of subsidised LPG cylinders indicates the Government is serious about containing its fiscal deficit. It reduces the Government's fuel subsidy burden by Rs 20,000 crore in the current fiscal, but it's a small drop compared to the Government's total fuel subsidy, which spiralled to Rs 1.40

YASHWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

lakh crore in 2011-12. Even after the diesel hike and cap on LPG, it was expected to touch Rs 1.70 lakh crore this fiscal. For genuine reform, the Government should have done away with the administered price mechanism completely, argues Krishnamurthy Subramanian of the Hyderabad-based Indian School of Business, adding, "Who are the people who consume diesel? It's mostly rich

36

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

The Big story UPAREFORMS

Government Move Enrages ArmyVeterans
Cabinet decision on pension won't amount to much
x-servicemen are infuriated at the Government's attempts to pass court verdicts off as their own decisions. On September 23, the Union Cabinet sanctioned Rs 2,300 crore to level disparities in ex-servicemen's pensions which a Press Information Bureau release said would "largely meet the demands of defence pensioners on one rank, one pension (OROP)". It was a blatant untruth that has only incensed veterans who have battled the Government on this issue for six years, staging rallies and returning their medals to the President. "It is deception," former army chief General Ved Prakash Malik fumed. "To pass court verdicts as government decisions has only created anger and frustration among retired soldiers," Malik told INDIA TODAY. Since 2010, the Supreme Court (SC) and Armed Forced Tribunals (AFT) have passed three judgments in various armed forces pension-related cases. In September 2010, AFT ruled against an error the Government made in calculating pensions during the Sixth
YASHWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

E

EX-SERVICEMEN RETURNING THEIR GALLANTRY MEDALS TO THE PRESIDENT

Pay Commission in January 2006. Instead of using the lowest within a particular pay band to calculate the pension, the Government conveniently used the basic of a lowest paid official in a particular pay band as the guide-- for example, Lt-Colonel to Major General. In October 2010, AFT ruled the halting of family pension to handicapped children after their marriage as "arbitrary and illogical". In August 2011, the SC struck down the Govern-

ment's stopping of dual family pension, that allowed the wife of an ex-servicemen who had been drawing two pensions to draw only one after his death. It will cost the Government an estimated Rs 16,000 crore to level the gap between pensioners of the same rank. So the Rs 2,300 crore which the Government promised to spend to "bridge the gap" adds up to little when distributed among an estimated 23 lakh ex-servicemen. Retired sepoys, who make up nearly half the total number of ex-servicemen, will see an

average monthly increase of just Rs 377 in their monthly pensions. With a substantial population of ex-servicemen among the Himachal Pradesh voters, Army officials feel the money has been sanctioned with an eye on the forthcoming Assembly polls. The announcement, however, backfired a day later when veterans pounced on the fine print. "All pensionrelated government committees have been without a military member," says Major Navdeep Singh, lawyer in the Punjab and Haryana High Court. The OROP issue has simmered since the last two pay commissions in 1996 and 2006. Ex-servicemen have demanded that soldiers with the same duration of military service should get the same pension for the same rank, irrespective of the year they retire. On June 25, Defence Minister A.K. Antony warned Manmohan Singh of possible unrest within the Army, linking it to pay-related matters and adding that the issue would take a "bad turn" if corrective action was not taken. The Prime Minister set up a committee of secretaries headed by Cabinet Secretary Ajit Seth on July 13. The September 23 announcement was part of the recommendations of the Seth Committee report. The spin added by UPA has only caused more heartburn among veterans.
by Sandeep Unnithan

tion of Rs 22,500 crore, has been merged with the National Urban Health Mission. The blueprint for the expanded mission is still being worked out by the health ministry. As for the food bill, National Advisory Council Chairperson Sonia Gandhi's pet project, it is presently with the parliamentary standing committee on food. It is expected to cost Rs 102,000 crore in the 12th Five Year Plan. Government managers are reluctant to stick their necks out on how the national health missions, the food-forall programmes or even the proposed Rural Development Flexi-Fund, which establishes a corpus of Rs 40,000 crore, will be funded. "There is no option before the Government but to bring the fuel subsidies down further," contends
CHIDAMBARAM

But it will strengthen fears that the Government's finances are in a worrisome state," says an economist working with a private sector bank.

Feel-good Pills
Tax subsidy,dearness allowance soften the blow
The disinvestment drive has been put back on track. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, at its meeting held on September 14, approved the sale of the Government's minority stakes in four PSUs--Hindustan Copper, Oil India, MMTC and Nalco--to raise up to Rs 15,000 crore. The Rajiv Gandhi Equity Savings Scheme announced on September 21 will provide a one-time tax subsidy of up to Rs 2,500 to first-time small investors in shares, equity mutual funds and exchange traded funds. In an attempt to reach out to target groups, the Government also announced 7 per cent dearness allowance for government employees, and accepted the longpending one rank, one pension demand of defence personnel. (see box). The Congress is clearly buoyant. "We were never, even temporarily, opposed to the second wave of reforms. The global economic meltdown of 2008 called for a certain amount of circumspection. The current process has to be really seen as a continuum," says party spokesman Manish Tewari. But the real challenge, says a senior Planning Commission official, is for the Government to find money for these schemes, and push genuine reform measures such as Goods and Services Tax rollout, Direct Taxes Code and pension and insurance bills. "Until and unless the Government forges a broad political consensus, they cannot be executed," he admits. The intractable problems of an alienated bureaucracy and absence of green clearances remain. And the real problem, says economist Bibek Debroy, is of land acquisition. Will the proposed National Investment Board be able to overcome these? Or will it end up treating clearances on a case-by-case basis? The latter would mirror the way reforms have been announced: Piecemeal, with much sound, and little light.
with Priya Sahgal

YASHWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

farmers and upper-middle classes. They don't need subsidies." The power bailout is a classic case of a half-hearted reform. The accumulated losses for state discoms was estimated to have reached Rs 1.9 lakh crore as on March 31, 2011. Non-revision of tariff for long years, non-payment of subsidies, high cost of power purchase and high distribution losses were the main factors responsible for the poor state of the state electricity boards (SEBs). The PMO, at a meeting held on May 16, favoured a proposal to restructure the liabilities of the discoms. Its roadmap was endorsed at a meeting held by Pulok Chatterjee, principal secretary to the prime minister, on June 6. According to

this, 50 per cent of the outstanding short-term liabilities (STLs), as of March 31, 2012, are to be taken over by state governments. The remaining 50 per cent STLS will be rescheduled by lenders and serviced by the discoms with a moratorium of three years on principal, and would be backed by state government guarantee. "The debt recast is a good thing, but it is only half a measure. SEBs are saddled with so much debt that they cannot undertake fresh investment to phase out obsolete equipment. This was the primary factor behind the grid collapse on July 31," says Subramanian, an expert on the power sector. "There will be some financial burden. But the states can bear it. Structural problems

have to be addressed, including rationalisation of power tariff," he adds. Retail power tariffs in India are lower than those prevailing in developed countries by Rs 4.16 to Rs 5.20 a unit and those in developing countries by Rs 2.08 to Rs 4.16 a unit.

Budgetary Proposals Repackaged
Aam aadmi is back in the spotlight
In a deft move aimed at refurbishing its "aam aadmi" and "pro-poor" credentials, the Government repackaged old schemes such as Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS), expressed its determination to unveil a revamped

National Health Mission and execute the National Food Security Bill. The argument is the fiscal reforms will enable the Government to concentrate on its welfare schemes, of which the last count of Centrally administered schemes was 225. The Government has wisely chosen schemes with minimal expenditure implications, or those in the future. ICDS has been redrawn for the 12th Five Year Plan, which begins this year, within the existing budgetary allocation of Rs 123,580 crore as the Centre's share. It will be rolled out in 200 high-burden districts during Phase-I to address maternity and child nutrition. The National Rural Health Mission, which had a budgetary alloca-

a finance ministry official. This will mean raising the prices of petrol, diesel, kerosene and LPG again--a prospect which the Government dreads. Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh will go to polls by December and Karnataka in May next year, followed by Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Delhi. The other options before the Government, according to experts, are to divest its stake in public sector undertakings, go in for borrowing or to sell its assets--all unpalatable. "The Reserve Bank of India will be reluctant to lend. The credit rating agencies will, moreover, be looking askance at this move. The Government could unlock its assets--land, for example.

38

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

39

