MAIL

Why Everyone is Afraid of Kejriwal
OCTOBER 29, 2012

Politicians run for cover as India Against Corruption threatens to undermine the pillars of the establishment

Arvind Kejriwal's indomitable spirit in the face of a callous political system should be eulogised. His is a small but right step towards a corruption-free India.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR,
Bangalore

A True Hero
Arvind Kejriwal ("Why Everyone is Afraid of Arvind Kejriwal", October 29) has indeed arrived. His foray into politics through his association with India Against Corruption (IAC) has sent all the politicos scampering for cover as is evident from their desperate reactions. Kejriwal and IAC today stand vindicated of their claims that all political parties are corrupt, to some extent or the other. More importantly, it has now become abundantly clear that to effectively cleanse the system, it is imperative that one enters the cesspool and take the risk of dirtying one's hand. Doing this from outside is impossible, as Team Anna's desperate but futile attempt to press for a Jan Lokpal over the last many months has shown.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

Khurshid Shames Government
Law minister Salman Khurshid coming out with a chilling threat to Arvind Kejriwal ("Salman Khurshid Under Siege", October 29) is not only shocking but highly condemnable. When Khurshid had said he was ready for an inquiry, where was the need for him to issue warnings to Kejriwal? The minister's remarks that it's time to replace ink with blood is a clear pointer that he does not believe in democracy.
K.R. SRINIVASAN, Secunderabad

Salman Khurshid's threat to Kejriwal points to a guilty conscience. It is most disheartening to see an educated man who is a senior political leader behave like this. He has insulted the very tenets of democracy.
ABHILASH THADHANI, Ahmedabad

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

``

``

The emerging young political leader who can come to the nation's rescue is Arvind Kejriwal. Kejriwal is a former Income Tax officer and is acting just like it. Just as most taxpayers are afraid of facing tax scrutiny, in the same way these political leaders are afraid of facing corruption allegations. However, Kejriwal should be careful of not becoming a political victim as he is taking on many influential and political bigwigs.
MAHESH KUMAR, Delhi

Isn't the movement against corruption unleashed by Arvind Kejriwal leading us towards another period of uncertainty and veiled anarchy where the finer edges of democratic polity are roughed up? Kejriwal's movement seems to imperceptibly lead us towards a mob rule (he calls it a

MAIL
panchayat). Doesn't an overdose of freedom as promised by Kejriwal's yet-to-be-christened political party sow the seeds of discontentment among the masses who might turn berserk in their attempt to reinvent the very democratic polity that has been purloined by successive governments that ruled at the Centre? Kejriwal's name-and-shame campaign is quintessentially propped up by the media, and helped out by the nameless masses, who are searching for scapegoats with a selfengendered malice against some biggies inside the Government.
KARANAM, Hyderabad

35
women. Given the political pressure, they have colluded with the Khap leaders. Khaps continue to pursue antiquated, antediluvian traditions and beliefs, which they want to thrust upon the new generation. These are nothing but reprehensible diktats. They only talk about girls condescendingly. These people have formed a syndicate to rule society in the name of tradition and honour. The Central Government should take it upon itself to act against such Khaps as states, thanks to vote bank politics, have failed to restrain them.
INDU SHANKER, Varanasi

DLF, one of the largest property developers in the country ("The Officer Who Dared", October 29 ). His bravery is, no doubt, appreciable. He is honest and a man of firm determination. Like Khemka, all civil officers should have the courage to call a spade a spade and work without fear and favour. Unfortunately, we have very few civil officers like Khemka. Instead of harassing honest civil officers, the Government should provide security to them and their family.
R.D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
D E C E M B E R 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Crocodile Tears
Gharials are practically fish eating crocodilians. They are not known to attack man. They love to live in deep gorges and slow currents of sweet-watered rivers. Due to their non-violent nature, very often they get caught in fishermen's net. Now they have vanished from most of the Indian rivers. They are only found in small numbers in the Ganges, Brahmaputra and Mahanadi. Dr Bustard after his survey of the Mahanadi river was of the opinion that Gharials face a critical situation in which their survival i s in jeopardy. The habitat conditions have been destroyed. Hide hunting, de-

Intrepid Kejriwal has become a crusader in his own right. His sole objective is to fight corruption and most politicians fear him. A relentless fight against the establishment will ultimately turn the wheel and the system will change for the better.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Repressive Khaps
It is high time that the rural population is made aware of the reality of the Khaps ("The Medieval World of Haryana Khaps", October 29). Increasing incidents of rape in Haryana, with most victims being Dalit women, clearly show that even the state government is reluctant to take stern measures to prevent atrocities against

It is shocking and shameful that the government, both at the Centre and the state level, allow the oppressive rule of the Khaps in this 21st century. Members of the Khap panchayats believe in regressive ideas that are against the very tenets of democracy. Their atrocities, especially against women and members of the backward classes are blatant examples of suppression. Strict action should be taken against the Khaps.
RAMOLA SINGH, Chennai

Honour Honesty
Ashok Khemka was abruptly transferred on October 11 for blowing the whistle on the mutually beneficial relationship between Robert Vadra and

It is usually observed that bureaucrats speak out only after their retirement from service. So it's a pleasant surprise to see Ashok Khemka, an honest and upright IAS officer with high credentials, who stands up, undoes the wrong, and questions the establishment. It's a pity that such an officer with exemplary service record has been allowed by the Haryana government to function on a single post only for an average of six months during his career of 20 years. Unfortunately, the voices and grievances of such officers are hardly considered for redressal by their own seniors who prefer to act as yes men to their political masters and inflict indirect punishments to those who dare to defy the unjust orders from the politicians.
PRAMOD SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

A NEWLY-BORN GHARIAL CROCODILE FROM AN ARTIFICIALLY HATCHED EGG

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

struction of the nesting sand banks, use of nylon nets, construction of embankments to control flood have all gone against their survival. He further pointed out that the life span of the Gharials is such that under effective control combined with sound management practices they will rapidly become a resource again.Under his active guidance, the infrastructure of the whole project was laid out. The scheme is envisaged to built up a large population by collecting eggs, hatching them artificially under controlled conditions of temperature and moisture and protecting them from predators.
by Ashok Kumar Dash

NOVEMBER 12, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

