THE HILLS ARE ALIVE WITH BATTLE CRIES
National politicians took the electoral battle to Himachal Pradesh in the run-up to the final race
NITIN GADKARI, 55 A subdued Gadkari escaped to the hills after embarrassing revelations. He headed for remote Rekong Peo in Kinnaur on October 27, cancelling his next round of rallies in the state. RAHUL GANDHI, 42 An upbeat Rahul made two forays into Himachal in less than a week. On October 25, he met voters in picturesque Solan and Keylong, and returned to visit Chamba and Kumharvin on October 31. MANMOHAN SINGH, 80 In his quiet old style, the Prime Minister tried to do the `politically correct' thing by addressing at least one rally to support the Congress's poll effort. He gave his only poll speech at Una on October 28. NARENDRA MODI, 62 The name of the storm that thundered through the Himachali mountainside on October 29. The Gujarat Chief Minister arrived in Mandi intent on bringing down his rivals. SONIA GANDHI, 65 With focus on corruption by BJP, Sonia went for a second Shimla trip on October 30. "BJP talks about corruption but does nothing against its own leaders tainted by it," she said in `italicised' Hindi.
STYLE STATEMENT Wore a green Kinnauri topi to blend in. It didn't stop media from picking on him for corruption charges. STUDIED NEGLECT Glossed over corruption. Spoke on need to exploit "tourism and horticulture" potential of state. DRESS SENSE The Gandhi scion wore his threeday-old stubble and a crumpled white kurta with a quilted jacket to keep out the chill. A week later he returned with the same attire, only this time he was freshly shaved, to blast BJP for its "doublespeak" on corruption. FAMOUS WORDS Made feeble assertions of NehruGandhi clan's age-old association with Himachal Pradesh. He found applause that matched his tone. POLITICAL MOVE Said all of Himachal's development was done by UPA and not BJP. TOP TARGETS Blamed Sonia for price rise, called the PM "Maun-mohan", and taunted Tharoor over Sunanda Pushkar. POLL PLEDGE Swore to help `good friend' and CM P.K. Dhumal transform Himachal into another Gujarat. VEILED MISSIVE Set aside the intricately-woven Himachali topi and pashmina shawl from Virbhadra Singh, kept a white scarf with party symbol. HER ACCESSORIES All the warring factions were on the dais with Sonia.

WAR OF WORDS
Prem Kumar Dhumal on October 28

"Himachal Pradesh witnessed tremendous development during the BJP rule,in spite of a discriminatory attitude of the Centre towards the state."

vs
Virbhadra Singh on October 31

"Has the BJP government given you new educational institutions or hospitals? Have you got jobs? All they have done is claim credit for Central schemes."

War on Modi
Angry about Modi's sexist attacks on Sonia Gandhi and Sunanda Pushkar, Congress's dirty tricks department swung into action, to highlight a YouTube video,`Modi is not a bachelor' . It shows Modi's 2007 nomination form, where he left his marital status blank. Uploaded on December 7, 2007, by `jeetegagujrati'--a reaction to handle `jeetegagujrat' that uploads proModi videos--it has a woman who calls herself Yashodra behn and claims to be Modi's dharampatni.

No Seat for Rupala
RUPALA

BJP national vice

president Purshottam Rupala, the best speechmaker in Gujarat after Modi and a contender for chief ministership if Modi heads for Delhi, was keen to fight the Assembly polls. But Modi advised him against doing so. Had Rupala fought, speculation about his CM chances could have led to factional fights in the party. Fine stroke, Mr Modi.
by Asit Jolly, Priya Sahgal and Uday Mahurkar

46

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

