LEISURE
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S
YOGEN SHAH

Chair Person
Meet Anjali Mody,26, granddaughter of former attorney general Soli Sorabjee and daughter of top corporate lawyer Zia Mody who owns a furniture design studio in Mumbai.Mody first made news in 2002 for giving a speech at the UN.This week, she is organising a furniture and fashion show, along with newbie fashion designer Akshay Yagi, that promises to be eclectic and fun. Mama would approve.

PRIZED POSSESSION
Last year TV actor Tia Bajpai, 24, starred in Vikram Bhatt's dud film Haunted 3D. Soon after, Bhatt cast the newcomer once again in Lanka, opposite Manoj Bajpayee. It sank without a trace. Despite a massacre at the box office, Bhatt remains hugely impressed with Bajpai's talents, which are invisible to the naked eye. On November 2, she will appear on the big screen yet again in Bhatt's 1920 ­Evil Returns in which she plays a possessed woman opposite Aftab Shivdasani. Will third time prove lucky for Bhatt and Bajpai?
YOGEN SHAH

Ready for His Close-Up
Siddharth Basu,57, television producer and director of quiz shows like Kaun Banega Crorepati, Dus ka Dum and Quiz Time is all set to make his Bollywood debut in Shoojit Sircar's political thriller Jaffna.Basu will play chief of a RAW team which has Ronit Roy and Rahul Bose as members. God help him.

GOING UP
Sapna Bhavnani's temper.The Bigg Boss contender called host Salman Khan a "serial woman beater"but footage wasn't aired. Numerous eyebrows after Sushmita Sen announced she would tie the knot in 2013.

SEXY AT SIXTY
Looks like the original `Dream Girl' is harbouring ambitions of the literary kind .Dancer and actor Hema Malini says she has definite plans to write a book.Speaking at a book

GETTYIMAGES

launch,Hema Malini said she would focus on fitness. The 64-year-old,who can give women decades younger a run for their money,credits dance and yoga for keeping fit.Expect publishers to now make a beeline for her door.


GOING DOWN
Chances of catching Preity Zinta's return vehicle anytime soon.She has deferred the release of Ishkq In Paris for the third time. Sheryln Chopra's oomph factor. As she gets ready to bare, yet again, in Kamasutra 3D.

Compiled by Sharla Bazliel, Prachi Rege and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

88 Volume XXXVII Number 46; For the week Nov 6-12, 2012, released from Friday onwards

