GLOSSARY

by NISHAT BARI

TACKYWARDROBE AWARD
If over-the-top dressing on TV soaps wasn't bad enough, the red carpet gets a dose as well
Item Bomb
Been watching too many item numbers haven't we? Someone told Sreejita De to use TV to work her way to the big screen.And always be prepared to break out into a dance. The Uttaran actor took that literally.

Q& "Zoya Akhtar and I have our A creative conflicts all the time"
Reema Kagti was a much-in-demand assistant director to some of Bollywood's best filmmakers before she took to directing. After the release of her second film Talaash, Kagti says she wants to focus on the take-home value of her films than on numbers. Q. Are you happy with the response to Talaash? A. Yes. Since we were dealing with an unconventional subject, this is exactly the kind of response I was expecting. Q. Do you believe in the supernatural? A. No, I am a rationalist. Q. The supernatural element is common in both your films. A. My intention was not to popularise the concept. It is more of a metaphor and creative device to portray the unknown, which helps you fight your inner demons. Q. Which filmmakers inspire you in your work? A. Legendary filmmakers like Raj Kapoor, Guru Dutt and Hrishikesh Mukherjee. Martin Scorsese and Wong Kar-wai are my gods. Q. How is it to work with Zoya Akthar? A. We complement each other's writing style and sentiments. Naturally, we have our creative conflicts all the time. But I love working with her. Q. What's next? A. Zoya and I are working on two scripts. The one I'm going to direct is a drama that is based on a newspaper article that we read long time ago. Q. You have assisted some of the best filmmakers in the industry. A. Observing Honey Irani, Ashutosh Gowarikar, Mira Nair from a vantage point was the luckiest moment of my career. Seeing them translate scripts into a film was the best on-the-job training. Q. What are some things we don't know about you? A. I'm a good cook and love to make all kinds of cuisines. I love to play poker and I'm scared of watching horror films. Q. What kind of a filmmaker do you want to be known as? A. That I don't use alternative subjects deliberately, it's just the way I think. And for making more good films than bad ones.
by Prachi Rege

TRANS APPEAL
Manoj K.Jayan, in the lead role of a transgender in Malayalam film Ardhanari (Half Woman), is proving quite a crowd-puller in Kerala theatres. Directed by Santhosh Souparnika, it also has National Award-winning actor, the late Thilakan.

SARTORIAL HIGH
Fashion designer Masaba Gupta is on her way up. Her quirky prints have steadily been snapped up by every trendy celeb and now she is heading fashion label Satya Paul as its newest fashion director. Way to go.

RUNNING START
Farhan Akhtar blends almost seamlessly into his character of the Flying Sikh in the first glimpses from Bhaag Milkha Bhaag, leaving even the real Milkha Singh impressed.

Photographs by YOGEN SHAH

Age Crisis
Avika Gor's wardrobe on Sasural Simar Ka is alarmingly similar to those double her age. Sadly, the symptoms have crept into her personal style too.Which 15year-old really dresses like that?

Mismatch
Et tu Salman? We really have to ask, what happened to those sleeves, and who ripped them out? We'll take a Being Human T-shirt and ripped jeans any day over this disaster.

Bling Alert
Had Pratyusha Banerjee of Balika Vadhu been a Christmas tree this outfit would have been perfect. But she is not, so we suggest she put away this sparkly number and head to a clothing store.

MUSIC ALERT

VOCAL CONNECT
British-Tamil musician Mathangi Maya Arulpragasam, 37, or M.I.A., as she is known, will perform in India for the first time on December 11 for the inauguration of the Kochi Muziris Biennale. But we have heard her before, crooning the songs O Saya and Paper Planes for Slumdog Millionaire. She has also been nominated for every award from Academy to Grammy.
GETTY IMAGES

PARTY TIME
There were ripples of surprise at the arrival of Aamir Khan and Kiran Rao's son Azad and already he is a year old. His first birthday party at Imran Khan's home had a full family turnout including Aamir's ex-wife Reena, children Ira and Junaid, sister Nuzhat and mother Zeenat. Nice.
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

TIME TO SUIT UP
Nawazuddin Siddiqui went to Cannes in a suit but is most often seen as a scruffy goon or thug. For a change, he will be slipping into expensive suits and surrounding himself with a bevy of women to play a business tycoon modelled on Hassan Ali Khan in Sanjay Sharma's Black Currency. Quite an image makever.

70

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

FOTOCORP

