MAIL

The Dark World of Match Fixing
NOVEMBER 26, 2012

Exclusive Extracts: Bookie Gambler Fixer Spy

It is difficult to understand why cricketers who earn so much more than most other sportspersons in the country should be so greedy and corrupt.
J A C O B S . , Thiruvananthapuram

Shame on the Game
Though the ICC reiterates its zero tolerance towards corruption, the controversies surrounding cricket over the years have been on the rise and this has marred the beauty of the game ("Inside the Dark World of Match Fixing", November 26). Instances of match-fixing can be observed way back in 1817 but it is in the year 2000 that maximum number of such cases were reported, shocking cricket lovers across the world. To make matters worse, a recent sting operation revealed six umpires were ready to be bribed. This was preceded by a finding that revealed five Indian cricketers were guilty of matchfixing. Strict action must be taken against the guilty, be it the players or authorities, if the game's dignity is to be preserved.
RAMESH SINHA, Gurgaon

Telecom Troubles
As pointed out by the telecom experts, the entire re-auction process seemed to have been deliberately conceived to ensure its failure to achieve the optimal targeted revenue ("Killing the Telecom Goose", November 26). It is sad to observe that few senior Central ministers are questioning the CAG's wisdom on 2G pricing rather than looking at their own pre-decided follies.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, Delhi
PARVEEN NEGI

The game of cricket must be freed from the clutches of fixers that involves the bookie-player-gambler nexus. They have made a farce of the World Cup and other international events.The lovers of the sport get deeply hurt when reports of fixing emerge from reliable sources. The guilty ought to be severely punished and the players indulging in such practices must be banned for life and suitable legal action taken against them all.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

What we need is an independent probe into the auction of 2G spectrum. But with conspirators having easy access to every agency, the question remains how such a probe can be practically possible when spokespersons of the Government leave no stone unturned in indulging in blame-game when results don't favour them.
SUBHASH CHANDRA AGRAWAL, Delhi

Cricket is a way of life in India but there is no doubt about its darker side. The book Bookie Gambler Fixer Spy has opened up a Pandora's box and revelations of match-fixing in scores of matches, especially those involving India and/or Pakistan, have come as a

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

``

``

MAIL
great shock to cricket fans in the subcontinent. The cricket boards across the world should unite and act soon.
C.K. SUBRAMANIAM, Mumbai

35
brave security personnel are exposed to danger every day as they battle the terrorists in a hostile environment. The apathy has also endangered the lives of civilians. It is unfortunate that Sushilkumar Shinde has proved unequal to the job of home minister.
BAPU SATYANARAYANA, Mysore

Virtual Devotion
The fact that an increasing number of people are reaching out to God through their smartphones and tabs is very interesting ("The Age of iGod", November 26). In today's time, people are pressed for time and therefore visiting a temple, a mosque or any place of worship is not always possible. So it is a good idea to reach out to God via technology.
MARY DAS, Pune

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
DECEMBER 16-31, 197 7

Debunking Nehruism
India is today the ninth or tenth largest industrial power in the world, with capacity and resources to produce almost anything from nuclear power plants to satellites but... and all discussions on Indian planning seem to end with a but. Throughout the past quarter century of planning, there have been voices of dissent from stray quarters--a Rajagopalachari here, a Lohia there--but these men were in any case shouting from outside the ruling establishment and were not therefore taken seriously. It was left to Charan Singh, pillar of the Congress party in Uttar Pradesh for years, to lead a revolt,

The biggest challenge facing cricket is to clamp down on the growing menace of match-fixing. This is similar to the crisis that befell international athletics a few years ago, when it was tainted by the spectre of drugs. The Indian Premier League is a big breeding ground for match-fixing and it was only recently that five players were suspended after proof emerged that they actively fixed matches for pecuniary gains. The ICC must come up with a strong law to deal with match-fixing. A possible solution could be a life ban on any player found guilty of matchfixing. We need to root out this evil from the gentleman's game before it becomes an uncontrollable virus.
AMBAR MALLICK, Kolkata

The hanging of Ajmal Kasab, the main accused in the 26/11 Mumbai attack, was a justified step but we should not assume that we have achieved closure to the horrific incident which killed many in Mumbai four years ago. In fact, India should take up the matter even more vigorously now at appropriate global forums to make sure that Pakistan hands over all culprits of the terror attack on India.
MADHU AGARWAL, Delhi

Democracy Icon
Even though Aung San Suu Kyi, in the vanguard of the democratic struggle in Myanmar, has expressed her disappointment and disillusionment with India for letting her down by supporting the military junta ("`India was not with us in our democratic struggle'", November 26), the bonhomie and warmth she continues to exude with our nation is clearly palpable. As her path to democracy has been a long and arduous one fraught with many hurdles including solitary confinement, her bitterness is understandable. Nevertheless, the reality is India, by virtue of being the world's largest democracy, has all along voiced appreciation of her courage and steely determination in accomplishing her long-cherished dream of ushering democracy in her country.
NALINI VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Thiruvananthapuram

Security Crisis
That India has not become wiser after the 26/11 terror attack makes for very disturbing reading ("India Doesn't Learn", November 26). Outdated weapons, poor training and proliferating intelligence and security agencies with their egos have made the state of the nation worse. The apathy of the powers that be means that our

Our intelligence agencies are not smart and shrewd enough to learn lessons from the past or from the 26/11 terror attack in Mumbai, which challenged our security and intelligence competency. Revamping and modernising of our intelligence agencies, keeping constant vigil on states and national borders is the need of the hour. We expect better performance from Home Minister Sushilkumar Shinde than mere rhetoric and assurances. We should show be vigilant and alert.
M.Y. SHARIFF, Chennai

CHARAN SINGH-- MUCH MISUNDERSTOOD

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

firstly from within, and when things become too hot, to marshal his forces from the outside. Charan Singh too was dismissed by Nehru and his leftist friends as a rustic, a hillybilly who had neither been to the London School of Economics nor broken bread with the Fabians. But the wheel has now turned full circle and it is Charan Singh who has become, for better or for worse, the authentic new voice of post-Emergency by Jay Dubashi India.

