NA TION

BJP
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

s leaders of Opposition in Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha respectively, Arun Jaitley and Sushma Swaraj should have been sharpening their attack against the Government as Parliament opened for its winter session. Instead, they were left fighting the fire unleashed by 89-year-old Ram Jethmalani on November 24. The senior lawyer had dared to publicly vocalise what factions within BJP could only say as non-attributable quotes. Jaitley is believed to have called Narendra Modi on November 27, requesting him to speak to Jethmalani, though it is not known if Modi did the needful. Jethmalani and Modi are known to be close; the Gujarat Chief Minister is believed to have pushed for a Rajya Sabha seat for Jethmalani in 2010. The senior lawyer has expressed his support for Modi as BJP's prime ministerial candidate. Jethmalani took on both Jaitley and Swaraj in an open declaration of war. His attack bared the fissures within the party. While senior party leaders Yashwant Sinha and Shanta Kumar supported him in his demand for resignation of party President Nitin Gadkari, in his scathing letter to Gadkari on November 27, Shatrughan Sinha sided with the lawyer in approving the appointment of the new CBI chief, Ranjit Sinha. In his letter to Gadkari, Jethmalani mocked him: "I am convinced that you are firmly set on the path of suicide and you are determined to drag the whole party with you. Vinaash kaale vipreet buddhi is an old maxim." Jethmalani did not hesitate in taking on Jaitley for opposing the appointment of Ranjit Sinha as CBI chief, accusing him of being party to a conspiracy to defame Sinha. Jethmalani said that lawyers representing Delhi Police Commisioner Neeraj Kumar, who had challenged the Government's decision to drop his name from the final list of three for the CBI director's post in the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), were virtually Jaitley's juniors. "It is very improbable that the litigation before CAT was not known to him and I presume that you have also acted on Mr Arun Jaitley's ad-

A

BATTERING RAM AND CROUCHING BJP
With his sharp legal brain, caustic wit, explosive temper and long memory, Ram Jethmalani is a loose cannon BJP can ignore only at its own risk

RAM JETHMALANI

vice," Jethmalani wrote. Jaitley told the media on November 27 that the charges do not merit a response. Both Jaitley and Swaraj had opposed the appointment of Sinha. They had asked the Government to put the appointment on hold till the Lokpal Bill was passed in Parliament. Jethmalani lauded Prime Minister Manmohan Singh for the choice and the fair selection process. The Lokpal Bill proposes selection of the CBI chief by a collegium. In fact, the Lokpal Bill itself was another issue that miffed Jethmalani. He accused Jaitley and Swaraj of not consulting him on it. "Though I am a senior member of the Rajya Sabha and a

BJP founder, your present leaders either in the Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha have never once discussed anything about the Lokpal Bill with me," he said. Sources close to Jethmalani say Swaraj was victim of collateral damage, the attack being actually aimed at Jaitley. The animosity between the two goes back to 2000, when Jaitley replaced Jethmalani as law minister in Atal Bihari Vajpayee's government. As law minister, Jethmalani was involved in a turf battle with the then chief justice A.S. Anand and attorney general Soli Sorabjee. Things got messy, with letters being exchanged between them and Jethmalani. It was at that stage

that Vajpayee asked Jethmalani to resign. Jaitley, who was the minister of state for commerce at that time, was given law as an additional charge, and was soon elevated to Cabinet rank. "Jethmalani always believed that it was Jaitley who instigated Vajpayee to remove him from the Cabinet. Vajpayee had anyway been somewhat uncomfortable with Jethmalani. He had been appointed at the behest of then home minister L.K. Advani. Jethmalani had represented Advani in the Ram Janmabhoomi case. But Jethmalani managed to rile Advani as well by opposing his TADA Bill," explains a senior BJP leader. Jethmalani went on to contest and lose

SOURCES CLOSE TO JETHMALANI SAY THAT SWARAJ WAS VICTIM OF COLLATERAL DAMAGE, THE ATTACK BEING ACTUALLY AIMED AT JAITLEY.
the Lok Sabha polls against Vajpayee from Lucknow in 2004. The bad blood between Jaitley and Jethmalani continued, as Jaitley managed to capture the position of the party's legal brain. Moreover, when

Jethmalani tried to return to BJP with a Rajya Sabha seat, Jaitley is believed to have opposed it. Modi backed Jethmalani to the hilt, hoping the lawyer would come to his aid in his legal cases. Modi's protégé, Amit Shah, was already in jail at that time. "Being on good terms, Jaitley called up Modi to oppose Jethmalani's candidature. Modi got miffed and asked Jaitley if he wanted to see him in jail. Jethmalani is then said to have taken the Rajya Sabha ticket as fee for handling Modi and Shah's legal troubles," adds the BJP leader, known for his proximity to Modi. Jethmalani never managed to create a strong base for himself in the party despite being part of the core group comprising RSS ideologue S. Gurumurthy and Arun Shourie. His association with RSS dates back to the Emergency. Lacking a popular base, he has always been seen as expendable. However, Jethmalani believes that the party will not go far in challenging him. "Even though Gadkari is as much a non-conformist as Jethmalani, he cannot act against the senior lawyer on his own. Only the party's parliamentary board can take any decision to expel him. Anyway, knowing Jethmalani, he couldn't be bothered. With the kind of secrets he knows about senior party leaders, he can bring the party down on his own. Not only does he have a long memory, he has an explosive dossier on BJP leaders," says a BJP member. That probably explained the legal eagle's confidence when he said on November 25 that "nobody has the guts to take action against me". Taking the bait, BJP suspended his party membership but stopped short of expelling him. Jethmalani was served a showcause notice that asked him why he should not be expelled from the party for six years. He responded in his characteristic `Idon't-give-a-damn' style, saying there was no merit in the showcause and that "it deserves to be in the dustbin". Since he has nothing to lose, Jethmalani is reckless. It is for this reason that he is feared in the BJP too. Armed with a razor-sharp legal brain, caustic wit and a way with words, he is not only a brilliant lawyer but also a dogged adversary. 

68

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

69

