GLASS HOUSE

by PRIYA SAHGAL

PAWAR'S SOFT TOUCH

HEALTH HAZARD
Union Health Minister Ghulam Nabi Azad has cancelled subscription of all magazines at his ministry. He says officials spend more time reading magazines than working. But what's his excuse for not taking any initiative?
YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

S

even medical students from Mumbai got a pleasant surprise last week when Sharad Pawar took them to his New Delhi home after their latenight flight from Delhi to Chandigarh was cancelled due to bad weather. The Union agriculture minister, who was travelling to Ludhiana by the same flight, got to

know that the students were on their way to Chandigarh for an entrance exam and had no accommodation in the Capital. He also arranged for cars for them to travel to Chandigarh. Pawar too went by road to Ludhiana and had a cup of tea with the students at a roadside dhaba. Now if only they would vote for him.

TEWARI

SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Tewari TV
anish Tewari knows he was made Union minister because of his able defence of the party as spokesman. He knows how to hold on to a good USP.Whether it's the 2G scam or FDI in retail, the information and broadcasting minister reigns over airwaves. Tewari is also part of an informal group that meets at 15 Gurdwara Rakabganj Road to synchronise party and Government's reactions to the media.The group comprises Ahmed Patel, Digvijaya Singh and Janardan Dwivedi, and Communications Adviser to the PM, Pankaj Pachauri.

M

TOILET TROUBLE
15 Gurdwara Rakabganj Road (GRG) has displaced 99 South Avenue as the Congress's war room. The showpiece at 15 GRG are the bathrooms with swanky fittings.The toilets at 99 South Avenue were in such a bad shape that think-tank notables such as Jairam Ramesh, Salman Khurshid and Prithviraj Chavan had to rush to the Claridges hotel instead.This may explain Ramesh's obsession with toilets for all.

DIGVIJAYA

MISTRY

WASNIK

New Party Order
he much-awaited AICC reshuffle has been deferred till after the winter session of Parliament. Sources say there will be a change of portfolios among some general secretaries--Mukul Wasnik, an Ahmed Patel protégé, is tipped to get Patel's home state, Gujarat; Digvijaya Singh, who has an avuncular rapport with rebel Y.S.Jagan Mohan Reddy, could get Andhra Pradesh; and Madhusudan Mistry will handle Uttar Pradesh. He impressed Rahul Gandhi with his handling of rival factions in the Lok Sabha by-elections in Karnataka in March. It may not be enough.

T

SPIN
OF THE WEEK

Parrikar's Happy Ending

I

n 2005, during his first term as Goa chief minister Manohar Parrikar's rivals had alleged that the Inox multiplex at Panaji was an illegal construction. They said Parrikar had cleared it because of vested interests, upon which the CM declared he would not watch any film at Inox till he was cleared of the allegations, which CBI gave last month. What better way to celebrate than to watch a film at Inox? The choice? Konkani film Digant, Goa's entry at the International Film Festival of India.
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Suddenly FDI in retail is not so much about industrialists as it is about farmers.At the VS all-party meeting on FDI on November 26, at least three regional leaders homed in on their identities as farm leaders while defending FDI­ H.D. Deve Gowda, Sharad Pawar and Ajit Singh.

12

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
FREE FOR ALL
by R. Prasad

Junior Grows Up
ssam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi's son, Gaurav, has made it to the shortlist of four probable candidates from the Jorhat constituency for the next Lok Sabha elections. The 30-year-old engineer's name was not in the first list prepared by Congress observer Majji Sarada when she visited Jorhat between November 19 and 23, but it was later added to the list clearly under `advice' from the Centre."If the party leadership wants, I'm ready to contest," Gaurav told INDIA TODAY. Such dedication.

A

A Seat for Trinamool
fter the Trinamool Congress (TMC) walked out of UPA, its seats in Lok Sabha had to be reallocated as its members could no longer sit on the Treasury benches. However when Kamal Nath discussed the seat reallocation, he reassured TMC that their new seats would be far away from CPI(M). He offered them a row next to BSP and SP but not too far away from Congress, "just in case you want to lean across and shake hands with the Congress", he joked. But there was one catch--one of the seats he offered was right next to the Congress bench. "No problem," retorted Sudip Bandyopadhyay and promptly allotted it to Kabir Suman, the rebel TMC MP.
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

A

GITIKA TALUKDAR

TURFWAR
OF THE WEEK

BANDYOPADHYAY

Balancing Act
hose perplexed at the sudden importance being accorded to Aadhar can blame it on T Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. According

to a Cabinet minister, Manmohan is keen that the scheme gets the publicity he thinks it deserves. Which explains the joint press conference on November 27 by Union ministers RAMESH (LEFT) AND CHIDAMBARAM P. Chidambaram and Jairam Ramesh. To ensure that the party got its due, the press meet was held at the Congress office and not at the PIB Conference Hall. Chidambaram began by saying, "The party congratulates the Government for pulling it together." So, did the duo represent the party or Government?

S.Jaipal Reddy boycotted the launch of the second phase of the Hyderabad metro project last week. He is said to be upset with Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy for sending a lowly official with the invite.As Union urban development minister,Jaipal had helped get the project cleared.The CM's Office is wondering why he is upset as they acknowledged his role by printing his name on the card. Sometimes it's not what's on the cards but what's between the lines that matters.

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

with KIRAN TARE, DEVESH KUMAR, KAUSHIK DEKA AND AMARNATH K. MENON

14

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

