UP FRONT

DEVIKA BHAGAT

THE DEATH OFROMANCE
t the age of 12, I fell in love for the first time--with into our lives perfectly and seamlessly. As soon as our Virendra Pratap Singh, Anil Kapoor's quiet and ma- friendship request is accepted on Facebook, we can find out ture character in Yash Chopra's Lamhe. And then the past, the present, the likes and dislikes of potential partagain at 17 with Count Laszlo from The English Patient. I ners. We no longer need to discover slowly, the layers peelspent my 20s looking for them in every quiet, monosyllabic ing off one by one. We no longer wait to be invited to their boy I came across, hoping their floodgates of passion would homes, to discover their book and film collection, their break open--only for me. Sadly, they were all sullen and tastes and idiosyncrasies. We have discovered enough by stoned. I never found Virendra and Laszlo for a simple rea- analysing their Facebook "Likes". We have passed judgson--they don't exist. They are fictional characters that ment and made our decision. The problem is: That somedreams are built around. Romantic films allowed us our fan- one is not "The One". Every jigsaw piece has four sides, tasies and we lived in hope. Today, hope is for suckers or as therefore four potential perfect fits. Why stay with one when Mr T would say: "I pity the Fool!" We need to dive headfirst there are three others out there. No external force is keeping us apart from the ones we and grab what we can before the billions of others do. Is there someone somewhere out there meant for us? Well, if he or desire. There are no parents holding us down, boys and she hasn't found us yet on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn or girls are financially independent and frankly, eloping to a hut by the river without money, phones or the Internet is Shaadi.com, then we're not going to wait and wonder. Romantic films have slowly and surely been replaced by just impractical. Today my 15-year-old niece and her romantic comedies. The sweeping sound of violins in sound- friends have only one desire for their future: It isn't Prince tracks has been replaced by bangs, pops, whistles and flush Charming on a White Horse, it's to be rich. Without any sounds. A woman waiting for her man or running into his conflict except our unbridled desire to indulge in arms is considered regressive. Audiences want laughs, not consumerism, romance is for hapless idiots. Good boys tear-jerking poetry. Dialogues have to crackle with wit. If a serenading their loves while strumming a guitar are unbeman picks up a woman in his arms, she has to bang her head lievable. Only fools--romantic fools--love with unending for that `laugh out loud' moment. If he proposes, she has to passion. The realistic ones work towards an Audi Q7. Fairytales are for children. Twitter is for adults where a reject him because marriage is an outdated institution. No longer is the hero lovelorn, it's his fool of a best friend that film is given a Hit or Flop prognosis before the opening weekend is through. Audiences want the hero ridicules. Only when they SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com to know the story of a film before are a few drinks down can they they go see it. The beauty of disadmit their true feelings before covery is lost because we are now throwing up or passing out in used to information coming at us their confession taker's arms. In instantly at the touch of a button. a world of SMS language and Spending three hours watching a acronyms, romance is old fashstory unfold is a death sentence. ioned, from a time when true love Phones and relationships are meant sacrifices. Romances took disposed of once their battery life place between men and women. decreases. Pictures and mesNow protagonists in romantic sages are lost in the transfer of comedies grow up from boys and data. There are no boxes filled girls into men and women. Love is with letters or photographs synonymous with sexual chemslowly turning to sepia. The istry. Unrequited love is a prewasteland of emotions grows historic notion. They, and perhaps larger and larger. We continue we all, are too immature and selfunfettered and unburdened onto centred to handle a premise like the latest operating platform and sacrifice. This is the "Me first" age. a blank memory card. Move on and move up. Romantic films now seem to Perhaps the concept of roThe beauty of discovery is lost belong to a bygone era. Perhaps mance is indeed comedic, as the because we are now used to we have seen the last of them. We idea of love has changed. I call it information coming at us instantly only have ourselves and our the Jigsaw Love Syndrome. We no at the touch of a button. Spending smartphones to blame. longer have the patience or the three hours watching a story unfold time to adapt and mould ourselves. We need someone to fit Devika Bhagat is a screenplay writer is a death sentence.

A

06

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

