SURVEY 2012

TEN YEARS OF SEX SURVEY VIEW FROM MARS
of attitudes towards homosexuality is further revealed in the 2012 survey. While a significant number of men said they would forgive their spouse for an extramarital affair, there was an overwhelmingly negative response if the affair in question was to be a homosexual one. What emerges from data across the years is that more and more men have their first sexual experience at a younger age. In 2005, 32 per cent of unmarried men who took part in the survey reported that their first sexual experience was between the ages of 15-18, whereas in 2006 this percentage rose to 52 per cent. This, of course, reflects a changing youth culture and greater opportunities for young people to experiment sexually. But with the results suggesting that an increasing number of men would think twice before agreeing to marry an `experienced' woman, perhaps young women continue to bear the burden of being `pure'. Over the past decade, men continue to subscribe to some sexual taboos while others have weakened. There is consistency of responses with respect to questions regarding sexual relations with a family member, with an overwhelming majority responding in the negative. On the other hand, the percentage of young men who admitted to having taken part in group sex increased over the years. There is one aspect that appears to have remained constant across the changing sexual landscape: The value placed on maintaining a stable relationship. So, while extramarital affairs are common, the percentage of men admitting to them in the INDIA TODAY Sex Surveys over the past decade does not reflect this. Indeed, in the 2012 survey, `spouse' ranked highest as the `ideal sex partner'. Perhaps men realise that negotiating the sexual landscape is a fraught activity and what is pleasurable in the short term may not be so in future. What is true of life in general is no less true of sexual culture.
Sanjay Srivastava is a professor of sociology at the Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi

By Sanjay Srivastava

ale sexuality, and male attitudes towards female sexuality, have a great deal to tell us about social norms. It is interesting, therefore, that while 66 per cent of young unmarried men INDIA TODAY surveyed in 2005 reported that they would not marry a woman who admitted to premarital sex, this percentage had risen to 74 during the 2006 survey. And, the percentage of those who had said `yes' to the same question fell for the above period. Unmarried men in the same age group also expressed significant change of opinion when asked whether they believed in equal pleasure for men and women in bed. The percentage of those who had said `yes' to the question declined from 83 in 2005

M

MAN'S WORLD

57%
YOUNG, UNMARRIED MEN INDICATED IN 2006 THATTHEY HAVE NEVER HAD A HOMOSEXUAL EXPERIENCE,A SHARP CONTRAST TO 2005 WHEN 79 PER CENT ADMITTED NOT HAVING SUCH AN EXPERIENCE.

Young men want independent young women, but they also feel deeply ambivalent about this independence

THE FEAR OF

FREEDOM
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

What is your favourite position while having sex? 2005
MEN (18-30 years)

to 67 in 2006. This shows that `sexual equality' continues to be an anxious ground of negotiations between the genders. It would appear that through the last decade, young men have aspired to partner with independent young women, but also felt deeply ambivalent about this independence. It is therefore not surprising that in the 2012 survey, when asked about the qualities they looked for in potential dating partners, young men ranked `affection' significantly above `independence'. The period over which INDIA TODAY

has carried out the surveys has also coincided with significant public debate about the great unspoken reality of Indian life: Homosexuality. Colonial era laws have helped to produce the fiction of `natural' and `unnatural' Indian sexuality. However, this fiction has not been sustained in the responses given by men. So, between 2005 and 2006, the numbers of young unmarried men who indicated that they had never had a homosexual experience declined sharply from 79 per cent to 57 per cent. This may explain the relatively liberal

attitude towards same-sex experiences by unmarried young men. While the percentage of married men who admitted to homosexual experiences between 2004 and 2007 declined, the percentage of those who said that they talked about it with their spouses more than doubled. Given the significant evidence of married men's homosexual activities, this might suggest both an embarrassment about their unmarried past as well as the changing nature of married life where it is `okay' to talk about such things. The fraught nature

37 28

2006
MEN (16-25 years)

41 28

2012
MEN (15-50 years)

35 13
MAN ON TOP WOMAN ON TOP

54

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

