THE BIG STORY

CASH TRANSFERS
one, it removes duplicates, frauds and dead people from beneficiary lists. Under the new system, a cash transfer will happen only when a person has an Aadhar number, so the waste from money being transferred to fraudulent or non-existent persons is eliminated. Second, the usually painful interface between a beneficiary and a government official, whether in a post office or in a pension office, can be eliminated. It is at this interface where beneficiaries also encounter the worst corruption when officials demand a bribe. Under the Aadhar system, money has to be deposited directly into a beneficiary's bank account. To ease the process of opening a bank account, an Aadhar number is deemed sufficient to fulfil the usually complicated Know Your Customer norms at commercial banks. Given the relatively low level of penetration of bank branches, particularly in rural areas, Nilekani insisted on the use of `business correspondents' to reach out to maximum number of people. A business correspondent has to be designated and trained by a commercial bank. Anyone from a kirana store owner to the convener of a local self-help group can become a business correspondent. Each correspondent is armed with a microATM linked to the mobile phone network for connectivity. The micro-ATMs are used to verify the biometrics (fingerprints and retina scans) of beneficiaries, and the cash due under various government programmes is disbursed by the correspondent. The correspondent is immediately credited an equivalent amount by the bank in his or her bank account. Some government officials are sceptical about how the interface between a business correspondent and a

UPA'S SMART CARD
Its credibility in tatters, the Government is banking on the former corporate czar to deliver a third consecutive term
By Dhiraj Nayyar

andan Nilekani does not like the limelight. In his finest hour, as the man officially tasked with ensuring a third consecutive term in Government for UPA, the former Infosys CEO is keeping an arm's length from journalists. The usually media-friendly Nilekani has politely declined all interview requests since November 26, the day Union ministers P. Chidambaram and Jairam Ramesh announced that the Government would begin to roll out direct cash transfers of benefits, using Nilekani's Aadhar technology, from January 1, 2013, in 51 districts. Nilekani does not want to be the face of the Government's `gamechanger'. He would rather let the diehard politicians in UPA take the credit. His reticence is a carryover from his earlier corporate avatar. Even during his hugely successful stint as Infosys CEO between 2002 and 2007, he always allowed his mentor N.R. Narayana Murthy to be the company's public face. Nilekani is a man of ideas and execution. He first proposed the idea of a unique identity number in his bestselling book Imagining India in 2009. When UPA was re-elected in 2009, the Prime Minister offered to make him a member of the Planning Commission. Nilekani turned it down. In a defunct commission, with no executive mandate, his skills as a top-class manager would have been wasted. The Prime Minister then asked him to set up the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI). Nilekani could not say no. In

N

three years, he has conceived and set up a system that could drastically reduce leakages and corruption in the apparatus of India's gargantuan welfare state. If it works, it could save UPA an amount equivalent to its annual MGNREGA disbursal. It could even please voters enough to deliver 2014 to UPA. The prospect of Aadhar certainly pleased Chidambaram once he moved from the home ministry to the finance ministry in August. As home minister, Chidambaram was a bitter opponent of Aadhar, insisting instead on biometric registration through the home ministry's National Population Register (NPR). Once in finance, he realised immediately its benefits. Nilekani had won over his strongest opponent, who had often driven him from his usually jovial self to utter despair over the last two years. Chidambaram's turf war is still lingering on the ground. Says a Planning Commission official, "In some places, Aadhar hasn't rolled out because the NPR officials are not letting them proceed." It is now Home Minister Sushilkumar Shinde's responsibility to end the damaging turf war for UPA's benefit. Contrary to common perception, the salient feature of UPA's latest initiative is not the direct cash transfer aspect. "MGNREGA is already a direct cash transfer. Money is transferred to a person's post office account," says a senior Planning Commission official. What Aadhar does is to make the cash transfer system more effective. For

VIVAN MEHRA/www.indiatodayimages.com

NILEKANI DOES NOT WANT TO BE THE FACE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S `GAME-CHANGER'. HE WOULD RATHER LET THE DIEHARD POLITICIANS IN UPA TAKE THE CREDIT IN THE MEDIA.
NANDAN NILEKANI

32

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012CTOBER 13, 2008

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

THE BIG STORY

12

10 11 9 7 8 13 14

CASH TRANSFERS

beneficiary will evolve. "The correspondent can also demand a bribe, just like the post office official," says a senior policy official. Nilekani has thought about that. The answer to that challenge lies in giving the beneficiary choice. The plan is to have not one, but several business correspondents serving a community of villages. If one business correspondent demands a bribe, the beneficiary can simply go to another. Like with ATMs in cities, beneficiaries don't necessarily have to go to a business correspondent who is employed by their bank. They can go to business correspondents of any bank. "If banks can manage people using different ATMs to withdraw money, they can manage people using different business correspondents," says another official. Ending the government official's monopoly over disbursing benefits will be one of Aadhar's achievements. "The fact that people won't have to travel long distances to deal with corrupt officials will itself be a vote-winner," says the official. Nilekani's corporate background in a serviceoriented industry made sure that he paid particular attention to smoothening the interface between the final beneficiary and the fund disburser. UIDAI got a massive fillip in November, when a detailed report by independent think tank National

Institute of Public 21 22 20 Finance and Policy 18 (NIPFP) endorsed the 19 huge benefits 25 43 42 23 from the project. 24 17 40 41 Several econo15 26 16 mists from the think 32 33 39 37 35 36 tank worked out a detailed cost-benefit analysis 31 38 of Aadhar over a period of 30 the next 10 years. They con3 27 sidered the benefits from re- 34 28 ducing leakages in all the 29 1 flagship populist schemes-- The pilot project for the Aadhar6 2 MGNREGA, PDS, fertiliser subsidy, 5 based direct cash transfer LPG subsidy, education and system will be rolled out in 51* Indira Awaas Yojana. They made districts from January 1, 2013 very conservative assumptions for 4 KARNATAKA 1. Tumkur 2. Mysore 3. Dharwad leakages ranging from between 7 KERALA 4. Pathanamthitta 5. Wayanad per cent (for MGNREGA) and 11 per cent PUDUCHERRY 6. Puducherry CHANDIGARH (for PDS) of total funds disbursed. 7. Chandigarh PUNJAB 8. Ambala 9. Sonipat, According to the report, the 10. SBSNagar/ Nawanshahr 11. Fatehgarh Sahib Government gave out a sum of 12. Gurdaspur DELHI 13. North East Delhi, 14. North Rs 3.25 lakh crore (almost 4 per cent West Delhi MADHYA PRADESH 15. Hoshangabad of GDP) under these schemes in 16. East Nimar (Khandwa) 17. Harda RAJASTHAN 18. Ajmer 19. Udaipur 20. Alwar SIKKIM 21. West 2008-09. The sum would no doubt be 22. East TRIPURA 23. Khowai 24. Dhalai, higher now. Even with conservative 25. North 26. West ANDHRA PRADESH assumptions of leakage (around 1027. Hyderabad 28. Anantpur 29. Chittoor 15 per cent) the Government could 30. East Godavari 31. Ranga Reddy DAMAN & DIU save almost Rs 40,000 crore a year, a 32. Diu 33. Daman GOA 34. North Goa sum equivalent to its annual disMAHARASHTRA 35. Wardha 36. Mumbai + Suburban 37. Amravati 38. Pune 39. Nandurbar bursement under MGNREGA. UnoffJHARKHAND 40. Saraikela-Kharsawan, icially, the Government is hopeful of 41. Ranchi 42. Ramgarh 43. Hazaribag saving anywhere between 30 and 40 * The plan is on hold in four districts per cent of its total welfare spending each in Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat once Aadhar is fully rolled out. because of Assembly elections.

Small Beginnings

Government's Game-Changer
GETREADY
To receive cash benefits under government schemes, first get a UID number and a bank account.
Government to pay commission Get your Aadhar Number
Give biometrics (fingerprints and retina scan) at the nearest Aadhar enrolment centre.

The Aadhar system will drastically plug leakages

Open a bank account
Aadhar number is enough to fulfil Know Your Customer norms.

Ensure account number and Aadhar number harmonised
Visit bank branch to do this unless bank account was opened with Aadhar number. Enables receipt of direct payment.

GETYOUR MONEY
Business correspondents, not bank branches, will be the disbursers of funds.

Correspondent

Government to pay a compensated bybank commission of 3.14 Equivalent amount is deposited by bank per cent (up to a directly to corremaximum of Rs 20) per transaction to spondent's bank acthe correspondent. count immediately.

Business correspondent gives cash in hand
National Payment Corporation of India is the nodal body to electronically clear the payments.

Verifyyour identity
Give Aadhar number and cross-check biometrics on micro-ATM which will be with business correspondent.

Askto withdraw your full or partial entitlement
Depends on which scheme and how much you are entitled to.

Go to local business correspondent Could be a kirana
store owner or anyone else authorised by a bank.

34

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

THE BIG STORY

CASH TRANSFERS
When NIPFP economists compared the benefits from cutting out leakages to the cost of setting up and running Aadhar, they found that the project yielded a huge internal rate of return of 52 per cent. Says Ajay Shah, one of the co-authors of the study, "For government infrastructure projects, an internal rate of return of 15 per cent is considered enough to proceed. This is several times that." Aadhar may plug leakages but it will not eliminate corruption. "It is naïve to believe that Aadhar will end all discretion on the part of the Government," says a senior official. The fact is that Aadhar cannot identify which set of people should be beneficiaries for which programmes. "The definition of who is poor and their identification will still have to be done by the Centre and state," says the official. In one view, corruption at the level of getting names on beneficiary lists may actually increase. "The premiums at the stage of identification and inclusion of beneficiaries will go up since no money can be made elsewhere in the chain," says an official. There may be other, more practical problems. Even the best technology may malfunction in remote areas. The Government is not unaware of these glitches. It has decided to roll out only a few schemes in the first phase starting January 1, mostly scholarships for students. Food and fertiliser subsidies, the biggest burden on the fiscal bill and the real game-changers, are not on the agenda until the end of 2013. The petroleum ministry has requested three months after January 2013 to begin rolling out LPG subsidies in cash. The Government needs the system to work perfectly by the end of 2013 so that it can roll out subsidies in time for the 2014 General Elections. "They are in a hurry," says an official. The haste may compound problems in the short run, but in the long run, there is little doubt that Aadhar will bring much-needed efficiency to a broken welfare state. It could also propel Nilekani, who some describe as Rahul Gandhi's Sam Pitroda, into active politics. 

GLITCHES ATGROUND ZERO
States like Jharkhand are not ready for direct cash transfers

SOMNATH SEN

ohan Pahan, a farmer from Bankheta village in Jharkhand's Ramgarh district, ambles slowly to the Dohakatu panchayat ghar on a windy afternoon on December 3. The 90-year-old tribal enters the single-storeyed structure to collect the Rs 400 per month he gets from the Jharkhand government as old-age pension. But Pahan is illiterate. Rajesh, a 32-year-old graduate who has been employed as a business correspondent by United Telecom Ltd to help distribute funds among the villagers, feeds Pahan's 12-digit Aadhar number into the micro-ATM, and guides his right thumb to a rectangular enclosure to take his fingerprint. The machine does not recognise the fingerprint. Only after repeated failed attempts does Pahan manage to get his money. Illiteracy and ignorance are just two factors that could frustrate the Manmohan Singh Government from walking away with accolades for routing welfare scheme payments through bank accounts linked with Aadhar numbers. The game-changer that Union Cabinet ministers P. Chidambaram and Jairam Ramesh talked about while announcing rollout of Aadharlinked subsidy payments from

S

SOHAN PAHAN (LEFT) AT THE DOHAKATU PANCHAYAT GHAR IN JHARKHAND

January 1, 2013, could just fail to take off. Several government departments and states are still not ready for its launch. In Jharkhand, only a fourth of registered MGNREGA workers have been able to open bank accounts to receive wages paid to them. Post offices, which too have been identified as a means of distributing welfare scheme subsidies, do not come within the ambit of the core banking system. UIDAI officials in Jharkhand and elsewhere admit that they had been taken by surprise by the sudden announcement of going in for Aadharbased subsidy payments in select districts. The process of giving Aadhar numbers to the residents of the 51 districts itself has been running behind schedule. State departments have been particularly slow in digitising their database. At Dohakatu, Rajesh, the young tribal business correspondent, complains that he has not received any salary so far. "I have been working since February, but I have not received a single penny. Why should a young person like me do this work?'' he grumbles.
by Devesh Kumar

36

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

