SURVEY 2012

BETWEEN THE SHEETS OF SMALLTOWN INDIA

ONLYVIRGINS PLEASE MEN IN METROS AND 30% MEN IN SMALL TOWNS WERE SEXUALLY EXPERIENCED ATTHE TIME OF MARRIAGE.

FANTASY
IMAGINATION HAS OUTSTRIPPED OPPORTUNITIES IN SMALL TOWNS. ROMANCE IS PART OF THE ASPIRATION OF BEING MODERN BUT SEX IS STILL A PRISONER OF CIRCUMSTANCE.

REALITY DAMPENS

35%

70%
SMALLTOWN MEN AND 65% MEN IN METROS WANT THEIR PARTNER TO BE AVIRGIN ATTHE TIME OF MARRIAGE.

By Sanjay Srivastava

here is a wonderful collection of Hindi short stories by Prabhat Ranjan that carries the title Bolero Class. The stories--and the title--brilliantly capture the aspirations that have made their way down new highways and toll-ways that pass through a variety of small towns. Beyond the bitumen, there are virtual highways too that criss-cross India. These push their way through more intimate spaces: Drawing rooms, studies and bedrooms. But highways that transport new ideas (and, of course, new commodities) to the bazaar and home do not completely sweep away older structures of belief and practice. Technology changes far more quickly than belief systems, and where the two meet is an arena of conflicting desires, uncertain wishes and simmering anxieties. The small town that emerges from the 2012 INDIA TODAYNielsen Sex Survey of four metros (Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai) as well as 12 towns (Hisar, Moradabad, Kota, Kolhapur, Jamnagar, Ratlam, Salem, Kottayam, Guntur, Asansol, Baleshwar and Aizawl) lies at that juncture where rapidly changing times meet beliefs that yield only slowly. In INDIA TODAY's 10th annual sex survey, Indians from parts other than the North-east tend to look upon the latter region as another country. In some aspects of inter-personal relationships, it, quite clearly, is. Thus, a remarkably high level

T

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

SURVEY 2012 that Kota reports a relatively high percentage (50 per cent) of those who admit to have gone on dates. The high proportion of young people that the town contains as a result of its coaching industry might explain this result. For, the desire for worldly success and aspirations of modern intimacy often go hand in hand.

METHODOLOGY
NDIA TODAY, in association with The Nielsen Company, conducted an opinion poll on 5,246 respondents (2,623 women, 2,623 men) across 16 cities. The survey focused on sexual awakening in small towns. Street corner sampling was used to find eligible respondents. The study was divided in two phases. In the first phase, recruitment interviews were done where respondents were asked basic questions mainly regarding their demographics and their consent was asked for participating in the survey anonymously (by promising that their identity will be protected).This was followed by the second phase in which they were asked to complete a self-administered questionnaire. Among metros, the cities covered were Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata. In small towns the cities covered were Hisar, Kota, Moradabad, Kohlapur, Jamnagar, Ratlam, Salem, Kottayam, Guntur, Asansol, Baleshwar and Aizawl. The target group consisted of single and married respondents in the age group 15-50. While women were invited to a central location, street corner interviews were done for men. Questionnaires where more than 15-20 per cent questions were not answered were treated as invalid.

I

AFFAIRS TO REMEMBER

18% MEN AND
WOMEN IN METROS AND 13% IN SMALL TOWNS ADMIT TO HAVING EXTRAMARITAL SEX.

I

58%
MEN IN METROS AGREE THAT INCREASING ACCESS TO SEX CONTRIBUTES TO INFIDELITY, 40% SMALLTOWN MEN THINK LIKEWISE.

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

MEN AND WOMEN IN METROS AND 33% IN SMALLTOWNS THINK SEX IS USED AS A SHORTCUT TO PROFESSIONAL SUCCESS.
bers of the opposite sex, Moradabad and Guntur clock in at 3 per cent and 2 per cent respectively. While the high figure for Aizawl reflects, once again, a different set of social and cultural mores, the situation in other Indian towns also tells us something about the nature of public spaces within them. The lower rate of dating in smaller towns reflects the fact that such interaction is public activity, and spaces for such activities are limited. This is a situation that will change with new spaces such as malls, multiplexes and public parks, where courting couples can roam without fear of harassment. The desire for another life--that of boyfriends, girlfriends and dating--is unambiguously expressed, and in most towns (in fact all of them, except Moradabad), a significant number admit to having fallen in love with someone from the opposite sex. This is not surprising, for love and romance have important dimensions of expressing a cosmopolitan identity as well as being an important part of contemporary consumer culture. Both these aspects feed into the world of aspirations that define new ways of being. It is also interesting

52%

of respondents (79 per cent) from Mizoram's capital, Aizawl, report a satisfactory sex life. While raw numbers cannot tell us what people mean by `satisfaction', it is worth contemplating that Aizawl--located in a region that has experienced a great deal of disruption to normal life--also reports much higher levels of happiness with regard to everyday social life and financial situation, compared to small towns in other parts of the country. The troubles of the North-east do not seem to have changed traditions of relatively liberal interaction between genders. Hence,

Aizawl has the highest percentage of individuals who nominate their boyfriends/girlfriends as the first sexual partner. It also reports the highest percentage of live-in relationships, as well as those with multiple sexual partners. Fantasies of desire can become realities, either through socio-cultural rules of engagement or through transgression of such rules. But the latter needs spaces where transgressive acts can take place without an overwhelming risk. In this context, whereas Aizawl returns a high figure (89 per cent) for those who have dated mem-

n India, the act of kissing has had a particularly important role in ideas about modern intimacy. More than just modern, it was considered `too' western and out of step with `true' Indian culture. Our films found the most extraordinary ways of suggesting the kiss without ever showing it. The survey provides important evidence of change in this attitude. In fact, the percentage of those who admit to having kissed is higher for smaller towns than for the metros (for example, 89 per cent for Kota compared to 81 per cent in Mumbai). In response to another question, respondents attached considerable importance (90 per cent in Jamnagar and 78 per cent in Salem) to kissing as an act of emotional significance. Changing attitudes towards the kiss are part of changes in ideas about the self. While they indicate changing ideas about displays of affection, they also tell us something about new notions of selfhood in another regard. The desire of romance is part of the imagination of being modern, and is linked to ideas about being able to take one's own decisions (in choosing a partner, for example) and lead the life one wants. What are the qualities that people look for in their partners? This question elicited an extremely interesting response. Maturity and openness were the most preferred qualities of potential dating partners. `Sexual appeal' is lower down in the scale. Is there a sense in that in these volatile times--and, should the dating partner become a spouse--what is required is a mature head? And that people take rational rather than emotional decisions when thinking about the kind of person they would like to spend their life with? Perhaps it is because of this that friends and peers, rather than,

20

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

SURVEY 2012

BETWEEN THE SHEETS OF SMALLTOWN INDIA

FUN IS FOREVER

Is sex important after a few years of marriage?
NO YES

35%
WOMEN IN SMALL TOWNS

47%

18%
NOTSPECIFIED

NO

48%
WOMEN IN METROS

20%
NOTSPECIFIED

YES

32%
IMAGES BAZAAR

say, the Russian roulette of the Internet, constitute preferred ways of searching for suitable partners. But it would appear that `beauty' is differentiated from `sexual appeal'. A significant number mentioned beauty as a quality that attracted them to their partner. Perhaps, beauty is in the eye of the beholder. Despite the evidence of change, the survey also reminds us that small towns are also anchored in long-standing belief systems that have not changed. And that, notwithstanding a changing geography of the imagination, our actions are also limited by the actual worlds where we live. So, the majority of respondents indicated that they had one sexual partner and that their spouse was their ideal sexual partner. The pace of change has clearly not altered attitudes towards the significance of married life. It has also not changed views people hold towards some other aspects of intimacy and relationships. So, an overwhelming number, both of men and women, expected their life partners to be virgins. And, while attitudes towards sex may be changing--56 per cent in Guntur

admit to having sexual fantasies--the overwhelming majority reported themselves to be virgins at marriage. Once again, the actual state of affairs is not as important as the attitude towards virginity. Ratlam bucks this trend: Just 11 per cent reported that they thought their partner was a virgin at marriage.

T

here are also other significant ways in which the winds of change brush against edifices of longheld cultural beliefs. A very small number indicated that it was okay to remarry in case of unsatisfactory sex life, and there was fairly strong (84 per cent in Moradabad and 73 per cent in Baleshwar) rejection of live-in relationships. Also, while dating is both acceptable and desired, premarital sex found little acceptance. However, 22 per cent of respondents in Kota admitted to `consensual affairs'. Kota also had a high percentage of those admitting to sexual fantasies, role-playing during sex, and sex with the same gender. Kota, while a place of pressurecooker competitive aspirations, is also a site of experimentations in intimacy.

However, notwithstanding experimentations in sexual life--Jamnagar reports 27 per cent as having used sex toys and 59 per cent of Kottayam's respondents have watched pornographic films--there are some forms of sexualities that are still considered beyond acceptable limits. Hence, the levels of acceptability of homosexuality and bisexuality are low, as is that of sex between heterosexuals and transgenders. This tells us more about public attitudes rather than actual practice, since there is a great deal of empirical evidence that, for example, married men do engage in bisexual relationships. This is also true for many small towns. Lodged between imaginative worlds that break old boundaries, and belief systems and other constraints that dictate everyday life, the sexual life in India's small towns tell us a great deal about the complexities of social and cultural change. Perhaps, the most remarkable aspect is that residents of towns such as Hisar, Kolhapur and Salem are willing to talk about it.
Sanjay Srivastava is a professor of sociology at the Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi

22

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

