GLOSSARY

by NISHAT BARI

Save the Date
GETTY IMAGES

Q& "I don't pick roles according to A what I will wear in the film"
Sonakshi Sinha, 25, was launched in the highest earner of 2010, Dabangg. She returns as Rajjo in its sequel Dabangg 2. Q.What can we expect from Rajjo this time? A. The romance is of a married couple, which is very rare in our films. Q. Which is your most challenging role? A. Lootera was my most difficult role. We shot in difficult conditions. Picking the nuances of a Bengali girl from the 1950s was very tough. Q. Why are most of your costars so much your senior? A. Filmmakers do the casting, but it means I am working with the biggest stars. Q. How is working with Salman Khan and Akshay Kumar? A. They have contrasting working styles. Salman works at his own pace, and Akshay is the first to arrive on set. Q. What are your boundaries for a role? A. I will do films that I can sit and watch with my parents without them cringing and wanting to hide their face. Q. When do we get to see you as something besides a village girl? A. My look in Bullet Raja will be different. My past looks have been similar, but I don't pick roles according to what I will wear in the film. Q. The strangest thing you've heard about yourself. A. While shooting for Son Of Sardaar in Patiala I read a report that a spa had been demolished while I was inside. Q. What kind of roles would you like to do next? A. I am very content with the work I am doing.
GETTY IMAGES

HOT PICK

International artistes, flamboyant designers, star spectators and iconic birthdays. This winter is heating up.
February 6, 2013 January 19, 2013

BOY GONE BAD
After his first role as villain in Telugu film Rebel, Vikram Singh aka Vicky, 29, is doing another--Thuntari, directed by Sukumar. "People here tell me I have the face of a hero and the body of a villain." If all goes well, he'll play the baddie in a film starring Rajinikanth as well.

SOMEBODY WE KNOW
Best known for his hit single Somebody that I used to know, Gotye, or Wauter De Backer is India bound. The thrice Grammy nominated Brazilian-Australian will perform at Blue Frog club, Delhi, for the Oz Fest finale.

SALMAN-PSY STYLE
South Korean YouTube sensation Psy has a date with India. Salman Khan will dance with him Gangnam Style for the Celebrity Cricket League's third edition.

GETTY IMAGES

December 7-12, 2012

December 8, 2012

O F T H E

HARD ROCK
American rock band Guns N' Roses, fronted by Axl Rose, kick-started their first India tour in Bangalore, left behind a trail of awestruck stars in Mumbai before wrapping up with a concert in Gurgaon.
AXL ROSE
RAMESH SHARMA FOTOCORP

TEMPTING FANS
Shah Rukh Khan gathered Rani Mukerji, Preity Zinta and Bipasha Basu and headed to Jakarta, Indonesia, for yet another edition of his Temptation Reloaded concert.

WEEK

A common man is a common man because he thinks commonly and that's why he very rightfully deserves to both live and die commonly. --Ram Gopal Varma, director

LEGAL TRAP
Years ago Ameesha Patel, 37, had sued her father Amit Patel for mismanaging her accounts. Legal tussles with her family continue, this time with uncles Nalin and Sunil Patel over an apartment that belonged to her grandmother Sushila Patel. In between all the suing, will she ever manage to rescue her vanishing film career?
GETTY IMAGES

December 7, 2012

December 11, 2012

DESIGNER PRINT
Roberto Cavalli's flagship store launch in Delhi brought in flocks of celebrities clad in his animal prints, with Sonam Kapoor getting a special place by Cavalli's side.

MELANCHOLIC 90
Bollywood legend and the king of tragedy Dilip Kumar turned 90. While he didn't celebrate the day due to the recent demise of his friend Bal Thackeray, his birthplace Peshawar did.

KAPOOR WITH CAVALLI
YOGEN SHAH

FOTOCORP

MOVING SOUTH
Over a decade on, Preeti Jhangiani hasn't yet moved out of the shadow of Mohabbatein. So she moved on--to Bengali, Punjabi and Kannada films, and has five films lined up for release. Matching steps is Neetu Chandra of Oye Lucky! Lucky Oye! Besides producing Bhojpuri film Deswa, she has films in Tamil, Telugu and even one in Greek, Home Sweet Home.

MUSIC ALERT

HIGH NOTES
Bangalore boy Arun Shenoy has hit all the right chords. After studying and working in the city for several years, he moved to Singapore, where he is now a songwriter and record producer. His debut world fusion record Rumbadoodle has been nominated for a Grammy Award in the best pop instrumental album category.

FIRST LOOK

BIG SHOUT
We have seen Ranbir Kapoor scrubbed, bearded, dishevelled and mute, but never half the Roadside Romeo he resembles in the first poster of Besharam. And never in a car as pink as that. Abhinav Kashyap, you have got our attention.

JHANGIANI

CHANDRA

246

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

with Ayesha Aleem and Mona Ramavat

YOGEN SHAH

