New Dimensions of Politics in Haryana
HJC-BJP Alliance At The Threshold of Power?
Its proximity to the national capital has continually primed Haryana as a highly significant state from the political perspective. Haryana's political panorama is seen as the appetite for the national politics and that is why all eyes are today set on Kuldeep Bishnoi who has every reason to flex his political muscles on account of his ever growing eminence resulting from instant connectivity with the poor and desperate. His sweeping popularity at the grassroots is changing the dimensions of politics in Haryana.
manifestation of war and victory over sins. The Hisar Victory added new verve and vigour to the BJP within and outside Haryana; and brought HJC-BJP alliance to the political axis of Haryana. The good prophecy of victorious spree didn't stop at Hisar only, as Bishnoi moved to the Parliament, his wife Renuka Bishnoi contested Adampur Haryana Assembly seat as an alliance candidate and registered a reverberating triumph. Both the conquests led to the fortification of alliance between the HJC

H

aryana state's political landscape witnessed a significant development on September the 10th last year, with Kuldeep Bishnoi led Haryana Janhit Congress (BL) ie. HJC perfecting an alliance with Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Both ruling Indian National Congress (INC) as well as Indian National Lok Dal (INLD), the opposition party in the state got a bolt from the blue. Political connoisseurs had then predicted with fervour that the alliance would certainly have to be watched as a germinating sprout. Today, in no time the said sapling of alliance between BJP & HJC has grown as a Sawtooth Oak Tree. Incidentally, the said alliance had

come at the forefront of Hisar Lok Sabha byelection. Bishnoi contested and won the Hisar byelection as a joint candidate of HJC-BJP thereby giving the alliance an astounding head start in Haryana, The victory in Hisar Lok Sabha also aided Bishnoi by instituting him as the tallest and principally recognized non-jat leader in the state. Fascinatingly for the alliance Bishnoi not only routed nearest contender Ajay Chautala of the Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) the erstwhile ally of BJP for the second consecutive time but furthermore coped to tear down the ruling Congress by ensuring loss of deposit of its stalwart candidate Jaiprakash, former Union Minister. Many termed the first victory of alliance as an auspicious blowing of Shankh - a

Fascinatingly for the alliance Bishnoi not only routed nearest contender Ajay Chautala of the INLD for the second consecutive time but furthermore coped to tear down the ruling Congress by ensuring loss of deposit of its stalwart candidate Jaiprakash, former Union Minister.

and the BJP. Both the parties are Apparently, the last rally in the row Kuldeep Bishnoi and other leaders now thunderously bellowing of their at Sirsa on December 2 organized by with a belief of liberation from the definite joint victory in the next state Bishnoi's HJC to commemorate current predicaments of the ruling assembly elections and the Lok HJC's fifth anniversary took the piv- INC. One may reason that these Sabha polls. While Kuldeep Bishnoi otal and giant slice of the cake by numbers are mustered and do not can reinforce his prospects of fetch- leading in the recent string of politi- essentially decipher into votes. ing the Chief Ministership of the cal rallies with a mammoth and Nonetheless, this is the least benchstate, BJP can make sure an en- laudable crowd of over three lakh mark that is there to demonstrate people. It is now being questioned the judicious vote-share. Ultimately hanced grip at the center. In a proffer to whittle new-fangled that do INC and INLD have any it is the people who rally behind their sustainable base for themselves in wrapping up to do after this gigantic leaders on ground are the prevue of advance of the Lok Sabha and As- political rally of HJC? Undoubtedly, the strength of a political leader and sembly elections in 2014, the three it is the people who matter in his party. Bishnoi's recent Sirsa rally major political parties of Haryana - upholding political opinion in an has added pedal to the metal for INLD, INC and HJC (an ally of BJP) electoral politics. The rally saw tens HJC-BJP alliance by placing them had organised rallies in different of thousands of people heartening one step ahead of INC and INLD at parts of the State over last few days. Nitin Gadkari, Sushma Swaraj, this juncture. The rally did raise a thought-provoking crux for the people of Haryana as to choices available for next elections with the present Govt. having failed miserably on all accounts and encountering unyielding condemnation from all segments of

Bishnoi's recent Sirsa rally has added pedal to the metal for HJC-BJP alliance by placing them one step ahead of INC and INLD at this juncture.

society; and Chautalas facing serious charges of disproportionate assets and corruption cases leading to fil,. ing of various charge-sheets by the CBI. HJC impressed upon the assembly of people that either there was option of choosing 'goonda raaf and 'bhrasht raaf or 'janhit raaf. Obvious hint at choosing either INLD, INC or HJC-BJP. People were also re- nerves of steel as his victory over two spective constituencies, and will perminded that all non-Congress Govts. other Chief Ministers- Bansi Lai and haps take them decades to attain enpreviously formed were always Om Prakash Chautala - in the 2004 durable levels. He does come out as aligned with BJP. Today, HJC-BJP parliamentary elections resulting a honest, simple, grounded and vialliance is being seen as the only from the defeat of their heir appar- sionary politician, which is proven viable alternative. It's also felt by ent overlaid the path for the first from his track record of winning the some analysts and intelligentsia in ever victory of non-jat from the Bhi- most difficult and complicated elections against gargantuan chieftains. Haryana that non-jat communities wani Lok Sabha constituency. are looking at Bishnoi as their savior Even in the current scenario with In all his elections both Jat and non(after Bhajan Lai) in the current dis- Bishnoi being a Lok Sabha MP, BJP jat communities had joined hands in criminatory setting. boasts of one additional number in his support; despite being a non-jat Haryana, since 1996 has been their tally. One BJP leader quoted himself he is never seen to have ruled by the Jat Chief Ministers so sometime back that 'Bishnoi is taken played caste politics and that is why much so that the infinite bulk of non- more as a part of BJP than an ally'. communities and castes all across jat electorate are increasingly feel- This goes to show a high degree of would seek his rise to power, for in ing alienated and panting for comfort, confidence and trust be- his empowerment; they would determine a sagacity of self fulfillment change. It can't be lost sight of that tween the BJP and HJC. Bishnoi's family is perhaps the only The politics of Haryana is caught and self empowerment. After seeing the numbers, emoup in convolutions and nuances. The one in the Indian political backdrop tions and charge-up at the rally, it's which has won both parliamentary popular discernment regarding no more news of success 'heard as well as assembly elections re- Haryana is that it is a citadel of Jats. through the grapevine' but a fact of markably, precisely totaling 24, from But the adherence to the truth is that 'win the day' for HJC-BJP alliance. the north, south, east, west and cen- Haryana as a state is a montage of What is even more encouraging for tral regions of their home State various castes and communities and HJC's Bishnoi is the recent trend of whether it be bordering Delhi Jats constitute only 21.5 per cent of Haryana's electorate throwing its or Punjab or Himachal or Rajasthan its populace or in other words 78.5 weight for a non-jat face, and if the per cent voters in Haryana are 'nonand UP; thereby demonstrating same sentiment comes together bepopular, universal and uniform jats'. In the current setting, Bishnoi hind the alliance, then the stage is acceptability all across Haryana. is the sole tallest 'non-jat' leader in set for Bishnoi taking the seat of next Bishnoi takes pride in claiming to the state, whereas other non-jat Chief Minister of the state. be a humble precursor and envoy leaders are just confined to their reBishnoi through HJC has of all castes and regions of the enpioneered a new dimension in tire state of Haryana on a micro Haryana politics with BJP by his side level; with 63 per cent of Haryana's Bishnoi is the sole tallest in state a nd he by them in centre, population, which is below the age of the kernel of immense predicament 'non-jat' leader in the 45 years, also promising well for and impasse for the Congress and state, whereas other non- INLD young Bishnoi. are on the roll. The HJC-BJP's Chautala's INLD seems to be losJat leaders are just alliance is beginning to see light of ing ground as more and more people the day with cognizant realization confined to their are getting aware of the connotathat now it's none other but a nonrespective constituencies, jat forerunner who could sail them tions of their adverse repute; which traits are virtually absent in Bishand will perhaps take them through; though how soon the alnoi's case. He holds an unimpeachliance gets to see the actual glow and decades to attain able and immaculate reputation. radiance of the daylight, the people endurable levels. People of Haryana also recognize his of Haryana will decide. ·

