37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

DR PRATHAP C. REDDY AND SANGITA REDDY

PRATHAP AND SANGITA REDDY AT APOLLO HOSPITAL, HYDERABAD

"We used to say let us do what anybody in the world can do. Now, we say let us do what others have not"
Prathap C. Reddy

DEEPAK G PAWAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

"We put the healthcare record in the patient's hands"
Sitting in the cavernous fifth-floor corner room at the Apollo Hospital, Hyderabad, Dr Prathap C. Reddy can glance through two glass panels for breakhtaking views of the historic Golconda Fort and nearby tombs to the south and the sprawling Cyberabad on the west. In a conversation with daughter and Executive Director-Operations, Apollo Hospitals Group, Sangita Reddy, 50, moderated by SENIOR EDITOR AMARNATH K. MENON, the 79-yearold shares a bird's eye view of the healthcare growth story in general and the Apollo journey in particular. Prathap C. Reddy (PCR) There is a sea change from the medicine I studied and what the first Apollo Medical College is going to do--transform the way medical instruction is delivered. Apollo should draw satisfaction in saying "we have brought this to India". It was my dad's wish that I come back and do something for the people in my country, and my mother loved it. But, when we came back, everybody said, "You have done a crazy thing." The turning point came when I lost a young man in 1979. He was just 38. Sangita Reddy (SR) I remember how upset you were. PCR Instead of having a surgery, he was on the bed looking at his wife and children: Four-year-old daughter and two-year-old son. Know why? They

Sangita Reddy

could not afford to raise $50,000 to go to the US. I asked myself: How many more are going to face this situation? SR I remember you said if Indian doctors were curing people all over the world, why not back home? PCR That is exactly what we did by opening a 150-bed hospital in Chennai in the 1980s. The most important thing was we involved everyone. SR You gave us a great opportunity. PCR I recollect when we did the first audio-visual. Shobana (one of his four daughters) was at the R.K. Swamy advertising agency. I walked out, it did not capture the vision. The next day, she

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

97

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS DR PRATHAP C. REDDY AND SANGITA REDDY

"We have resolved that we will do everything possible in the field of non-communicable diseases.By bringing greater awareness,we can make India diabetes-free."
Prathap C. Reddy

PRATHAP REDDYWITH WIFE SUCHARITHA AND DAUGHTERS SHOBANA , SANGITA , SUNEETA AND PREETHA

Process, speed, efficiency, feedback, courtesy, hospitality are all making an impact. Combining professionalism with medical excellence brings in a lot of value. Sangita Reddy
had the whole thing changed. SR It was like you were consumed with this thing. Everyone who came into your circle of influence joined the bandwagon. PCR When President Giani Zail Singh was coming to inaugurate Apollo Hospital, Chennai, I was told he would spend only 20 minutes. When he came, he saw every single place in the hospital and told his daughter, a doctor, "We did not see this in Dr Denton A. Cooley's Texas Heart Institute." When it was time for his speech, he put aside the prepared text and said, "I am so happy today that people from India do not have to go abroad." That was a good beginning. Now, we are talking about how we can consecutively give greater value not for money but life. When we started, the cost of a heart surgery was $3,000. Today, it is lower, at $2,900, in spite of inflation. Improvement has not increased costs. We have also grown to 55 hospitals and, in every field, we are doing whatever the rest of the world is doing. SR An Indian hospital group is now the number one in transplants in the world. We were among the earliest hospitals to adopt Six Sigma business metrics in a clinical environment. Now the transformation agenda is to create scale and access, and not think of sequential opening of hospital beds. PCR We need to change the way healthcare is delivered. From hospital to clinic and home, you must connect seamlessly so that the patient does not make unnecessary hospital visits. SR The core vision is a healthcare IT system which is accessible anytime, anywhere. I hope we will always be remembered for putting the healthcare record in the patient's hands. Having crossed a million PHRs (Personal Health Records of patients), this is a channel for doctors to communicate not only when the patient is present but also over the phone when he is at home or travelling. PCR Previously, we thought let us do what anybody in the world can do. Now, we are prepared to say let us do what others have not done. SR Pharmacy chain growth has been one of those examples. PCR Someone asked me, why did you start pharmacies? Because 30 per cent medicines being sold were fake. SR Besides Indian patents, we have had 30 million international patients from 18 countries. PCR The other day while going around our specialty hospital, I met a couple from abroad who called our surgeons rockstars. On chatting further, I discovered they lived 100 metres from where I used to in Springfield, Illinois. I met another couple from Kansas. These people initially did not believe India could offer such top-notch care. SR More research, stem cells, more technology... and everything is for the patient.
Video available on iPad

"Now we are talking about how we can consecutively give greater value not for money but life. In every field, we are doing whatever the rest of the world is doing." Prathap C. Reddy

"Now the transformation agenda is to create scale and access, and not think of sequential opening of hospital beds." Sangita Reddy
98
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

