I
,? *

EMBRACING PEACE, PROSPERITY AND GROWTH
Our'Land of the Rising Sun' February 20,1987. A momentous occasion. On this day, Arunachal Pradesh was conferred full Statehood from its Union Territory status. A sapling of hope germinated. A journey started. Today, twenty six years later, it presents the picture of a vibrant and self-reliant state with impressive development record in diverse fields, especially in the infrastructure development and human resource sectors. Under the leadership of Gen. J. J. Singh, the Governor and Shri Nabam Tuki, the Chief Minister, Arunachal Pradesh is today well-settled on a path of equitable growth, consolidating on the pro-development and pro-people policies adopted by former Chief Minister, the late Sh. Dorjee Khandu. The focus is on peace and harmony and the objective is to propel growth. The process has started. The growth rate of Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) in the State for the year 2011-12 is 10.84 percent constant, one of the highest in the country. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT: Some landmark achievements of the State are enactment of Arunachal Pradesh Education Act, 2010, implementation of Right to Education Act, constitution of Right to Education Protection Authority (REPA) to examine, monitor, and safeguard the rights of children, establishment of National Institute of Technology and Arunachal Pradesh State Council for Technical Council Education among other pioneering projects. The Government will set up six Model Degree Colleges and has already set-up 3 new colleges from this current academic session. Establishment of 10 more Polytechnics in 10 different districts of the state has been finalized. Besides, the Rajiv Gandhi Government Polytechnic set up by the Government of India with financial assistance from World Bank is the first institution of its kind in the state. The Legislature has approved the setting up of a State University at Pasighatthis year, which will be the second University of the State after the Rajiv Gandbi Central University at Rono Hills. Chief Minister's Talent Award Scheme with a cash award of Rs 10,000 and a laptop to the meritorious students of Class X and XII has been introduced to encourage academic excellence. The State, which had only 3 primary schools on the eve of independence, is today fast closing the gap in literacy rate with the  national average. ||EALTH : All health indicators in the State are better than the national averages and have shown consistent improvement. Additional posts of medical doctors and specialists to cove^Jistrj|tfjospitals are being created. The project for upgradation of Naharlagun State Hospital is being taken up earnestly which will be followed by setting up of a medical college. INFRASTRUCTURE : Thanks to the massive economic package of more than Rs 25,000 crores sanctioned by the Hon'ble Prime Minister during his visit in 2008, the State received a massive boost on the infrastructure development front. Works on all the components of this package are progressing satisfactorily and are at various stages of completion. (See box). Power : With a cumulative hydro-power potential of more than 60,000 MW, the State is the future power-house of the country. More than 42,000 MW of this potential is under development at various stages. Three mega hydro-power projects providing a capacity additional of 2,710 MW are likely to be completed by 2014. The existing potential in the State can take care of more than one-third of the country's total energy requirements.

Status of PM Package in Arunachal Pradesh
 New state-of the-art secretariat building to be completed by March 2013.  110 MW Pare Hydroelectric Project to be completed by 2014.  Itanagar Water Supply project to be commissioned in December 2012.  Harmuti-Naharlagun Railway Line Project (21.75 km) to be completed by December 2012.  Electrification of all 2121 villages in Border Areas in full swing; 1300 villages completed by Dec. 2012  First Greenfield Airport sanctioned for the state at Itanagar with operational capacity of handling Boeings/Airbus aircraft.  Operationalization of 8 of existing Airports in collaboration with Ministry of Defence  Road Connectivity to 513 settlements in blocks along the international border to be provided by 2013.  1260 languishing projects, pending since the last twenty years completed in one go  Itanagar to Hollongi 4-lane Highway to be completed by August, 2014.  Work on 1657 km long Two Lane Trans Arunachal Highway running througb-out the length of the State connecting 12 districts at varying stages of implementation  Two-lane road connectivity (805 km) to all district HQs not lying on the Trans-Arunachal highway.

Message from His Excellency the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh
Gen. (Retd.) J. 1. Singh, PVSM, AVSM, VSM My vision of future Arunachal Pradesh... A vibrant, prosperous and peaceful Arunachal Pradesh. A bright future for all Arunachalis, where they not only enjoy the highest per capita income, but also, the highest per capita happiness. May our beautiful Land of the Rising Sun continue to stand strong and steadfast as the eastern sentinel of our great nation. AGRICULTURE : Various programmes including establishment of 13 Krishi Vigyan Kendras are being taken up to augment agricultural production in the State. The State has recorded impressive growth rate of 14% in the agricultural sector. To provide monetary support to small farmers in purchase of equipment, Chief Minister's Agriculture Mechanization Programme has been launched this year under which subsidy levels have been almost doubled. Setting up of rural godowns and cold storages are being taken up in a planned manner by strengthening the State Agriculture Marketing Board. Special focus is being laid on cultivation of cash crops, fruits, off-season vegetables, spices, tea and rubber to augment the income of marginal farmers. TOURISM : Arunachal Pradesh is a land of pristine beauty with immense tourism potential. Describing it as the last of the Shangri-Las, the travel icon - 'Lonely Planet has rated it as the fourth best tourist destination in the World in 2012. The State Government is harnessing its abundant resources through various activities related to cultural tourism, natural & eco-tourism, rural tourism, religious tourism and adventure tourism. Creation of infrastructure, capacity building and training of stakeholders are areas of priority. There are 11 tourist circuits approved by the Government that transport tourists to exotic locations, heritage sites and promote adventure tourism. Arunachal Pradesh was given the National Award for the best State for creation of infrastructure during 2008 by the Ministry of Tourism. In the last five years, the number of domestic tourists and foreign tourists has increased by four times and twelve times respectively. SPORTS AND YOUTH AFFAIRS : Infrastructure development for promotion of sports is a priority. A new scheme for the youth - 'CM's Youth Development Scheme', aimed at channelizing the talent of youth in constructive manner is being introduced. The youth from the State have won laurels at national and international levels in sports like badminton, mountaineering and weight-lifting. A policy for giving attractive cash prizes to medal winners has been introduced. Allocations for sports sector in the State have been increased by more than four times in the State budget and development of State-of-the-Art stadiums is being taken up in all District Headquarters in a phased manner.

My State has registered the highest GSDP growth rate in the country in the last two years. Our per capita income, which was about 10% lower than the rest of the country only five years ago is today about 10% higher than national per capita income. Ours is one of the only eight States in the country where the actual expenditure during the 11* Five Year Plan has been in excess of the projected targets. We will try to keep up with these achievements in the years to come. We have adopted the State Public Private Partnership Policy (PPP) - 2011 paving way for private investments in various viable sectors like tourism, education, health, hydro-power and other infrastructure development We have succeeded in attracting substantial private investments that will not only boost infrastructure development but also open up additional employment avenues. My Government will lay stress on creating sufficient job opportunities for unemployed and under-employed educated in sectors like Agriculture, Horticulture, Tea, Bamboo and Rubber, Tourism besides Industry and Handloom & Handicrafts. We have already constituted the Arunachal Employment Generation Council and the Arunachal Pradesh Skill Development Council. Our target is to generate additional employment for atieast one lakh youth in the 12* Five Year Plan. Hydro-power, tourism and horticulture will be the future engines of growth for our State and these will continue to be our priority sectors. We will aim to realize our potential in these sectors by setting up of fruit processing units, building tourism infrastructure and training our youth and by developing our hydropower potential through public sector units and private sector participation. By 2025, Arunachalis will be the richest citizens of the country. Our State has the highest Hydro-power potential (60000 MW) in the country. Of this, about 42,000 MW has been allotted for development to various power companies. By the end of 12* Plan (2017) the State will add more than 2,000 MW capacity under its power sector. There are three important projects under execution, namely, Subansiri Lower HEP of 2000 MW, Kameng HEP of 600 MW and Pare HEP of 110MW which are likely to be completed within an year's time. We will construct a 132 KV State Grid from Tawangto Deomali, connecting all districts of Arunachal Pradesh so that stable power can be made available to all the parts of the State. We are also in discussions with the Govt. of India for constructing a high voltage transmission network to evacuate power from the mega hydro projects as and when they are completed. We have given top priority to agriculture and allied activities to make the State self sufficient in food grains and become a major exporter of fruits and medicinal plants. We are encouraging cultivation of high value and low volume fruits like strawberry, kiwi and promote the production of organic crops, offseason vegetables, and cardamom and ginger etc. Special impetus is being put on floriculture, orchids, cane and bamboo and other market-sensitive forest produce. Last year, our agriculture and horticulture sectors witnessed growth rates of 14% and 195% respectively, which are unprecedented anywhere in the country.
I

New Schemes introduced by the State Government this year
Chief Minister's Agriculture Mechanization programme Chief Minister's Skill Development Programme for Unemployed Youth Chief Minister's Livelihood Mission School Chief Minister's Prayatan Vikas Yojana Chief Minister's Disability Pension Scheme Universal Health Insurance Scheme Tea and Rubber Cultivation 1

With the adoption of the State Public Private Partnership Policy (PPP) by the State Government, my message to all investors is clear and open. Anybody who is interested in investing in Arunachal Pradesh is welcome. We have abundance of land and my government is committed to facilitate implementation of projects in partnership with private investors. In fact, many private investors have already ventured into the State and are doing commendable work. My only request to all potential investors would be to keep the welfare of the indigenous people on top priority in all their endeavors. Rest assured, all are welcome!

1

