NET FLUX
graphified

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

blogroll

Cyber Crimes Soar
There has been an increase of 85.4 per cent in cyber crime in 2011 from 2010 in India.According to the National Crime Records Bureau 2011,cities including Bangalore,Visakhapatnam,Jaipur and Delhi reported a high incidence of registered cyber crimes under the IT Act. In 2011,1,791 cases of cyber crime were registered under the IT Act compared to 966 in 2010.Forty-two per cent of those arrested were between the ages of 18 and 30 while 39.9 per cent were between 30 and 45.Out of the 157 cases of hacking in 2011,23 were reported from Karnataka, the highest in any state.
Visakhapatnam
107

Prison Diary
John McAfee, the founder of anti-virus security firm McAfee, is blogging from a Guatemalan jail. McAfee is currently detained as a suspect for his neighbour's murder in Belize. His blog `The Hinterland'chronicles his experience of hiding from the police. His thoughts on prison so far--"the coffee is excellent" .

JOHN MCAFEE

app watch

Magazine Mania
Magzter, an Indian magazine store app, was the top grosser in Apple's app store in Asia. Beating worldwide favourites like Angry Birds, NYTimes and Temple Run, the app now has 4.5 million global users. Started by two Chennai-based entrepreneurs, Girish Ramdas, 37, and Vijayakumar Radhakrishnan, 34, the free app enables people to VIJAYAKUMAR RADHAKRISHNAN (LEFT) AND GIRISH RAMDAS browse, buy, read and subscribe to over 1,000 virtual magazines on their smartphone or tablet. Magzter plans to feature books next--they recently launched digital comic books with Amar Chitra Katha for mobile devices.

Jaipur
76

Delhi (city)
50

Bangalore
*117

Pune
83

Hyderabad
67

*Figures denote cases registered under the IT Act

star of the week

web wow

app alert

Perfect Pitch
You can hear the voices of Harsha Bhogle,Ravi Shastri,Ian Chappell,Tony Greig and Sachin Tendulkar--all from one person's mouth.Thanks to a video of Sabyasachi Tripathy's mimicry act at Christ College,Bangalore,the 25-yearold Kolkata boy has caught the fancy of net-savvy cricket fans all over the world.The video,featuring a match between India and Australia,has Tripathy imitating the commentators.But the biggest cheers from the audience came when Tripathy broke into Tendulkar's trademark soft,high pitched voice.The video has over 1 million views.

Hat's Off To Her
Twenty-three-year-old Bridget Hughes' brown hat might look ordinary, but it could just be one of the most famous hats in the world, thanks to the Internet.The hat belonged to her mother, who passed away after suffering from breast cancer when Hughes was seven. She recently lost the hat and posted about its significance on Facebook. People from across the world have taken notice of her loss and her post has been shared over 160,000 times and received 8,000 comments.
BRIDGET HUGHES

Top of the Lot
This week's app round up is for the colour blind, the clotheshorse and the foodie. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. En Chroma tells you if you are colour blind through a series of tests and even pinpoints the deficiencies your eyes have. Polyvore lets you browse for various pieces of clothing and accessories online and put it together to form the perfect outfit. Foodster has a choice of more than 10,000 recipes.

net prank
Facebook user Nolan Daniels fooled thousands of people into thinking he won a lottery.He posted a picture of himself with his `winning'$588 million Powerball ticket with a caption that he would give $1 million to anyone who shared it on the social networking website.So far,the picture has been shared 200,000 times.

This week's most watched video was a terrifying elevator prank filmed in Brazil.A person enters the lift only to face a scary little girl dressed in white.Other popular videos include a Turkish Airlines ad featuring sportsmen Kobe Bryant and Lionel Messi as well as comedian Jimmy Fallon and Mariah Carey singing a Christmas song.

viral video

Scary Ghost Elevator Prank 71 million Jimmy Fallon and Mariah Carey's Kobe Vs Messi-- Christmas Song Turkish 5.8 million Airlines Ad 19 million * Views from when videos were uploaded
DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

241

