37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

TANUJA AND KAJOL

"In today's cinema, it is difficult to say who the hero ine is and who is the vamp"
Tanuja

TANUJA AND KAJOL SHARE A LAUGH AT THE PRESIDENTIAL SUITE OF THE SUN-AND-SAND HOTEL IN MUMBAI

Kajol

Photograph by SHIVANGI KULKARNI

I believe films reflect the era we live in. Back then, women were not as fiery as today

The strong sun warms up the sea on a typical November afternoon in Mumbai. The sprawling suite of a Juhu hotel is being prepared to shoot a conversation between two leading ladies in cinema. Bollywood has many stars but few endure, which is why the mother-daughter duo of Tanuja, 69, and Kajol, 38, are an exciting pair. Kajol breezes into the suite, two-yearold son in tow. She slips into a Shantanu-Nikhil bustier pant suit that is embellished with dull gold. Tanuja resists being "made up" and looks every inch a lady, in a simple black chiffon sari. The two women share visible chemistry, often finishing each other's sentences. While Tanuja gave us memorable cinema in the early 1970s, her daughter ruled the box of-

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS TANUJA AND KAJOL

fice in the 1990s and is considered one of the finest actors of her time. Sparks fly as the two ladies discuss their love of Bollywood, motherhood and life with SENIOR EDITOR PRACHI BHUCHAR and PRINCIPAL CORRESPONDENT PRACHI REGE. India Today (IT) What are the major differences in the industry between then and now? Tanuja Today the industry has an extremely commercial environment. While that's good, I'm not okay with the commercialisation of creativity. Kajol I agree. We work in a more competitive and money-minded environment. But I believe this transition is not intentional. Today we have over 400 people working on a film set at any given time, and the demands of

the industry are different. Tanuja In our time every person on the sets mattered. We were a close-knit family. That is missing today. The basic humaneness that defined filmmaking in my time is missing. Kajol I remember when I used to accompany my mother to the sets. Everyone referred to me as "Tanuja ki beti hai, yeh toh hamari hai". Nobody has time to remember names now. It is a reflection of the age we live in. IT How has the casting and characterisation changed? Are we misrepresenting women in our films? Tanuja There were no firebrand characters in my era. Leading ladies played gentler characters, and there were very few strong women charac-

"Today, an actor's real identity supersedes that of the character he plays. I like Johnny Depp, who changes his look like a chameleon in every film.This way more than the actor, the character appears alive." Tanuja
Kajol You had Sharmila Tagore in a bikini back then,so obviously they were more advanced than today.I think it looked more tasteful and much sexier then than today. Tanuja What I don't like today is that we don't reflect Indian culture and tradition when it comes to sex or sensual characterisations. We are sensual, but not that sexual as a society. This needs to reflect in our films too. Sensuality has disappeared from cinema. Sexuality is thrown in-your-face; the Indian woman is all about being in-your-face. Kajol That's what the sari is about. Everything is covered,yet a peep of an ankle can be a turn-on for men. Tanuja Absolutely! The Bengali sari, in which we didn't wear a blouse, the mystery of what lies underneath helped depict sensuality on screen, without resorting to brazen sexuality.
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

TANUJA IN A STILL FROM JEWEL THIEF, 1967

106

ON SEX AND SENSUALITY

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS TANUJA AND KAJOL

"The focus is on what actors wear to events they attend, be it the award functions, weddings or premieres. Shutterbugs snap us all the time. Looking beautiful all the time is vital for any actor today." Kajol
ters in films. It was more about satisavitris--morally-obligated characters who were submissive in nature. Kajol I believe films reflect the era we live in. Back then, women were not as fiery as today. I mean, today we have NGOs that fight for the girl child and women's rights. Society has evolved, and so have movie characters. Tanuja This comes with its own share of problems. Today, when one watches a film, one cannot differentiate between the heroine and the vamp. All characters look the same. Back then, you could tell that Helen and Bindu were the cabaret stars, while Tanuja and Asha Parekh were leading ladies. Kajol Today, a film works on a formula and the styling and look of the character is based on that. Because of this actors have lost their identity. We were naturally Everyone is keen to and elegantly glam up for the role, because that's where the glamourous; we appreciation is.
(FROM LEFT) KAJOL WITH FATHER, THE LATE SHOMU MUKHERJEE, MOTHER TANUJA AND SISTER TANISHA

INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIEVE

Tanuja It needs to be didn't need the memore humane dia to make us a diva. in its functionIT Do you think the need ing rather than to be glamorous has put being just belligerpressure on actors today? Tanuja ently competitive. Tanuja I guess so. In our time, Making films is a creative we didn't care about the media. They didn't intrude, leaving us free to business, not just a competitive one. make our own choices. Today they intrude more into an actor's personal life. IT Being a mother and actor then and Kajol A responsible journalist must re- now, dividing time between home and work. How easy was it then and now? spect a person's privacy. Tanuja I don't think there is any differIT Have we improved our entertain- ence. You need support to be a working mother. Thanks to my mother ment content? Tanuja I would rather not see films (actor Shobhana Samarth) and grandtoday since they don't make sense to mother, I would find quality time for me. Today's music too is less of melody my children. Kajol We have working parents and more of Metallica. Kajol Generation gap! (Laughs) But I rather than just a working father. I agree. Back then, lyrics were amazing. tell my daughter Nyssa you should Today, songs come with an expiry date. respect my work and I will respect yours when you grow up. IT A few things Bollywood today can IT How does being married to famous men from the same industry feel? learn from the 1960s and 1970s?

Kajol My dad (Shomu Mukherjee) was the best support system my mother could have. When they decided to separate, they sat down with us and explained how their decision to live apart would not affect us as a family. Tanuja When Kajol was happy to see my school in Panchgani and chose to go there, and then Tanisha followed, Shomu and I took an off every Friday to visit them. Kajol We make sure at least one of us is in town all the time. Ajay (Devgn, husband) never brings his work home, and encourages me to do the same. IT Has the working style of directors changed? Tanuja The director's word was the be-all and end-all for even top stars. Kajol Today we have a lot more conversation and dialogue on the sets. We as actors are certainly more involved in the creative process.
Video available on iPad

108

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

