THE ARTS

KOCHI-MUZIRIS BIENNALE

The world's newest biennale in Kochi offers a grand setting to showcase contemporary artworks

K.P. REJI WITH AN UNTITLED PAINTING

Rising Star
By M.G. Radhakrishnan

Emerging Artist

SHREYAS KARLE , 31
USP Interrogates the society and times through visual sarcasm

e has sold a painting for Rs 5.1 crore and shaken up the domestic art scene with his steel tiffin boxes and copper thalis, but the Kochi-Muziris Biennale (KMB) has managed to give him the jitters. Subodh Gupta, 50, appears tense as he arrives at the 150-year-old Aspinwall House, the large sea-facing heritage property set to host KMB from December 12. A Kerala-style rice boat that would form the core of his work has not arrived. "What's this, yaar?" he impatiently asks Riyas Komu, a fellow artist and curator for the three-month event. The country's first biennale is tipped to be its largest exhibition of contemporary art by domestic as well as international artists. "It is large and non-mechanical.

H

The boat moves slowly. Don't worry, it will reach in time," Komu assures him. Gupta, born in Bihar and based in Gurgaon, was called `India's Damien Hirst' by The Guardian newspaper. "This is my third trip to Kochi in the past few months and all were to prepare for the Biennale," he says as he savours fried Kerala karimeen (pearl fish) and rice at the YMCA's Spartan restaurant in Fort Kochi. "It is such a pleasant and simple meal, so typical of Kerala." Asked whether the boat would give his new work a Kerala-specific dimension, Gupta shakes his head. "Not at all. It is about life anywhere, everywhere. Seeing me, another artist said, so we are all in the same boat. It's just that. It's about all of us in the same boat of life together." Gupta's boat may have taken time coming but that's not the case

with the nearly 170 granite grinding stones brought by Sheela Gowda, 54, from Karnataka. The Bangalore-based artist is also known for creative ways of using ordinary things like human hair, oil drums, incense or even cow dung to offer artistic insights into life, politics and gender. "My work, titled Stopover, features kitchen grinding stones," says Gowda, who trained at London's Royal College of Arts in the 1980s. Christoph Storz, her artist partner from Switzerland, says, "Grinding stones were once thought to be immovable parts of homes and lives. Women used to spend a lot of time grinding various things in these. But new apartment complexes have led to the demolition of old houses and grinding stones lie abandoned on roadsides. No one wants them and nobody knows how to get rid of them." Around 90 contemporary artists

ARTOFTHE MATTER
Kochi is all set to play host to three months of non-stop creative expression
 Listed among the 13 "must see"

K.P.REJI, 40
USP Explores history through local myths and everyday events
160-year-old Durbar Hall of the Maharaja of Kochi renovated with Erco LED museum lighting and other fixtures by Vikas Dilawari, the centuries-old hub of Kerala's spice trade Mattancherry Bazaar, a spice warehouse Pepper House, and a Dutch bungalow David Hall. "KMB seeks to celebrate contemporary world art by invoking the historic cosmopolitan legacy of the modern seaport of Kochi and its predecessor, the ancient Muziris," says Bose Krishnamachari, a prominent artist who heads the KMB Foundation. The foundation organises the event with support from the government, various embassies, galleries

cultural events of 2013 by Forbes magazine.  Starts on 12.12.12 and ends on 12.03.13.  Showcases works in painting, sculpture, installation, video art, performing arts.  Seminars, symposiums and workshops.  Estimated budget: Rs 30 crore.
from India and abroad, working on various media such as painting, sculpture, installation, film, digital art and performing arts, will participate in the KMB to be held at six exotic sites. The venues of the world's newest biennale include Aspinwall House, the

54

PHOTOGRAPHS BY M R NANDAKUMAR

BRUSH STROKES BY THE BACKWATER

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

55

THE ARTS

KOCHI-MUZIRIS BIENNALE
Mumbai-based artist Shreyas Karle, 31, says he is enamoured with the presence of water all over Kochi. His work, titled Fountain, is actually a failed fountain. Instead of water gushing through the fountain's mouth, it leaks from a tube beneath. "My theme is the futile human attempt to tame and conquer nature. Fountain shows how we try to make water behave but in vain," he says. His work will have multimedia elements too. Baroda-based painter K.P. Reji, 40, is giving the final touches to a 15 by 10 oil canvas featuring the land, people and myths of his native Alappuzha, with an approaching cargo ship in the backdrop. Delhi-based Aman Kanwar, 48, who works on films and installations that pose questions related to power, exploitation and sexuality, will present his work titled Sovereign Forests. "Farmers' land is taken over for development and compensation is claimed to be paid. But how can they value a paddy field nurtured by generations of farmers with knowledge acquired through centuries?" he asks. The winner of the 1st Edward Munch Award for Contemporary Art, Norway, says his work displays more than 250 types of rice cultivated in a single field through the diverse and complex knowledge accumulated by generations of farmers. Sudarshan Shetty, Atul Dodiya, Anita Dube, L.N. Thallur and Vivan Sundaram are among the other prominent Indian artists expected to attend the exhibition. The international artists in attendance find the history of the maritime town of Kochi fascinating. Many have incorporated in their works elements of the town's heritage. Amanulla Mojadidi, 41, a US-born artist from Afghanistan, is depicting an archaeological site he imagines as the house where one of his predecessors lived during the migration from Kabul to Sirhind and back in the 17th century. "My predecessors were Naqshbandi Sufis and their migration from Kabul to India and back is a fact. I added the Kochi connection to give it a universal dimension. Their migration

and corporate houses. Krishnamachari underplays a controversy raised by a group of artists in Kerala over KMB's "wasteful conduct", which led to an investigation by the vigilance department. "It prompted some sponsors to back out. But we were able to manage from other sources," he says. The Indian art market's annual turnover reportedly crossed Rs 2,000 crore in 2011, as against just Rs 25 crore in 2003, reflecting the commercial success of artistic creations.

Culture Crusader
contains elements of resistance and revolt against unilateral interpretations of identity, history and religion," he says. The Portuguese artist known as Rigo 23 is interested in the tales of `Kappiri' workers (Black African slaves), who had come to Kochi with Portuguese sailors and colonisers in

AMAN KANWAR, 48
USP Documentary maker, moved to mixed media installations and raises questions on human rights, modernity and power.

BOLD STROKES AT THE BIENNALE
It doesn't get bigger than the Kochi event in the world of contemporary art

90 artists from India and
abroad are participating.

expected to attend.

6 venues are hosting the event. 500,000 visitors 3 months will be the
brought by artists. exhibition's duration.

60 artworks have been
granite grinding stones have been brought by artist Sheela Gowda.

Multimedia Maven

SHEELAGOWDA, 54
USP Uses common objects such as human hair, incense and oil drums to explore issues of deprivation, dislocation and gender.

170

134 biennales are held
globally, according to the Biennale Foundation.

the 16th century. "I am absolutely thrilled by stories about how the Kappiris later became feared and venerated icons for the local people in Kerala. There are still temples in their honour. I am planning something on the Kappiris," he says. Zhang Enli from China has started working on watercolour murals inspired by the Hindi films he watched in Shanghai in the 1980s. "The songs and dances were unforgettable," he says, through an interpreter. Josef Semah from Baghdad will present a wood and copper installation on the `72 privileges' granted to Jews and Christians by the King of Kochi in the eighth century. Raja Ravi Varma, the 19th century painter from Kerala, had to cross its shores to showcase his art, win the first prize at a Vienna exhibition in 1873 and emerge as the father of Indian modern art. More than a century after Varma's death, the world's contemporary art has come to his land in all its splendour. 

56

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

