Feature

OT
ut various task of fulfilling

Jf

ajf?

ompiementing me armed torces spirit 01 selfless service to me nation, stands tall one institution which has been silently performing its role in I making the country self-reliant in the field of defence technologies by design and development of strategic, complex and sensitive weapon systems for the use of Indian Army, Navy and Air Force. It is none other than Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), the R&D wing of the Ministry of Defence, formed with the mandate to empower India with latest defence technologies leading to production of world class weapon systems and equipment in various areas of military technology. DRDO's area of activity includes aeronautics, armaments, combat vehicles, electronics, instrumentation engineering systems, missiles, materials, naval systems, advanced computing, simulation and life sciences. It is no doubt a comprehensive range, but behind it lies a long and arduous journey, marked by extensive experimentations, trials, and success in the end. So, when did the glorious DRDO saga begin? Birth Pangs Surrounded with security threats since Independence and suffering from a complete lack of R&D infrastructure and wherewithal, Indian defence services had to chart a tough terrain in striving for self-sufficiency virtually from the scratch as the western countries possessing advanced defence technologies tried to block India's rise as a self-reliant, strong nation through embargoes and denial regimes. A cornered India had to rely heavily on imports in the area of defence, but the foreign powers were only willing to part with weapons that had turned obsolete for them, that too with practically no 'transfer of technology.' It is here that DRDO rose to the challenge as it was formed in 1958 with the amalgamation of the then already functioning Technical Development Establishment (TDEs) of the Indian Army and the Directorate of Technical Development & Production (DTDP) with the Defence Science Organisation (DSO). The DRDO focussed on mastering critical technologies that other countries would not share with us. It was then a small organisation with 10 establishments or laboratories. While helping our armed forces to face the export control regimes of advanced countries, DRDO has progressively enhanced their combat effectiveness through development of state-of-tlie- art indigenous defence systems. A separate department of Defence Research and Development was formed in 1980 which now administers DRDO and its 52 laboratories and establishments. Over the years, DRDO has grown multifold in terms of the variety of subject disciplines, number of laboratories, achievements and stature. It has several accomplished as well as on-going projects for the development of missiles, armaments,

AnimPACTFeature
light combat aircraft, radars, electronic warfare systems etc. Armed with over 7000 scientists and about 20,000 other scientific, technical and supporting personnel, DRDO today is deeply engaged in developing defence technologies covering various disciplines, The current Director General of DRDO is reputed missile scientist, Dr Vijay Kumar Saraswat who is also Scientific Advisor to the Minister of Defence and Secretary, Department of Defence, R&D. The other illustrious predecessors of Dr Saraswat include the renowned names like Dr D S Kothari, the first DG and Bharat Ratna Dr A P J Abdul Kalam. Achievements Galore The DRDO's mission is to design, develop and lead to production state-ofthe-art sensors, weapon systems, platforms and allied equipment for the defence services; provide technological solutions to the Services to optimise combat effectiveness, promote well-being of the troops, develop infrastructure, committed quality manpower and build a strong indigenous technology base. The production value of systems based on technologies developed by DRDO for which orders have been placed by the armed forces during the past one decade is well over Rs 1,48,000 crore. DRDO has made the country proud through achievement of technological self-reliance in a number of critical areas including ammunition, armoured systems, surface to surface missiles, sonar systems, electronic warfare systems, NBC defence and advanced computing. The list of DRDO's achievements is too long to enumerate here. Can we have a quick look at the significant milestones in DRDO's momentous journey? Well, DRDO's recent achievements include the successful flight testing of various missile systems under the Integrated Guided Missile Development programme (IGMDP). It successfully test-fired 5000 km-range Agni 5 missile, joining an elite missile club comprising the US, Russia, France and China, possessing the capacity of building Inter Continental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs). A giant leap in India's capabilities, both in strategic deterrence as well as technological prowess and rightly called "a game changer" by Dr Vijay Kumar Saraswat, the maiden flight of Agni 5 taking place just three years after the project's sanction, carried behind it around three decades of dedication, innovation and hard work by the DRDO team. Apart from Agni series of missiles, DRDO has developed and flight-tested a family of missiles ranging from short range ballistic missile Prithvi II and its ship launched version Dhanush, the medium range air defence system with multi-target, multi directional capability Akash, the 150 km range precision strike surface to surface tactical missile Prahar, supersonic cruise missile BrahMos, the top attack anti-tank missile Nag, and its helicopter mounted version, Helina. Prithvi, Akash, BrahMos and Agni 1-3 are already inducted. Agni4, Agni 5, LRSAM, MRSAM are in advanced stage of development and will soon add to the strength of our armed forces. In the field of armaments and combat vehicles, DRDO has achieved considerable success with the development of the MBT Arjun and multibarrel rocket launching system Pinaka. Two regiments of MBT Arjun Mk-l have already been inducted in the Army. Certain major and minor modifications as suggested by users have been incorporated in Arjun Mk-ll and given to users for trials. In the field of aeronautics, DRDO's notable indigenously developed products include Tejas, the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA); Rustom-1, the medium-altitude unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), a forerunner to Medium Altitude Long Range (MALE) UAV Rustom-2; Nishant, another medium sized aerostat based platform developed for surveillance applications; 'NETRA', another UAV, 'Sudarshan, a laser seeker kit for 1,000 pound bombs and Kaveri Gas Turbine Engine, an indigenously developed engine for the Light Combat Aircraft. (LCA). Not only that, DRDO has developed expertise in the field of testing and certification for various components sub-systems and systems as well as complete airborne platforms. It has also indigenously produced Airborne Early Warning and Control System which includes active electronically scanned active phased array radar. The DRDO's radar warning receivers have been selected to upgrade most of Indian Air Force aircraft like MiG 21, MiG 29, SU 30MKI, MiG 27 and Jaguars. DRDO has successfully designed and developed technologies for Infantry Combat Vehicle (ICV) applications like virtual prototype through modelling

vftftf

AnimPACTFeature
and simulation, Advanced Running Gear System, Auxiliary Power Unit, Water Jet propulsion and shock Resistance seats. Among naval systems, Varunastra, a state-of-the-art ship launched heavy weight Anti Submarine Electric Torpedo, equipped with the latest advances in control, homing and recovery aspects and advanced indigenously developed propulsion technology is all set for User Evaluation Trials. A friend of Soldiers and Society While striving to meet the cutting edge weapons technology requirements ranging from aeronautics and naval systems to sophisticated missile defence systems and cyber security, DRDO provides ample spinoff benefits for society at large. The perennial problem of disposal of human waste in extreme cold climate has been successfully resolved by the DRDO through development of Bio-digesters, the modified version of which has been installed by Indian Railways in rail coaches. The Life Sciences laboratories of DRDO have developed technology to maximise the operational efficiency of our soldiers and provide them with adequate support and protection. Some of the achievements in this regard include three mobile laboratories for nuclear, biological and chemical defence; an upgraded first-aid kit for protection against chemical and biological agents as well as the nuclear radiation; technology for kits for detection of swine flu; a Submarine Escape Set (SES) for escape from an abandoned submarine.; a Computerized Pilot Selection System (CPSS) ; Yoga Training Modules for toning up cardio-respiratory, respiratory, endocrine and nervous systems to maintain optimum physical fitness and mental health of troops deployed at high altitude extreme climates. DRDO has developed a life saving one man HAPO chamber which is a portable first aid device for emergency treatment for varying degrees of acute mountain sickness. An Integrated Life Support System (1LSS) based on OnBoard Oxygen Generating Systems have been developed for LCA for long endurance flights. Many systems developed by DRDO for the armed forces can also be used for civilian applications. These include composite materials; steels-, computing systems-, water poison detection kit; mosquitoes repellent; parachutes; stent; ready to eat food items-, riot control vehicles; bullet proof vehicles; night vision devices; laser dazzler, survival kits; integrated shelters; fire retardant materials/equipment; emergency escape chute; walking robot; snow gallery-, lubricants; paints-, fuel cells; etc. Challenges and Opportunities Thus, we have seen that DRDO has to its credit numerous successes in developing major weapon systems and critical defence technologies since its inception. Thanks to DRDO, today India is both an indigenous hub for R&D investments and also boasts of the capability to absorb fair quantities of new generation weapon systems, leading to the all-round modernisation of its defence forces. The role of DRDO assumes critical importance in today's geo-political context, a fact highlighted recently by none other than Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, in the context of "a net deterioration in international strategic and security environment, political uncertainties in our neighbourhood, turmoil in West Asia, ever-growing terrorism and cyber threats." ndia is subjected to undeclared cyber-attacks due to its electronic infrastructure being largely imported and thus vulnerable to bugs and malware. Identifying cyber security as a thrust area, DRDO has placed on its agenda, development of indigenous sewers, routers and operating systems. All these challenges call upon India to build a robust domestic defence industrial base in both the public and private sectors, to compete with global players in developing state-of-the-art technologies. Is the DRDO prepared? DRDO is alive to new challenges as it has intensified its efforts to provide the defence services decisive edge by equipping them with internationally competitive systems and solutions. This custodian of defence R&D is determined to make the nation fully empowered in the arena of national security.

