LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S
YOGEN SHAH

LESSON OFTHE WEEK
The Central Board of Secondary Education has added a chapter on the life of Rajinikanth in the Learning to Communicate book for Class VI students. It is titled `From Bus Conductor to Film Star' .

Activist, Actor
Her brief arrest in October for protesting against coal mining in forests reinforced her credibility. Amala Akkineni, 44, is aknownenvironment activist who gave up acting when she married TamilstarNagarjuna in 1992. Telugu film Life Is Beautiful brought her back earlier this year and now she will be seen in a cameo in Hindi film Listen Amaya alongside Deepti Naval.
YOGEN SHAH

DANCERS OFTHE WEEK
Tennis player Sania Mirza and her husband, Pakistani cricketer Shoaib Malik will show off their dance moves in reality show Nach Baliye 5.They will be a guest couple on the show amid 11 other pairs.

` 1,40,71,000
The amount paid by the Chhattisgarh government to Kareena Kapoor for an eightminute performance last month as part of the state's week-long anniversary celebration, Rajyotasava 2012.

Wild Romp
The mild Luke Kenny, with his music and Rock On!!, is the last person we'd imagine having an explicit romp in bed on celluloid. But he is. In a film about zombies, Origin of the Zombie, with Kirti Kulhari who shared a lip lock with Kalki Koechlin in Shaitan. Go figure.

LUCKY BREAK

Srinagar girl Sandeepa Dhar didn't manage to leave a dent with her debut film Isi Life Mein. But the model finds herself in the big league, albeit with a small role,in Dabangg 2.There is also Golu Gappu with Vir Das and Kunal Roy Kapoor, Black Sheep with Zayed Khan and a three-film deal with Viacom 18. Now that's a windfall.

Mystery Girl
Aditya Chopra has a new secret. Vaani Kapoor, a model who has floored him enough to bag not only a role in Maneesh Sharma's untitled film for Yash Raj Films, but a threefilm deal as well. Previously a model with Elite, she will be paired opposite television actor Sushant Singh Rajput and Parineeti Chopra. But with the makers keeping her a closely guarded secret, we'll have to wait to know more. Hope she is worth it.




Compiled by Nishat Bari

64 Volume XXXVII Number 53; For the week Dec 25-31, 2012, released from Friday onwards

