NET FLUX
net fail

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video
This week's most-watched video was a rap video pitting biblical character Prophet Moses against children's favourite,Santa Claus.Moses is played by rapper Snoop Dogg.Other popular videos include a combination of the 50 most popular English songs of 2012 and Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard's fake speech about the world coming to an end.
Mashup of over 50 pop songs of 2012 8.7 million
EKTA KAPOOR

QUEEN OF BAD BEHAVIOUR
Ekta Kapoor allegedly swore at a 68-year-old man in a Mumbai bank and called him an "old fool". After his daughter tweeted about her behaviour, she trended on the microblogging site where jokes and insults poured in. Here are some of the tweets seen on the Web: @ lindsaypereira So what if Ekta Kapoor abused an old man? She's been abusing our collective intelligence for decades now. @Kutti_Please Ekta Kapoor should be Slapped Thrice. Just the way she likes it. In Slow Motion. @shadymumbai Btw Ekta Kapoor was in the bank to safely keep Tushaar Kapoor's talent in the Safe Deposit Box.

appwatch

Learn Music the Virtual Way
Meet your virtual music guru.The app, Musiguru, developed by Bangalore-based Aravind Krishnaswamy, allows musicians to teach students in India and abroad. Musicians can record lessons, watch their pupils perform and send feedback. So far, the app features tabla artiste Muthu Kumar, Hindustani vocalist Priya Kalyanpur and Carnatic vocalist Padma Krishnaswamy.

Moses vs Santa Claus 13.5 million

Australian PM Julia Gillard's address on the end of the world 2.8 million
* Views from when videos were uploaded

net point
Now,you can find your way around Delhi's Chandni Chowk market through its website which was recently launched by Kapil Sibal,Union minister for communications & IT.Created by Google India, chandnichowkonline.in is a directory of the 17th century market and is divided into categories like clothing,food and hardware. Each shop also has its own website.

graphified

web wow
Google

Facebook Fanatics
Facebook
52.1 million 59.7 million

Tracking Middle Earth
Conducting the census of a country is hard enough, but of a fictional fantasy location? Tougher. Emil Johansson, a Swedish man, completed this difficult task when he carried out a census of Middle Earth, the location of author JRR Tolkien's novels, The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings and The Silmarillion. He came up with some interesting findings--for instance, women comprised less than 20 per cent of Middle Earth's population.
EMILJOHANSSON

Yahoo!
40.3 million

Microsoft
29.3 million

Wikimedia
21.9 million

app alert

BitTorrent
20.2 million

Ask
16.4 million

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for photographers, videographers and Facebook addicts. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. Wink lets you instantly share group photos with friends with a single tap. Strum transforms simple videos into colourful vignettes, greeting cards or music videos that can be shared on social networks. Gabi curates your friends's Facebook content and ranks posts by your personal preferences or what gets most likes and comments.

There are no surprises when it comes to the most-frequented sites by Indians in 2012. According to a report from ComScore, which helps companies manage digital data, our nation Googled and Facebooked into a frenzy.The report also showed that between 2011 and 2012, there has been a 43 per cent increase in visits to retail sites-- three in five Internet users in India visit sites like Snapdeal and Flipkart.

A Mother's Trauma
"I Am Adam Lanza's Mother"is a blog post that exploded online. Written in the aftermath of the kindergarten school shooting in LIZA LONG Connecticut,the writer of the blog,Liza Long,spoke about her own son's struggle with mental illness and the need to address the issue of mental ailments.She elaborated on how her 13-year-old son would have psychotic outbreaks and would threaten to kill himself.The post has already collected 15,000 comments.

60

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

blogroll

