LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

SEXIS DESTINY
The novel is a paean to the pain of womanhood in a macho materialistic world
By Geeta Doctor

S
THE SELECTOR OF SOULS
byShauna Singh Baldwin Simon & Schuster Price: RS 499 Pages: 548 BETWEEN THE COVERS Baldwin echoes the oft-repeated saying "the political is the personal" bysetting the background of her search byfollowing the lives of two very different individuals belonging to different strata of society.

omewhere in the ancient ravines and mountains of the Indo-Gangetic plain, the Mother Goddesses must be cheering. At last one of their own kind has arrived with the energy borrowed from the cold Canadian citadels of scholarship and post-feminist dogma to sing of the body. That Shauna Singh Baldwin equates the subcontinental travails with the female body was clear in her first much-acclaimed novel, What the Body Remembers. She recreated the legacy of the troubled past, aptly signalled by the word "Partition", and attended by the rape and dishonour of whole communities and with images of fertility and barrenness. Once again, she has delved deep into the body politic to deliver a quaintly old-fashioned paean to the pain of womanhood. She situates her feminine perspective on India's macho, materialistic society with its polo playing men, who power their orange-coloured Mercedes Benzes with testosterone; their lumpen equivalents, loutish drivers lumbering long-distance trucks while picking up the random Aids virus en route. Their common desire is to be the fathers of sons while battering their women in the need to remain relevant. She echoes the oft-repeated saying "Sex is destiny". Or the even more contentious--the political is the personal --by setting the background of her search by following the lives of two very different individuals

belonging to different strata of society. One is a privileged member of the upwardly mobile class of entrepreneurs that has made its fortunes in Manmohan Singh's reformed India. Anu, a battered wife, has a daughter whom she has had to send away to Canada, Baldwin's adopted country, since Vikas, her husband, is a villain who has no use for girl children. When Baldwin gives her a bumpy ride, making her first a Catholic nun wannabe and then a nurse with a symbolic syringe (phallic symbol?) loaded for revenge, it would appear as a lecture on the plight of minorities in India, the murder of the Sikhs after the Indira Gandhi assassination, the demolition of the Babri Masjid, and the rise of Hindutva. The full force of the patriarchy is reinvented to form a suitable enough background for a new battleground of the sexes. Far more compelling is her portrait of Damini, a wise old woman of the hills who morphs from faithful servant into a veritable shamanic figure by the end of the saga. In what is a gripping prologue that reveals Baldwin's powers at their best, we see Damini as a grief-stricken grandmother administering a wad of tobacco into the hungry mouth of her daughter's unwanted child. The killing of the newborn girl, her tiny lips open to receive her first nourishment that will be her last, recalls the stories of the women of Uslampatti in the Theni district SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com of Tamil Nadu, who feed the milky poison of the Datura plant to the unwanted baby girl, or bury them alive in pigsties, or stuff unhusked rice grains into their mouths till they choke. As Baldwin notes in an afterword, 42.4 million baby girl have died from 2001 to 2008 as a result of pre-natal selection. Baldwin's intentions are commendable, but by adopting a racy manner, she ends up sounding like a busker strumming the sidewalks of the global market for instant gratification. 

64

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

