NA TION

RAPE

BEWARE

BARBARIANS ON THE PROWL
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

As a young woman fights for survival, a shamed nation looks for answers. Can the brutality of rape go unpunished?
Varanasi, Kanpur and Mumbai demanding death penalty for rapists. Even hard-nosed police officers and cynical doctors at the hospital, who have seen the worst of humanity, are shaken at the barbaric nature of the assault on the girl. What is worse is that when she and her friend were battling for their life, many people passed them by, but nobody stopped. A PCR vehicle finally picked them up close to midnight following a call from a passerby and took them to the hospital. Initially, they were taken to the AIIMS trauma centre but after nitpicking about the exact spot from where they were found, it was decided that the particular area was under the jurisdiction of Safdarjung Hospital. It's a ramshackle government institution bursting at its seams. Patients, some with not even a blanket on them, writhe on the floor as the queue for beds lengthens. The stench of urine and the smell of disease fill the corridors as washrooms overflow. Oblivious to the chaos around her, the diminutive girl is putting up a strong

AYOUNG GIRL PROTESTS OUTSIDE CHIEF MINISTER SHEILA DIKSHIT'S HOME IN DELHI

ears stream down her face unbidden as she lies in a morphine-induced slumber in the ICU of Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi. Doctors did not think the 23year-old paramedical student would survive for more than a few hours when she was brought into the hospital on December 16. She had been brutally raped for over 40 minutes by six men in a bus as it was driven on the busy Outer Ring Road of the Capital. She and her friend, a software engineer, were stripped and abandoned on the busy National Highway 8. They lay there for more than an hour, screaming to catch the attention of anyone who would stop to help. "She had deep bite marks all over her body. Her face was badly bruised. Most damaging were the injuries inflicted on her private parts. The rapists had brutalised her with an iron rod and a beer bottle, causing severe damage to her. The mutilation was deep, injuring her intestines and

T

abdomen," says a doctor treating her. Shaken by her injuries, he says that he has never seen such savagery in his 25-year career as a doctor. He is not alone. The nation has risen in anger and in horror at yet another outrage. A woman is raped every 22 minutes in India but for once, Parliament was not adjourned on December 18 as enraged lawmakers asked for death penalty for the six rapists. Ordinary citizens took to the streets of Delhi, demanding answers from the Government. Students staged protest outside the homes of Union Home Minister Sushilkumar Shinde and Delhi Chief Minister Sheila Dikshit, where police used water jets to disperse the protesters. BJP leaders protested outside Parliament and at Jantar Mantar. A candlelight vigil was held at India Gate as over 500 people gathered, praying for the victim and demanding justice. Online petitions seeking justice for the girl found their way on social media. Soon the spontaneous movement spread all over the country as protests were held in

RAMESH SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

RAPIST NATION
October 2003
SWISS DIPLOMAT RAPED IN DELHI

Rape has rarely been punished swiftly and in adequate measure

May 8, 2005
DU STUDENT RAPED IN DHAULA KUAN
Status One of the accused,Ajit Singh Katiyar, was arrested on May 13, 2005; three are absconding. Katiyar was handed a life sentence on December 9, 2009, by a city court.

January 5, 2009
MBA STUDENT RAPED NEAR NOIDA MALL
Status All the accused were arrested on January 6, 2009, but released on bail. In February 2012, Gautam Budh Nagar district court transferred the case to Delhi on the request of the victim's friend.

November 26, 2010
BPO EMPLOYEE GANG RAPED IN DHAULA KUAN, DELHI
Status Two of the accused were arrested on December 2, 2010. They are still in jail.The other two accused are absconding.

February 1, 2011
SALESGIRL PUSHED OUT OF TRAIN IN KOCHI, RAPED
Status In November 11, 2011, a fast-track court held the accused, Govindachamy, guilty and handed him death sentence. He is now in jail.

November 5, 2012 September 17, 2012
WOMAN GANG RAPED AND FILMED IN DELHI
Status Victim's live-in partner, who was one of the rapists, was arrested on September 25. Others still on the run.

SPANISH WOMAN RAPED IN MUMBAI
Status On November 8, the victim identified the accused, a 30-year-old man called Mohammed Ismail Ansari. He was in judicial custody for two days and later sent to a high-security jail in south Mumbai. He is still in jail.

Status In December 2008, the Crime Branch of Delhi Police filed a closure report with a city court.The police claimed that they could not trace a single suspect.

AJIT SINGH KATIYAR

30

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

NEW

NA TION

RAPE

MEN THINK THEYCAN GETAWAY
T
they end up happily married! he rape of a 23-year-old in Delhi is an inGUEST COLUMN Writers, directors, producers, actors and dication that we are socially regressing actresses must give this serious thought. into an age where it is each man for himWomen have the right to decide who they self. Where people feel free to help themselves want to sleep with, when to sleep with them, to anything that takes their fancy. It could be a and indeed to enjoy it. Why should they be car, money or in this case, a woman. If they told not to carry mobile phones, or not to cannot get it legitimately, they feel perfectly enwear jeans or not to mingle with boys? I'd like titled to snatch it. We live in a society where to ask those who say women should not go there is no fear of repercussion. And it seems to be symptomatic of how our nation functions Farhan Akhtar out after dark as the streets are not safe, how about we keep the men home? Won't at all levels today. A section of the political and corporate elite believe they are free to loot us, to scam that be safer for women? I can only look back through history at the control us out of thousands of crores. And if you happen to be from a social strata that cannot afford such lofty men have sought to wield over women and in particuambitions, you can rob a car, burgle a house or molest lar, their bodies. My theory is that it has something to do a woman. Usually by the time the law catches up with with her power to create life and the fear and inadequacies that power makes men feel. The woman has you, it is too little, too late. There is a disconnect between the political establish- successfully proved that she can be the man's boss in ofment and those whom it intends to govern. There is a fice, can run companies, run governments and more. Men are threatened by her. demand for justice and the torTheir last recourse is to target toise-like response of a deaf sysher physically and feel they still tem has only exacerbated the have control over her. growing anguish. What is even There is a way to combat it. more tragic is that the majority Our ministers, the police deis silenced by the minority. I've partment and our judiciary heard arguments that this is a have to come together to resolve section that lacks education and this problem. We have to create opportunities and the widening a powerful citizens' lobby that economic divide has led to frusshould demand fast-track tration and these heinous courts and an amendment in crimes are a manifestation of the law. Since it isn't happening that. Maybe. Maybe not. But as a matter of course, it has that's another debate because to be enforced. ultimately, a crime is a crime. Be it the molesters in There is definitely someGuwahati, the murderer of thing wrong in a society where my friend and associate, Pallavi, men feel they can get away in Mumbai, rapists in Delhi or with sexually harassing or rapacid throwers across the couning a woman. As a filmmaker, I SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com try, no landmark example is must also look inward to see if the industry that I belong to could be partially respon- being set of these criminals. And when there is no fear of sible in propagating this kind of mindset. And I must swift justice, there is no deterrent. That is why you hear cries today of castration say, sadly so, the answer is yes. There are films in which romantic wooing has been replaced by a kind of harass- and death penalty. Society has reached boiling point. ment of the heroine. The heroes of these films could be Before people resort to anarchy, the establishment considered stalkers in some civil societies. Now imag- must act. Until then, this madness will not end. Until ine that this actor is a role model to millions... wouldn't then, India's women will continue to suffer. And for his fans think this behaviour is okay? Now imagine that that, we will all be guilty. Act now. this actress is a role model to millions... what message does it send to women across the country? There was a time when the villain stalked the heroine and got Farhan Akhtar is an actor, writer, director, producer and beaten up by the hero. Now the hero can harass her and proud father of two daughters

NUMBERS THAT NUMB
Poor conviction rate in rape cases remains a major worry

A woman is raped every


22 minutes in India.
2009
Conviction rate

Section 309 of Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), according to the Act 5 of the amendment in 2009, says that inquiry and trial under section 376 IPC (Rape) should be concluded within two months from the date of incident.


22.15%
2010
Conviction rate

In 2009, 23,996 rapists were chargesheeted, 5,314 convicted.

Rape forms almost 10 per cent of all crimes against women.Total number of crimes against women in 2011 was 228,650.

In 12,887 rape cases in 2011, the offender was known to the victim.
 Since 1971, the population of the country has gone up by 100 per cent. Instances of rape have gone up by 873.3 per cent.



22.34%
2011
Conviction rate

In 2010, 25,215 rapists were chargesheeted, 5,632 convicted.

In 2011, women aged between 18 and 30 formed a bulk of the victims (13,264). Shockingly, there were 4,646 victims between the ages of 14 and 18.


21.65%

In 2011, 26,436 rapists were chargesheeted, 5,724 were convicted.
* SOURCE: NATIONAL CRIME RECORDS BUREAU

fight to live in the cordoned-off ICU of the hospital. A nurse breaks down as she describes the girl's battle. Medical Superintendent of the hospital, B.D. Athani, struggles to keep his composure. He says that a team of doctors is closely monitoring her condition and all emergency procedures have been performed. Her damaged intestines were susceptible to gangrene and had to be removed in a surgery on December 19. She is in no condition for any further surgeries, and at least three more critical ones are required. Her blood pressure and heart rate are high, and her blood platelets are dropping dangerously. Having completed a physiotherapy course from Dehradun, the girl was looking to intern in a Delhi hospital. Her parents, not having much trust in the people of Delhi, had come to live with her. Now, her mother is constantly by her bedside. Fiercely protective, she did not allow even Congress President Sonia Gandhi to meet her daughter on December 18. Just a few hours before that, her daughter had shown her will to live. The doctor talks about the little note

that she wrote for her mother on December 18. Written in Hindi, it said: "Mein jeena chahati hun (I want to live)." Her condition has deteriorated since. She has contracted severe infection because of the injuries. The doctors are not sure if her will is stronger than the severity of the infection. "The girl does not know the reaction her plight has evoked in the country. I hope it brings about some change in the system and I hope she lives to see it," says the tearful nurse who is attending to her. The psychological scars will stay much longer, probably for a lifetime. Crime psychologist Dr Rajat Mitra, who works with rape victims and helps in their rehabilitation, rues the fact that there is no institutionalised support system for them. "This girl will need consistent long-term support to enable her to lead a normal life," he says. Public pressure may well spare the girl the ignominy of most rape victims, who have to relive the trauma even after the accused are caught. "First, the police do not have the sensitivity to handle such cases and then

32

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

NEW

NA TION

RAPE

THE GUILTY MUST PAY
Jurists and legal experts say that speedy trial and conviction in rape cases is a must

SOLI SORABJEE
Former Attorney General

INDIRAJAISING
Additional Solicitor General

KTS TULSI
Senior Advocate

SHANTI BHUSHAN
Former Law Minister

DR RAJAT MITRA
Crime Psychologist

MEENAKSHI LEKHI
Senior Advocate

Action should be swift in rape cases.There should be special fast-track courts and proper judges appointed.The message must go out that the perpetrator will not get away with it.

Quality of prosecution must be improved to increase the conviction rate in rape cases. Prosecutors must work in better coordination with the police, which too should be sensitised.

The entire criminal justice system must be shored up. Scientific investigations, quick trial and maximum sentence must be awarded to the guilty. Certain punishment is the best deterrent.

Better policing is the key. Long pending reports on police reforms like that of the Dharamveera Committee (1976) must be implemented with political consensus.

Rape victims must be given consistent support to help in their rehabilitation. The government must build a support system that will enable them to lead a normal life.

We need better implementation of the rape law, reminding the perpetrator of his crime's consequences. Responsibility of the state does not end with making the law, it only starts there.

the victims are subjected to insensitive questioning in the court," says lawyer and Additional Solicitor General Indira Jaising. Even the witnesses in rape cases are harassed. In a chillingly similar case in January 2009, a 24-year-old MBA student from Noida and her friend were accosted near the Great India Place mall by 11 men. They forced their way into the couple's car and drove it to a secluded place in Garhi Chaukhandi village where they took turns to rape her. The Noida victim's parents sent her to London. With the girl gone, her friend was the sole witness in the case. "He was harassed by the police. A resident of Delhi, he had to go to Gautam Budh Nagar district courts for all the hearings. The way our justice system is, sometimes the prosecutor would be missing, and at other times the accused would not be there. But the boy had to go there on every date," says a lawyer familiar with the case. The boy was threatened by the accused and their families, asking him to withdraw the charges. "He wrote three letters to the police about the threats. He finally approached the Supreme Court in February 2012 seeking the transfer of the case to Delhi. It was transferred. The case is

still going on. The girl returned in October and identified the accused in the case. It is still not clear when the judgment will come," the lawyer adds. Eminent jurist and former attorney general of India Soli Sorabjee says the entire system needs to change. The message should be clear: The guilty will be punished. Most importantly, the victim must be treated with sensitivity. "As soon as there is a rape case, whispers start about the girl's loose morals, her clothes and if she was coming from a bar. This must change. The women must not be made to feel ashamed," he asserts.

T

his case may just become the turning point and change the way people think. It was evident from the reaction of those who took to the streets of Delhi. "This is the kind of mentality that no decent human being should have. It is the same mentality that prevails in the khap panchayats in Haryana. We need to start educating youngsters on how to treat women," says Atif, a student from Kanpur on a visit to Delhi. In a spontaneous show of anger, a large number of students and professionals from all over Delhi joined the 200-odd

protesting women from the All India Democratic Women's Association outside the police headquarters. Rajya Sabha MP Jaya Bachchan, who broke down in Parliament, met Delhi Police chief Neeraj Kumar demanding stern action against the accused. Lawyers and jurists are somewhat wary about changing the existing rape law. They argue that there is death penalty for murder but that hasn't prevented the crime or even reduced its incidence. A sentence of 10 years in a case of gang rape, going up to a life sentence, is enough of a deterrent, provided justice is quick and punishment certain (see box). Will it change the life of a fragile girl, on the cusp of a new life in a big city, who lies in a hospital bed struggling for survival? Will the six men who took turns to reduce her to this state be made to pay for their heinous crime? It is a measure of how shallow our modernity is and how hollow our liberty is that neither question can be answered in the affirmative.
with Rahul Jayaram and Jayant Sriram

Read Meenakshi Lekhi on why the responsibility of the state does not end with making the law, at www.indiatoday.in/lekhi

34

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

NEW

