GLOSSARY

Salman Khan is about to release the sequel to Dabangg but there's only one person's reaction he is worried about, father Salim Khan."If he says relax ho jao, bhool jao, so jao, it means the film will work," says Bollywood's brightest star whose last four films have each grossed over Rs 100 crore. On the eve of what he says is Chulbul Pandey being more romantic and emotional in Dabangg 2, the 47-year-old star speaks to Editor KAVEREE BAMZAI.

Q& "Success can drive you crazy" A
Q. So who has seen the film so far? A. Well, I have seen it once when collecting the print. I am not one of those megalomaniacs and narcissists who watch their films in a preview theatre, applaud and go waah waah. My family and friends have seen it and they are seedhe bolne wale (straight talking). Normally when people watch a preview, they don't tell you what they really mean. Q. So what do they say? A. Oh, they'll say, "Well, I liked the film", with the emphasis on I. Or they'll say, "Where did you shoot the film, yaar? Was it in Kanpur or Wai?" Or, "Where did you picturise the song?" The real test is tomorrow when dad watches the film. Q. Does it matter to you if the film makes Rs 100 crore or Rs 200 crore? Does money matter anymore? A. Of course it matters. I am crazy about money. Main ek rupaiya bhi nahin chhodta hoon (I don't leave even one rupee). I am in love with money. I don't believe in keeping it in a safe. I believe in spending it. Q. On Being Human, among other things? A. Yes. But I am very careful about what it's spent on. We don't believe in miracles. We believe we should support causes where there is even an incremental improvement in the quality of life. For instance, families of police officers. (Recently, Salman gave cheques worth Rs 3 lakh to nine families of policemen who were killed between September 2010 and November 2012 in Delhi.) Kya leke jaoge? (What will you take with you when you die?) My point is, even if you've cheated on your wife, or you've done something wrong, whatever your reason, give a little, spread a little happiness.
YOGEN SHAH

"I LIKE TO KEEP TO MYSELF. AFTER ALL, I CAN'T DAMN MYSELF AND I CAN'T PRAISE MYSELF. ALTHOUGH I HAVE TO SAY I AM A GREAT GUY."

Q. How's your health? A. The acute facial pain has gone. (Last August, he had a complicated surgery in Los Angeles to ease trigeminal neuralgia, a nerve disorder which had been causing excruciating pain in his head and jaw.) The aneurysm remains. It's a blood clot in the brain that was 3.55 mm in size. It should not go up to 6.5 mm. Then I will be in trouble. I will be going to the US for a check-up. But it's too dangerous for surgery. I don't believe in throwing anything or anyone out. Hum to khud nikal jate hain logon ki zindagi se (I remove myself from people's lives). Q. Why do you think Dabangg worked with critics? A. Mitti se judi picture thi (The film was rooted to the earth). Critics thought it was an art film so they gave it four stars. Q. Nothing to do with a Kashyap (Abhinav) directing Dabangg? A. Yes (sarcastically), the whole world revolves around the Kashyaps. Arbaaz Khan and Salman Khan are nothing. Q. Are you enjoying your success? A. Yes, I am one of the lucky ones who's seen success and failure. I am enjoying it but it's dangerous to get addicted to it. Dimag kharab ho jata hai (You can go crazy). How do you convince yourself that the person on screen is not you? Your films are hits one after the other and people think you have discovered the formula for blockbusters. And then one after the other, your films start to bomb. I have proved once that I can handle failure. Q. Will you be able to handle failure again? A. Of course. I'll try again. And if I don't succeed, I'll do something else. Q. Have you learnt to like talking about yourself to the media? A. No. I can talk about my film. I am still awkward talking about Being Human. But I like to keep to myself. After all, I can't damn myself or praise myself. Although I have to say I am a great guy (laughs).

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

GLOSSARY

by NISHAT BARI

CHIP OFF THE OLD BLOCK
A.R. Rahman fans gathered at the inauguration of the Chennai International Film Festival were in for a surprise, as Ameen, the composer's 10-year-old son, gave his debut piano performance of Minuet in G Minor. He has previously sung for Na Na, Rahman's track for Couples Retreat. We can't wait for what's next.

BUSINESS OF BEAUTY
After scooping awards for her debut film Kaadhal in 2004, Sandhya Ajith, 24, all but disappeared from Tamil cinema. The Kerala-born actor moved back home and appeared in a few Malayalam films instead. But now she seems to have found her true calling--a chain of beauty parlours in Kerala. While most of the parlours are open to all, she has one outlet exclusively for film celebrities. For her sake, we hope this one works out.
YOGEN SHAH

SINGH

HONEY FOR ANIRUDH
Anirudh Ravichander of Kolaveri fame is going north for his latest music collaboration. Ethir Neechal, a film by Senthil, has the music director join hands with Punjabi composer Honey Singh who has sung the title song. The song also features Tamil rapper Hip Hop Thamizha Aadhi.
RAVICHANDER

RETURN TO THEATRICS
Om Puri is going back to the stage after 25 years. He is directing and acting YOGEN SHAH in Tumhari Amrita, a Punjabi play being staged in Delhi for the Punjabi Theatre Festival. Adapted from Javed Siddiqui's play by the same name, it has Divya Dutta as Amrita, and Puri as Zulfikar reading emotional letters.

RUFFLED FEATHERS
Remember Sneha Ullal, 27, the Aishwarya Rai lookalike? She has moved on to Telugu films with Anil Sunkara's Aasu Raja Rani Matrum Joker, a 3D bilingual. But after two parrots died on set, she filed a complaint against the director with animal welfare charity Blue Cross. Hmm.
with Lakshmi Kumaraswami and Saranya Chakrapani
DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

SEEN ABOUTTOWN
John Abraham has been taking in the local flavour while shooting in Kochi for Shoojit Sircar's Madras Café. He put in an appearance for an AIDS day function organised by Kochi Corporation, and caught a performance by Tamil-British artist M.I.A. at the Kochi-Muziris Biennale. After a tour of the threemonth-long art festival by co-curator Bose Krishnamachari, he even pledged Rs 10 lakh in support of it. How generous.

YOGEN SHAH

63

