Na tion

2G VERDICT

SUPREME TAINTSTI CKS TO UPA2
By Dhiraj Nayyar

Court indicts Government and says auctions are best. Small telecom players bear brunt of cancelled licences.

THE AFTERMATH
Implications of the SC verdict

he tumult that will wreck any expected composure in the coming Budget Session has begun. The eye of this storm is the 2G judgment on February 2. The Supreme Court's order, cancelling the 122 telecom licences handed out in controversial circumstances by former telecom minister A. Raja in January 2008, is the most serious judicial indictment of the UPA Cabinet, particularly its top echelons. The Opposition has already started to demand the Government's resignation, accusing it of culpability in the 2G scam. So far, the Government has made Raja its favoured scapegoat. This judgment extends the penumbra of guilt. It is a mixed order for the $70 billion telecom industry, which with 850 million subscribers, ought to have been a mascot for inclusive growth, had bad government policy not interfered. Companies such as Uninor and Swan, which entered the telecom industry in 2008, will suffer. Their licences stand cancelled. Other bigger players may actually gain at their expense. But the industry as a whole should be relieved. The parameters laid out by the court will affect the interface between Government policy, executive decision and the private sector for the foreseeable future. The order cancelling the licences is based on the Supreme Court's reading of the Constitution and the law and Raja's violation of both. I The Court has ruled that the firstcome, first-served principle is against the principle of equality in the Constitution because it unfairly favours those who have preferential access to Government. Since the UPA Cabinet stood rock solid behind the policy, the court's ruling is an indict-

T

POLITICAL
I Congress's corruption is centrestage again, UPA credibility battered. I Home Minister P. Chidambaram's position is tenuous. I BJP and other opposition parties set

to seize advantage in UP polls.

BUSINESS
I Government likely to face litigation

from losers of licences.
I New entrants of 2008 like Uninor and

Swan will suffer most.
I Established players like Vodafone and

Airtel will consolidate their positions.
I Consumers likely to be protected

from any adverse impact.

POLICY
I Discretionary allocation of natural MANMOHAN SINGH
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

A. RAJA
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

P. CHIDAMBARAM
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

resources by Government to end.
I Auctions will be the sole method to

ment of the entire Government. I The court notes how Raja did not place the recommendations made by Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) in August 2007 before the full Telecom Commission which would have included the finance secretary. The finance ministry headed by P. Chidambaram was originally opposed to first-come, first-served but did a Uturn in January 2008, the month in which licences were allotted. I The Supreme Court indicts Raja for refusing to abide by a suggestion from the law ministry asking for the matter of spectrum pricing to be referred to an empowered group of ministers. The court also notes how he rejected the prime minister's suggestion for a

rethink on first-come, first-served. I The court is scathing in the manner in which Raja arbitrarily changed the cut off date advancing it by six days to benefit some players. I The court notes how some companies which submitted applications in 2004 or 2006 were pushed down the line in priority and those who applied in 2007 moved ahead because of Raja's machinations. These violations were well known and reported extensively in the media and even raised in Parliament through the last three months of 2007 and the first three months of 2008. The then finance minister Chidambaram and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh knew it all and did

nothing to stop the allotment. They now have no place to hide. Chidambaram, was explicitly empowered by the TRAI Act to stop Raja in his brazen violation of the law. Chidambaram, as guardian of the public exchequer, was within his rights to disagree with Raja's policy and force the matter to be referred to the Cabinet. He did not. The Supreme Court did not exonerate Chidambaram. Instead, they left it to trial court judge O.P Saini to decide whether the Home Minister should be made a co-accused in the 2G case. All eyes are now on Saini, who, according to the Supreme Court's order, must take a decision within two weeks. Saini may pronounce his ver-

dict as early as February 4. A week is a long time in politics. This is the longest week of Chidambaram's life. The Supreme Court's direction to the Government to auction the 122 cancelled licences within a fourmonth-period is a scathing rejoinder to current telecom minister Kapil Sibal and law minister Salman Khurshid, who have consistently argued, in a valiant attempt to defend the UPA Government, that it was never the Government's policy to auction 2G spectrum. The only violations, if any, according to them, were in the implementation of the firstcome, first-served policy. The Supreme Court has emphatically rejected that line of argument.

distribute natural resources.
I Greater certainty in the environment

to do business.

THE LOSERS
10 firms had 2G licences cancelled
I Unitech Wireless Group 22 2G circles I Loop Telecom 21 I Videocon Telecommunications 21 I Sistema Shyam Teleservices (Shyam Telelink) 21 I Etisalat DB 13 I Idea Cellular & Aditya Birla Telecom 9 I S. Tel 6 I Spice Communication 4 I Tata Tele Services 3 I Allianz Infratech 2

46

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 13, 2012

FEBRUARY 13, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

47

Na tion

2G VERDICT

Sibal, in his now infamous "zero loss theory", had also argued that there was no loss to the exchequer from the Raja handouts of licences in 2008 at 2001 prices. That vacuous argument will be put to rest once the auctions for the 122 licences are completed. The Government will recover its losses courtesy the Supreme Court, and the gains will not be notional. The 3G auctions raised Rs 1 lakh crore for the Government. In comparison, Raja's dole out earned only Rs 9,000 crore for the Government. At a press conference soon after the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs and the Cabinet Committee on Investment had met following the Supreme Court judgment, Sibal tried to pass the buck. "On the policy issue the Supreme Court has said that the (first-come, first-served) policy is per se discriminatory. This policy is a legacy of the then NDA government." The question that Sibal doesn't answer is why the UPA government was bound by the legacy of the NDA Cabinet. Cabinet decisions of previous Governments are not cast in stone and are often reversed if found inappropriate.

2G DOWN THE LINE
Jan 10, 2008 Department of Telecom
(DoT) issues 2G spectrum licences on first-come, first-served basis.

Oct 22, 2009 CBI starts probe into 2G spectrum case, raids DoT offices. Nov 10, 2010 The CAG submits report on 2G spectrum, says exchequer lost Rs 1.76 lakh crore.

Feb 2, 2011 A. Raja, his aide R.K. Chandolia and former telecom secretary Siddharth Behura sent to jail. Feb 8, 2011 Shahid Usman Balwa, promoter of Swan Telecom, arrested. April 20, 2011
CBI arrests three officials of Reliance ADAG, Unitech's MD Sanjay Chandra and Vinod Goenka, chairman of DB Realty.

May 20, 2011

CBI arrests Kanimozhi, and Sharad Kumar,MD, Kalaignar TV.

Aug 20, 2011 TRAI says there was zero loss to the national exchequer. Aug 24, 2011 Raja wants PM, P. Chidambaram and Kapil Sibal to be questioned to prove his innocence. November 3, 2011 Trial court rejects bail plea of Kanimozhi, seven others. November 28, 2011 Delhi High
Court grants bail to Kanimozhi, Sharad Kumar, Karim Morani, Asif Balwa and Rajeev Agarwal.

he CBI's investigation into the 2G case has also received a rap from the court, even if indirectly. While the Supreme Court did not accede to petitioner Prashant Bhushan's plea to hand over the monitoring of the 2G case to a Special Investigation Team (SIT), it directed the CBI to report its findings regularly to the Central Vigilance Commissioner who would then brief the Court. An additional check on the CBI's investigation has been put in place. The CBI's inconsistencies were exposed in another instance. The Supreme Court fined Swan, Unitech and Tata Teleservices Rs 5 crore each for violating merger and acquisition norms by diluting stakes to foreign investors soon after the grant of licence before the end of a mandatory cool off period. Curiously, the CBI has charged only the first two firms in the 2G case, leaving the Tatas off the hook. In the

T

December 8, 2011 Janata Party chief Subramanian Swamy is allowed to testify in support of his complaint seeking prosecution of Chidambaram. January 21, 2012 Court reserves its order for February 4 on plea seeking Chidambaram's prosecution. February 2, 2012 SC cancels 122
licences allotted by Raja in 2008, leaves it to trial court to decide the culpability of Chidambaram.

court's view, the nature of violations is similar. But not in the eyes of the CBI. Within hours of the Supreme Court decision, the BJP's central leadership was discussing how to leverage the verdict to their advantage in the Uttar Pradesh assembly elections. The timing of the judgment could not have been better for the Opposition

party. Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, Arun Jaitley, who was in Lucknow, was quick to sharpen his attack on Chidambaram. "The finance minister is the custodian of the public exchequer. It is the prime responsibility of the finance minister to ensure that there is no loot of public money," he said, adding that while it was the Government's decision, "telecom minister and finance minister had a special role". The Supreme Court's judgment could not have come at a worse time for Rahul Gandhi's Uttar Pradesh campaign as the corruption of the Congress party once again takes centrestage. It may well define the poll campaign across India's largest state. The biggest blow from the Supreme Court judgment will land on those foreign investors who invested in Indian telecom companies after the licences had been given out, and now stand cancelled. Uninor, a joint venture formed after the Norwaybased Telenor invested in Unitech's telecom company, was quick to react after the judgment. Said a statement from Uninor, which had invested over Rs 6,000 crore for a 67 per cent stake in Unitech and lost 22 licences as a result of the Court order, "We have been unfairly treated as we simply followed the government process we were asked to. We are shocked to see that Uninor is being penalised for faults the court has found in the Government process." Says MP and former telecom entrepreneur Rajeev Chandrasekhar, "Investors that invested in good faith will be upset and worried. The foreign investors came in as secondary investors and must have presumed that all was okay once the Government had issued the licence." Chandrasekhar believes that they must take a share of the blame. "The question they must ask themselves is whether proper due diligence was done." Chandrasekhar believes that Uninor and others will approach the courts for legal recourse. "They can sue the Government," he says. A protracted litigation process in which the holders of the 122 cancelled licences

48

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 13, 2012

Na tion

2G VERDICT
BHUSHAN SWAMY

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE PETITIONERS

Bhushan and Swamy set the ball rolling for the 2G judgment

hursday, February 2, was a day of reckoning in Courtroom Six of the Supreme Court. At 10.30 a.m., Justices G.K. Singhvi and A.K. Ganguly T read out three judgments on the biggest scam of the decade. The judgments were a victory for Prashant Bhushan and Subramanian Swamy, both of whom had filed separate petitions in the Supreme Court in a bid to force a reluctant Government to punish the guilty. Bhushan, senior lawyer and PIL activist, says it was possible because a resurgent judiciary started responding to public opinion ever since Justice Sarosh Homi Kapadia became the Chief Justice of India (CJI) in May 2010. "There was a time when I stopped filing," he says. "There was just no seriousness about corruption." Bhushan found the new CJI "gracious and fair". Since the 2007, Bhushan had been organising campaigns to punish corrupt judges through his Campaign for Judicial Accountability and Reform organisation. Now, the battle is against corrupt politicians, bureaucrats and businessmen. For Swamy, the other petitioner, this could be Diwali, Christmas and Id rolled into one. The Harvard educated economist and Janata Party chief, whose crusades for a culture of accountability go back four decades, has blown the whistle on the 2G scam single-handedly. "I have fought over 40 cases myself," he says. "I enjoy going to court. I have won them all." "The 2G case will be over by the end of 2012. Everybody will be convicted," Swamy says. In the dim light of the basement of his Nizamuddin East home in Delhi, rows of books, walls full of framed Hindu gods, messy desks and piles of paper create an atmosphere that's intriguing as it is entertaining. This is where the first news of 2G spectrum allocation swindle came in January 11, 2008. Distressed government officers talked about fisticuffs, demand of Rs 1,650 crore in an hour, of bouncers throwing respectable people out. In July came reports of how the loot was split, Rs 4,000-Rs 36,000 crore, depending on VIP hierarchy. That was the tipping point for Swamy. "The difference between me and Anna Hazare," says Swamy, "is that he wants new systems. I work within the system. And I have proved it." by Damayanti Datta seek legal redress could complicate or delay the auctioning process for the licences, which needs to be carried out in the next four months. The Supreme Court judgment will have a disproportionate impact on those companies which entered the sector for the first time in 2008-- Uninor (22 licences), Swan-Etisalat (15 licences) and Shyam Sistema (21 licences). If they fail to win bids at the forthcoming auction, they will be entirely out of the business. Market leader Bharti Airtel had not got any licences in 2008 and so has suffered no reverse. The second ranked, Vodafone, is also safe. Reliance Communications, which got its li-

cences in 2001 is also immune from the SC judgment. However, the third largest operator, Idea, has lost nine limited licences. With deep pockets, it is likely to bid for these in the forthcoming auction. The big players may also be in a good position to buy some of the 122 licences that were held by smaller players but will be available in an open auction, thus strengthening their positions in the market. In the short run, there is a risk that if some players drop out of the telecom market, the competition will decline and those left in the fray will be tempted to raise tariffs, hurting consumers. Says Chandrasekhar, "That is a possibility, but the regulator should be able to take care of a rise in tariffs because of reduced competition." For consumers, there is no immediate reason for concern. The operators whose licences have been cancelled will be allowed to operate until the auction for the licences is held. Number portability will help. Says TRAI chairman J.S. Sarma, "We are living in a MNP (mobile number portability) age, which is in full force across the country, so there is no need to worry. Customers can migrate without much trouble." That may of course work to the detriment of the companies whose licences have been cancelled. There may be a mass migration away from them in the four months between now and the auctions. The Supreme Court judgment has also laid out explicitly guidelines for the use and sale of precious natural resources to private parties, an area that has been surrounded by policy ambiguity not just in spectrum but also mining and oil and gas exploration. The court's insistence on auctions will provide much clarity to Government in what has often been a controversial policy space. It will also force private enterprises to play by the rules of the game and not seek ways and means to subvert policymaking in this sphere. It could go a long way in curbing the cancer of corruption that has plagued the country in recent times.
With Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Priya Sahgal and Shantanu Guha Ray

50

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 13, 2012

