BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE JANUS FACE OFJUSTICE
principal challenge before our judiciary has not party still controls the railway ministry, and accidents have changed in six decades: the problem of one statute not stopped. We should not however blame her for not ofand two laws, one for the powerful and the other for fering her resignation, since no Union minister has resigned the weak. Kautilya, author of Arthashastra, was perfectly after a railway accident since Lal Bahadur Shastri in 1956. The board of directors of Air India has never gone to happy to sacrifice the ideal for the good of the state, so there was neither conflict nor confusion in the golden age prison for an accident; indeed, no one has even tried to prosof Mauryas. The Mughals, during their jewelled period, ecute an Air India or Railways manager, let alone incarcerwere not perturbed by concepts like equality, although, ate him. Why? Is death in a hospital, or building collapse, like the Mauryas, they understood that a state could not somehow more heinous than death from a mismanaged sustain itself without some sense of equity. Big fish cannot government utility? Why is the private sector punished for quite swallow minnows with the impunity to which they negligence of public welfare, but never the public sector, got accustomed in the imperial age of history, at least in when in fact it should probably be the other way around? Those who run public sector institutions have, without the theory that guides a democratic Constitution. But only the delusional believe that double standards have disap- any fuss, simply placed themselves above the law. If there was any justice, dozens of nationalised bank directors peared in the application of law in democratic India. The private sector has wealth, a useful yardstick of would have been behind bars for the manner in which they power. But even those few ministers without wealth handed out the people's money to fly-by-night operators in have the police. No prizes for guessing which of the two the full knowledge that most of the loan would be stolen beis more advantageous. And so justice, which wears a fore being written off as a "Non Performing Asset". My parblindfold in statues, turns out to have not only two eyes ticular compliments to whoever coined that phrase. Never has a sweet deal been veiled by such a clever euphemism. but more than one face. In the first week of last December, an appalling fire Every Non Performing Asset should be rewritten in the acbroke out in a private hospital in Calcutta, killing patients. count books as a Very Active Liability. Many balance sheets The guilt was obvious: greed and indifference had bred a would suddenly look very imbalanced indeed. I happened to be among the sub-class called journalists culture of mismanagement in which the legitimate need at the White House during the visit by for profit had long succumbed to the SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Atal Bihari Vajpayee after America had lure of profiteering. There is always destroyed the Taliban government in good money to be made out of misery. Kabul in its search for justice after Public anger, predictably, was intense. 9/11. George Bush was president, and Eleven members of the board of directhrough some mysterious process I am tors have been arrested, including two still unable to comprehend I was given reputed doctors held in great esteem in the opportunity of asking president the city, one of them old and infirm. The Bush a question. My query was not law should be, and was, indifferent to very complicated. When terrorists atesteem; even if those directors who tacked America, the Pentagon travelled were not directly involved with the 10,000 miles to exact revenge. When management share some responsibilterrorists attacked India, Washington ity. But they have no immediate hope of patience, calm and various getting bail, not because of the law, but Is death in a hospital, or urged other measures designed to make you because politicians deflect public anger at the first opportunity. These are fun- building collapse, somehow a competitor for the Nobel Prize for damentals of democratic behaviour. more heinous than death Peace. Why? Was an American life But why are there two laws, one for from a mismanaged gov- more valuable than an Indian life? Were there two laws in the world, one the private sector and one for the public? Why do members of the Railway ernment utility? Why is the for America, and another for India? There are. Board never get arrested when a railway private sector punished for This would not have bothered accident kills scores or even hundreds of negligence of public Kautilya; and he would not have asked passengers? The Chief Minister of West welfare, but never the for the resignation of the Mauryan emBengal, Ms Mamata Banerjee, has been Union minister for railways. She never public sector, when in fact pire's Oxcart Board either. But I hope jailed members of her Railway Board, it should probably be the there is some reason for thought and reflection over double and triple judiwhich is the direct equivalent of the other way around? cial standards in 2012. board of directors, after an accident. Her 

A

FEBRUARY 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

50

