Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

THE BARD AND THE BLASPHEMER

O

ne afternoon in Jaipur, where a Rushdieshaped void reminded us of the limits of freedom and the profanities of politics, I heard poetry wafting from the Mughal Tent, one of the festival stages. It was a full-house session and there was no point getting in and blocking someone's view; so along with other idlers who swarm one of literature's biggest carnivals in the Orient, I listened, just for a while, to the wellknown Indian poet Kapil Sibal. The bit I heard was something about the Left, and it was received with encouraging applause from the audience, which indeed was such a heartwarming sight that brought out the poetic sensibility of the people who come to the festival. I don't remember the lines because, most probably, they might have been too refined to be registered by a prosaic mind. That maybe beside the point. The very sight of the poet Sibal performing with a balladeer's brio, and the reception he got, told a story Jaipur could not have afforded to miss. The poet Sibal, incidentally, has a daytime job as an important Cabinet minister in the Government of India, which has done everything it could to make Jaipur inaccessible to Salman Rushdie. When sundry Muslim organisations threatened the festival with bloody consequences if blasphemer Rushdie dared to show up in the sacred city of Jaipur, the state government of Rajasthan and the Central Government in Delhi, both ruled by the Congress of which the poet Sibal is a valuable leader and whose defence of the indefensible on a wide Spectrum of scams in iambic pentameter continues to add more Teflon to the office of the Prime Minister, refused to stand up against the killers of free speech. In Jaipur, much to the relief of the organisers, no free-speech suicide bomber went

up to the poet Sibal for autograph and hugged him in gratitude. No one boycotted the reading by the poet who was part of the system that banned The Satanic Verses, banished its author, and banished him again for the vote from the Muslim ghettos of Uttar Pradesh. I am not sure how many of the festival revellers were disturbed by the irony of going home with the poetry of Sibal and missing the prose of Rushdie. Well, Jaipur may have passed, but in Delhi, as the French would say, plus ca change, plus c'est la meme chose (the more things change, the more they stay the same). Looks like the poetry of Sibal or the monosyllable of Manmohan Singh is the only aesthetic we are condemned to live with. Suddenly, Delhi has become a synonym for Pyongyang or Havana, Beijing or some other place where words are measured against the Word, where any text that does not conform to the social realism of the ruling class corrupts--or even subverts-- the sacred traditions of the state. For the Imam in Rushdie's Verses, history is "the blood-wine that must no longer be drunk" because it is "the intoxicant, the creation and possession of the Devil, of the great Shaitan". Replace the fictional Imam with the real Commissar in Khadi and the words that offended the late Khomeini ring true in a Delhi where the offenders range from, Rushdie apart, poet Ramanujan to a maverick BBC presenter to the Nordic temptress with the dragon tattoo called Lisbeth Salander. What we have in abundance--and uncensored--is the freedom to enjoy the pornography of politics as practised by the cultural arbiters of Delhi, and I will be among the blessed if I get to listen to a poetic rendition of it by the great bard Sibal next year in Jaipur.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE VERY SIGHT OF THE POET SIBAL PERFORMING WITH A BALLADEER'S BRIO, AND THE RECEPTION HE GOT, TOLD A STORY IN FREE SPEECH A RUSHDIE-LESS JAIPUR COULD NOT HAVE AFFORDED TO MISS.

S I G N P O STS
PAES

Bob and Mike Bryan. RANKED India, a low 125th in addressing pollution control and natural resource management challenges, according to the 2012 Environmental Performance Index report by Yale and Columbia universities' re-

WON Thirty-eight-year-old Leander Paes, his first Australian Open men's doubles title, with Czech mate Radek Stepanek. The unseeded pair was up against the top-ranked American twins,

searchers with the World Economic Forum. PROPOSED Single entrance test, for all engineering colleges in India. The IITs have agreed to merge the IIT-JEE and All India Engineering Entrance Exam conducted by the CBSE.

DROPPED Rajpal Singh, for the Olympic men's hockey qualifiers. Singh SINGH insisted that he had recovered from his appendicitis surgery and was fit to represent the country.

NEW

