GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

DELHI DREAMING
s Elections 2014 inch closer, one man who can't even get his MPs elected is fantasising about becoming prime minister. And doing everything to achieve it. Telugu Desam Party (TDP) President N. Chandrababu Naidu, 61, is planning to move to Delhi to be closer to the seat of power he aspires to occupy. Recently, Naidu declared he did not want to be chief minister. On January 29, his acolyte and senior TDP leader G. Muddukrishnama Naidu told journalists that many people in the country wish to see Naidu as prime minister. We presume they all live outside Andhra Pradesh.

NO SLAPGATE
hen a member in the audience at Davos prefaced a question about lack of housing and toilets in India by saying "I hope the minister won't slap me", Commerce Minister Anand Sharma gave a pious answer. "I am a Gandhian and don't believe in talking about slaps." Ah, and we thought the other Gandhi was the flavour of the season.
SHARMA

A

W

NAIDU

COST OF FAT

KHAN

POWER TRIPS
est Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's whimsical solutions are becoming contagious. Kolkata Book Fair thought the crowds at Imran Khan's press conference were getting out of hand, so they simply switched off the lights. Khan was whisked away in the dark, as journalists jostled for a picture. Tridib Chattopadhyay, one of the organisers of the fair, claimed they did so to keep to the time limit. Also, he said, the cricketer was looking tired. Such concern.

M

adhya Pradesh government employees, who are overweight because of hormonal imbalances, can now claim relief at the government's expense. The government will be paying for bariatric surgery, says Health Minister Narottam Mishra. Dr Mohit Bhandari of the Bhandari Group of Hospitals says any employee with a Body Mass Index above 32.5 can go for the surgery at the hospital. Mishra says it is better that the employees remain in the state rather than go to "bigger cities". That's really big of him, considering surgery can cost up to Rs 2 lakh.

W

SUBIR HALDER /www.indiatodayimages.com

MODI FOR GOA
Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi is likely to be the BJP's star campaigner in Goa, where the party is hoping to come back to power after a gap of five years. He was not the first choice. The Goa BJP had hoped to rope in the Karnataka chief minister, but with mining still a controversy in that state, the party decided against it. In attacking Goa Chief Minister Digambar Kamat's record on mining, at least they will now not be pointing a finger at themselves.

PAKISTAN'S PUBLIC DISSENT
India has its vigilante aunties and shotgun uncles in Government, but Pakistan believes that public protest is the cure for offensive TV content. First there was anchor Maya Khan who was fired from Samaa TV for shaming youngsters cuddling in parks. Now there's Shamoon Abbasi who has quit his show on A Plus TV called Thodi si Bewafai, which went around catching people in the middle of homosexual activity. Six thousand hits on the blog that first brought it to everyone's attention and dozens of complaints with the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority later, Abbasi quit. Lesson in there somewhere for India's scissor-happy Government?

ABBASI

12

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

GLASS HOUSE TAMIL POWER

M

PEOPLE'S CALL
harkhand Chief Minister Arjun Munda has turned all modern with his Samsung laptop. He has set up a grievance redress call centre in his office in Ranchi where people can call in with their problems on any of the 30 phones. The calls are recorded for him on his laptop when he is not around. The office gets about 8,000 calls every day, and sometimes Munda listens in, with instant solutions.

REAL NASTY

ani Shankar Aiyar sure knows how to steal the limelight. Speaking at the launch of a biography of Sonia Gandhi in Delhi, he took the stage saying he would speak for a few minutes in Tamil. The few minutes went on for a while. When a member of the audience protested, he said: "This was a deliberate move on my part to introduce you to a rich language. You expect all of us to understand your language (Hindi) under the garb of national language, but it's shameful that no one in northern India is acquainted with a language that is probably older than Sanskrit."
AIYAR

J

T

MUNDA
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

he ad war between The Hindu and The Times of India got a political twist when Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah wanted to know whether the people shown in The Hindu's counter-attack on The Times of India were actors or "real people". Significant because The Times of India had declared in its ad that The Hindu (without naming the paper, of course) puts readers to sleep. The Hindu responded with YouTube
ABDULLAH

DESCRIPTION
O F T H E W E E K

ATI MURKH ministers Salman Khurshid and
Kapil Sibal after the Supreme Court, responding to his plea, said the filing of a complaint under the Prevention of Corruption Act is a constitutional right and a competent authority can sanction prosecution of a public servant within a specified time limit.
videos which showed a series of youngsters being unable to answer basic general knowledge questions but being totally up to speed on trivia like Hrithik Roshan's nickname. Naturally, it was because they read The Times of India. "Real people," The Hindu editor Siddharth Varadarajan answered Abdullah on twitter.

Subramanian Swamy on Union

SHOCKER
O F T H E W E E K

Twenty-five per cent Mumbaikars think Rahul Gandhi and Mahatma Gandhi are related.That's in a poll with 8,000 respondents conducted by St Xavier's College students.
RAVI S SAHANI/www.indiatodayimages.com

"This is one of the losses I am most happy with in my career. When you are fit, when you have the passion, you are able to suffer. I suffered during the match, but I enjoyed all the troubles."
RAFAEL NADAL, on losing the

JOKE
O F T H E W E E K

Grand Slam "When I was on a hunger strike for 26 days (during "They (Shiv Sena) can abuse the Singur stir), the PM didn't anybody in their mouthpiece. But they expect noenquire about me because body should write against he was afraid his Left them. How's that possible?" friends wouldn't like it. " RAJ THACKERAY
MAMATA BANERJEE, West Bengal CM
MNS

INTERNAL CONGRESS OPINION POLL: WHO SHOULD BE INDIA'S PM?

chief
GETTY IMAGES

NADAL

1. Rahul Gandhi 2. Rahul Gandhi 3. Rahul Gandhi 4.All of the above

with PRIYA SAHGAL, PARTHA DASGUPTA, AMARNATH K. MENON, AMITABH SRIVASTAVA, SHURIAH NIAZI

14

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

