Nation FIGHTER DEAL

THE RAFALE FIGHTER JET

FRANCE JETS PASTGERMANY
India picks the Rafale fighter, reinforces tag of being world's largest arms importer
ndia's impending acquisition of the Rafale aircraft is likely to significantly alter the balance of air power in the subcontinent. On January 31, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) announced that the French-built aircraft had emerged as the lowest bidder in its $10.2 billion (Rs 50,000 crore) contest to buy 126 medium multi-role combat aircraft (MMRCA). When all 126 MMRCAs are fielded by 2021, the Indian Air Force (IAF) will be able to match the growing presence of Chinese and Pakistani air forces which will deploy over 240 similar aircraft. The first of the MMRCAs, thus called because they can shoot down aircraft and bomb ground targets, will be inducted four years from now and help the IAF arrest a dip in fighter squadrons caused by the phasing out of the MiG-21. The IAF has less than 30 squadrons against a sanctioned 39.5 squadrons. It will, however, take another year for the IAF to sign the contract to acquire the aircraft. This is the world's largest open tender military contract. Sources say the contract size is set to nearly double to $ 18 billion (the 2011 defence budget was $ 36.3 billion) when it is adjusted for inflation.

I

The French-built aircraft knocked out its closest contender, the Eurofighter Typhoon, produced by a four-nation consortium that includes Germany and Great Britain. The price of the Rafale has not been revealed but is believed to be nearly $100 million (Rs 500 crore) per aircraft. The deal also reinforces the somewhat dubious tag of India being one of the world's largest importers of defence hardware. Last year, it eclipsed China to claim that title. In the next fortnight, the MoD is to set up a Price Negotiation Committee (PNC), including representatives of the IAF and financial advisers. The PNC has a 90-day deadline to hold discussions with representatives of Dassault Aviation, makers of Rafale. Meanwhile, the Defence Offsets Facilitation Agency will begin discussions with Dassault on the mandatory 50 per cent `defence offsets'--the firm will have to indicate partners in Indian industry from whom it will source nearly half the contract value. The MMRCA decision is the wheel coming full circle. Soon after the 1999 Kargil War, the IAF was set to buy 126 Mirage 2000-5 jets. In 2005, the UPA government changed this to an open tender and invited manufacturers

from the US, Europe, Sweden and Russia to participate. Dassault withdrew the Mirage 2000 from the contest and fielded the newer, pricier Rafale instead. Two years ago, a senior IAF official indicated they were looking for a `contemporary Western fighter'. Sure enough, in April 2011, the MoD ejected Russia, Sweden and the US from the contest, narrowing it down to the Rafale and Eurofighter. The first squadron of 18 Rafales will be delivered three years from the date of signing the contract. The 108 remaining aircraft will be assembled in India by Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. The IAF has indicated it will exercise the option to buy 74 more MMRCAs. This means it could end up with over 472 fourth-generation aircraft, including 272 Sukhois. "The IAF is rapidly becoming topheavy by inducting expensive twinengined aircraft like the Sukhois and MMRCAs whereas it needs workhorses like the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)," says aviation analyst Pushpinder Singh Chopra. Nearly three decades after it was conceived, the LCA Tejas, meant to replace the MiG-21s, is still far from combat-worthy. Clearly the IAF needs to get it off the ground for a healthy mix. by Sandeep Unnithan

42

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

