Nation KARNATAKA

BJP'S PORN-AGAIN MOVEMENT
Three Karnataka ministers resign after they were caught on camera watching porn on a cell
By Sowmya Aji

JOKE'S ON THEM
The three Karnataka ministers and the BJP were the butt of popular humour soon after TV channels broadcast the story "Last heard, BJP has given honorary membership to Sunny Leone." "Journey of Bangalore: from Silk City to Silicon City to Silk Smitha City." "There are two vidyapeetas in Palimar now: Poornaprajna and Pornaprajna." Some tweets: "Karnataka MLAs should be given porn allowance. Perhaps 5-10 porn CDs per month? Desperate minister Lakshman Savadi watching porn in the Assembly." "Just watching it is not a crime, Mr Savadi said.Well, let's wait for him to do something criminal on the prestigious floor of the House."

phone in the state Assembly

ex has reached the floor of the Karnataka Legislative Assembly. In an incident that shocked the country, two state Cabinet ministers were caught on camera on February 7 watching pornographic films on a smart phone while seated in the House. The two ministers, cooperation minister Lakshman Savadi, 49, and women and child welfare minister C. C. Patil, 53, as well as environment minister J. Krishna Palemar, 56, who reportedly forwarded the obscene clip to them, resigned from their ministerial posts. They have also been suspended from the Legislative Assembly pending an all-party internal inquiry. The scandal was inadvertently uncovered by cameraman Srinivas Kulkarni, 31, of the private channel TV-9, who was filming the Assembly session. He was standing in the visitors' gallery and had panned his camera to Janata Dal (S) MLA Venkatrao Nadagouda, who was speaking about the severity of drought in his region. Kulkarni suddenly noticed that Savadi, seated directly below him, was glancing upwards nervously to see if the camera was trained on him. "I was curious to see why he was worried. He was fiddling with his mobile. I turned my camera and zoomed in on his mobile and was horrified to see he was watching porn. I don't even want to talk about how awful the images were,'' Kulkarni told INDIA TODAY. While Savadi was intently watching the clip, Patil, who shot to fame for his January 2 comment that women needed to cover up to be safe from rape, was leaning over to look at the images on his phone. The 10-minute recording by Kulkarni showed Savadi watching a clip of a woman being gangraped. The clip

S

LAKSHMAN SAVADI (FAR LEFT) AND C. C. PATIL; A VIDEO GRAB SHOWING THE TWO WATCHING A PORN CLIP IN THE ASSEMBLY

MAIL TODAY

KPN

has allegedly been shot and circulated in north Karnataka. This was followed by another clip in which a woman was performing a striptease, similar to the nanga naach (naked dance) programmes of Andhra Pradesh. The last bit was of a woman and a man, fully naked, engaged in sexual intercourse in a room. All Kannada TV channels which relayed shots of Savadi watching the clips have gone on record saying that they blurred the graphic content and edited out most of it, as it was "unsuitable for general public viewing". Savadi had an explanation. He said that he was watching the clips as he wanted material to counter Congress charges that the BJP government was supporting a reported rave and sex party at St Mary's Island, off the coast of Udupi, in February. "I have not committed any offence. I was watching the video of four men who raped and killed a woman in a foreign country. I was watching that video just to gather

information,'' Savadi said. Patil also tried to wriggle out, saying that he had actually reached out to switch off the clip that Savadi was watching. "It is not our culture to watch porn and I thought it was not suitable to see it in the House,'' he claimed. TV channels ran the former ministers' statements along with the clip they were actually watching. Within minutes of these visuals being aired, there was a total shutdown of power in Athani, Savadi's Assembly constituency. Cable TV was blacked out in Nargund, Patil's constituency. The BJP's discomfiture has been greeted with derision by the Opposition parties. Even the BJP rank and file and Sangh Parivar activists expressed disgust at the situation. A party worker, assistant to one of the ministers, said, "When I set out for the Assembly today, my wife asked, why do you want to go? Is this what you do in the Assembly?'' Another worker said he was com-

pletely disgusted with the behaviour of the ministers. "How will their wives or children sit next to them now?'' he asked. RSS spokespersons declined to comment and merely said, "It is up to the party to take further action.'' The one person who expressed sympathy for the BJP/RSS rank and file is JD(S) state President and former chief minister H. D. Kumaraswamy. "The BJP and RSS grassroots workers brought these people to power out of love, making sacrifices and asking for nothing except ideology in return. Who will see to their pain now? Will Chief Minister D. V. Sadananda Gowda or state BJP chief K. S. Eshwarappa respond?'' he asked. Opposition leader Siddaramaiah pointed out that the former ministers had violated Section 292 and 293 of the Indian Penal Code that bans public viewing of pornographic films. "We are examining whether we can file a criminal case against them, as the legisla-

CAUGHT IN THE ACT
Karnataka BJP ministers and MLAs'sexcapades in recent past

M.P. Renukacharya, present
excise minister, was accused of "betrayal" by nurse Jayalakshmi. In 2006, she released pictures of him kissing her and threatened to release a CD of their sexual exploits.

Hartal Halappa, former food and civil supplies minister, had to resign after being accused of raping a friend's wife in May 2010. Halappa is still facing a criminal case. B.S.Yeddyurappa was accused of murdering his wife Mythra Devi to be able to continue his relationship with minister Shobha Karandlaje in 2009. A sessions court ordered a probe, but the Shimoga police filed a report closing the case.

ture is a protected area. They will face up to five years in prison and a fine of over Rs 1 lakh. It is a black day for us and the BJP has been stripped off everything by this act,'' he told INDIA TODAY. Public anger is also boiling over. A group of pro-Kannada activists attacked Savadi's house in Bangalore. Protests, demonstrations and effigies of the ministers were burnt by angry women and youth wing activists. After day-long deliberations in the Legislative Assembly, the government caved in and set up an inquiry committee into the incident. Speaker K. G. Bopaiah, quoting former Lok Sabha speaker Somnath Chatterjee's judgment in the cash-for-votes scandal on December 12, 2005, said the trio were suspended till the inquiry committee report was submitted. Members of the legislature are banned from carrying mobiles into both Houses, just like in Parliament. They are often reprimanded and even sent out by the Speaker if they violate this rule. There are also jammers installed to prevent the misuse of mobiles. The Karnataka Speaker will have to take a call on whether the ministers were breaking rules. The Congress, sensing a never-before opportunity, has declined to be part of the committee, which it termed as another way to "hush up'' the scandal. Party state President G. Parameshwara said that they will demand the dismissal of the government by submitting a memorandum to Governor H. R. Bhardwaj. The Youth Congress has already set things in motion by holding a bandh in the constituencies of all three ministers. "We will keep up the pressure on the government,'' State Youth Congress chief Rizwan Arshad said. The hardest hit in this situation is former chief minister and BJP strongman B. S. Yeddyurappa, as all the three former ministers are his cohorts. This incident is being seen as a huge stumbling block to his own return to power. An angry Yeddyurappa, who lashed out at the media for "creating mischief", said very indignantly, "We have shown our high moral fibre because the three ministers resigned voluntarily, within 24 hours of the incident.'' I

38

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

FEBRUARY 20, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

39

