SIMPLY DELHI

Inside

COVER STORY

Décor that Wows s-4
Simply Delhi brings you the latest trends in home décor for the season
BUZZ

In the City

s-16

A check list on where to eat and what to shop for
ELSEWHERE Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie Chief Executive Officer Ashish Bagga G Editor Director M.J Akbar Assistant Editor Insiyah Vahanvaty Editorial Team Rewati Rau, Ekta Alreja, Vanita Chitkara, Sibi Arasu, Shilpa Mehta, Ekta Marwaha, Humra Afroz Photo Editor T Narayan Photo Department Ravi S. Sahani, Reuben Singh, Vikram Sharma, Subir Halder, Sipra Das, Rashmi Hajela (Chief Photo Researcher) Design Associates Madhu Bhaskar, Vandana Nayar, Sheeba Narain Production Surinder Hastu (Chief of Production), Harish Aggarwal, Naveen Gupta Layout Execution Ramesh Gusain, Ravishanker Singh, Rajesh Kumar Rawat G Publishing Director Malcolm D. Mistry Associate Publisher (Impact) Anil Fernandes G IMPACT TEAM Senior General Managers Sonal Pandey (West and South), Preeti Kohli (North), Sunil R. (Bangalore) Kaustav Chatterjee (East) V. Somasundaram (Chennai) Jitendra Lad (West)

Out and About
Heading out? Then try these places
WHAT'S UP

s-20

Enjoy!

s-30

A month of food, art, music and more
Cover by INDIA TODAY HOME
INDIA TODAY HOME

OUR PICK of the month
Persistent act
Ongoing Till February 17 In its fifth edition, Persistence Resistance, the film festival organised by the Magic Lantern foundation, aims to keep up with continually evolving viewing trends. The annual documentary festival attempts to create diverse spaces for viewing films. Screenings will be held in auditoriums, video parlours and video libraries. It offers a space for installations as well as interacting with filmmakers, all of which aim to take into account the viewers' sensory perceptions. This year the festival is screening films by both Indian and international artistes. The line-up includes films from Italy,

Germany, USA and Estonia. Festival highlights will include selections from the DEFA film archives in Germany such as My Camera and Tsunami and Three Hazelnuts for Cinderella (pic above). At Multiple venues For more information, visit persistenceresistance.in

Want to tell us about an event?A new store? A restaurant?People doing interesting things?Anything newsworthy? Please email us at: simplydelhi@intoday.com

