SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story

Décor that Wows
Designer NIki Mahajan's living room

WANT TO GIVE YOUR HOUSE A MAKEOVER THIS YEAR? THINK BRIGHT. BRING OUT YOUR BRIGHTEST CUSHIONS, POLISH THOSE ANTIQUE PIECES, HANG UP YOUR STEEL THREAD CURTAINS AND PULL OUT THOSE VIBRANT RUGS. SIMPLY DELHI BRINGS YOU THE LATEST TRENDS IN HOME DÉCOR FOR THE SEASON.

LIVING ROOM
Tips `n' Tricks
B Silver leafing, gold

Bold and beautiful
Wall coverings are the way to go this season and you will be spoilt for choice between electric metallics, gorgeous felts and unashamedly romantic English prints. A great option is midsummer rose that depicts beautiful English gardens with birds singing in the background; a sure shot way to brighten any nook and elevate its look. "If you are looking for more modern options, 3D wallpapers are a great way to highlight a wall and give it depth and character. Add abstract geometrics, gallery stripes or an animal print to your entertainment room or den to give it a stylish dimension," says Deepi Singh, owner of Maizon de Muslin, an international wall covering and fabric gallery based in Delhi. Décor experts are also giving thumbs up to all that's bright and bold. Raspberry, lime green, canary yellow, magenta and ultramarine are the haute hues to dabble with. "There's also a decided tilt towards ethnic, Indian interiors. You can opt for inlay work on the wall and in floor furnishings as well. Don't shy away from using ornamental tabletops, cabinets and sideboards," says Raseel Gujral Ansal of Casa Paradox. Designer Niki Mahajan's address (pic on left) in upscale Sainik Farms, Delhi, is a fine example of vibrant colours perfectly complemented with timeless accents. "I have paired very different hues in the house, from vivid to muted ones. Some of my walls are orange, some yellow and some white," says Mahajan. Another way to go is to add vintage furniture in your living room. Heritage pieces like ottomans, trunks and screens are being recreated with a contemporary finish. "Clearly minimalism has been shown the door and the focus is on elaborate Indian décor,"says Ansal. This season, interiors will see the juxtaposition of modern pieces against antique furniture. Look forward to playing off an antique chest of drawers by placing it next to an egg-shaped chair or something equally bohemian.

foiling and sponging with paints are simple techniques that can dress up walls and furniture. B Don't be afraid to change the positions of things in a room. That may be all that is necessary to create a brand new look. B If comfort is the key factor in your décor scheme, opt for downy, fabric-covered couches and chairs. B If you find a hole in the upholstery, trim the edge lest the loose threads get further ripped. B Natural fibres tend to absorb stains faster, while synthetics can be cleaned easily. You can opt for blended fabrics that give you the best of both.
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

s-4

SIMPLY DELHI N FEBRUARY 2012

FEBRUARY 2012 N SIMPLY DELHI

s-5

SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story

Tips `n' Tricks
B Glass panes on

cabinets instead of solid wood make the room seem larger and give it a lighter feel. B Wipe glass panes with a wet cloth-- use absorbent tissue and newspaper to bring shine. B The countertop should be durable-- try granite as opposed to marble, which stains easily. B Add ceramic tiles behind and around the stove to make cleaning spills and splatters easier. B Ideally, you should not go beyond 2.5ft in length for drawers. If they're bigger, the weight may make them bend.

KITCHEN

Minimalist wonders
There is no love sincerer than the love of food. A kitchen is the best place in a home where you can give shape and form to this precious craving. But if you think that kitchens are nothing but four-walled rooms where essentials such as spices and appliances are kept, you are in for a reality check. Kitchens today are bold, cosy and the heart of a happy home. "Nowadays people are giving their kitchens importance, as compared to earlier times when most people just had basic kitchens with a slab and a stove. Today it is a well-designed corner of the house and sometimes the most expensive," says Ravinder Singh Virdi, Managing Director, Design Edge Pvt Ltd. "Kitchens are no longer a woman's domain; they have become a place where the entire family likes to cook, eat, and chat. So one should be careful while choosing a space for kitchen. Ideally, a rectangular kitchen works best," adds Virdi. Your kitchen design should allow

enough space for all the activities that take place in the kitchen. "Install gadgets or a professional style cooking range that's not only fuss-free but allows you to run around in the kitchen and do a lot of things at the same time," suggests Virdi. Stephanie Marshall, interior designer, Kohler Design Centre says, "Some cultures and locations lend themselves to particular designs. A professional style cooking range is suited for preparing elaborate meals, while a convection oven is good for baking and easy cooking." Proper lighting plays a major role in making your kitchen look spacious even if it is a space starved one. "Go for floor-to-ceiling glass walls wherever possible as these allow maximum sunlight. Or ensure that your kitchen has a lot of windows which allow sunlight to filter in. Using under-counter lights is another good option. And what complements this style of lighting is a combination of bold colours like red, green or orange with muted tones or earthy colours,"

says Virdi. Another smart way to make your kitchen look bigger is to hang mirrors. Small mirrors hung in stylish frames look beautiful and also amplify light, brightening your kitchen up. Next in line is how will you be using the space? For entertaining or dining as well? And what kind of cooking you do? It is tough to put things in place unless you are completely sure how it is going to function. Accordingly a layout can be created that works best for you. For instance, a large island for group preparation and serving a buffet, a raised counter for eating at and socialising, and a dual purpose sink with two wash bowls for tasks like washing vegetables and drying them. In entertainment-cum-cooking rooms, a primary sink and a preparation sink give you multiple locations to access water. Plan ahead and enjoy the benefits of a warm kitchen that becomes the nerve centre of your home.

s-6

SIMPLY DELHI N FEBRUARY 2012

SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story
away dumped books and clothes. A chest of drawers offers sufficient space for toys, and eventually clothes. Flooring for a child's room needs special attention and care. "Laminate flooring is affordable, looks attractive and is easy to clean. But make sure you get a scratch proof and stain resistant variety," says Naresh Maheshwari, CEO, Pergo India. To give an instant facelift to your kid's room, change the bedding. Linens, blankets and throws can be replaced from time to time to reflect what your youngster is `digging', be it pirouetting ballerinas or tough ball games. Beds which double up as sofas or have pull outs are perfect to house the little women and young lads who come by for sleepovers. Walls form the backdrop of your kid's territory. Add a touch of creativity and character with wall decals, without having to deal with pencil marks and paint splashes. A cheaper and more temporary investment than wallpaper, they allow you to pin up your fancies and peel them off once the craze wanes. "As your kids grow, change the wallpaper in the room from cartoon motifs to whatever it is that your child likes as he/she is growing up--maybe a jungle or a space theme. Go for bold colours like blue, green, red, orange and yellow when it comes to furniture. These are attractive and add brightness to the room," suggests Dimple Kohli, furniture designer and owner Quboid Design House. "A thought provoking environment is an ideal way to ensure a smooth transition from toddler to teen," she adds.

CHILDREN'S ROOM

Happy days
Children are not clingy, their troubles and fights are forgotten over a night of dreamy sleep as are their obsessions and heroes. It doesn't take them long to replace yesterday's idol or change their favourite colour from blue to purple. We know that keeping up with the young ones is not an easy feat but here is help to make sure that junior's room grows up with him. Toys strewn across the room, muddy shoes lying in a corner, missing crayons and forgotten bags; does all this sound too familiar? The only thing that grows faster than kids are their wants, so try and ensure that their rooms have sufficient space for it. Replace the monsters under the bed with storage space. Wool and wicker baskets are good for stashing

Tips`n' Tricks

B Decals or large graphic

outgrows them.
B Bookshelves that double

stickers are easy ways of expressing yourself in a room. These won't damage the paint and can easily be removed when your child

up as steps to an upper bunk, mini hammocks to lounge around on and sliding doors on wardrobes are

all good ideas as well as space savers. B Putting labels on pull out baskets, boxes and trunks will help them keep the place neat.

B Feeling creative? Use an old-fashioned projector to create the image of your choice on a wall. That definitely creates a brand new look.

s-8

SIMPLY DELHI N FEBRUARY 2012

Photograph courtesy WWW.URBANDECOR.COM

SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story
big this season. White, an eternal favourite for this domain, is being ditched in favour of stark hues while mundane textures of floors and walls have given way to unusual ornamentation and accents. Says Jean Noel Edouard, Head of product design, Nagina Waters, a Delhi-based luxury bathroom store that showcases highend brands like THG, Capponi and Baldi, "India is a land that's traditionally associated with ornamentation. So, going for bathroom fixtures and fittings that lack detailing or colour result in a bland, antiseptic look." Though classic themes with a bias towards a subdued colour palette will always have a fan following, experts are now encouraging you to include bright hues and decorative surfaces in your washroom hot list. Even the quirky bathroom fixtures give it a bold look. The bathroom storage unit has been updated with sleek, trendy pieces that are made of new-age materials like glass and acrylic. Or go for smart basin options installed in elegant countertops. "These counters are available in multiple colours and are fashioned out of wood, steel, stone, and acrylic polymers like corian and parapan," says Ashish Taneja, director of Zolijns, a Delhi-based store. Go for countertops in tones of red, orange, yellow and lime green. Metallic washbasins made of monolithic copper and bronze are also giving ordinary fixtures a not-so-gentle nudge out of stores.

BATHROOM

Luxury meets utility
"It's too good for the likes of me. I shall be afraid to touch anything. I ain't a duchess yet, you know," exclaimed the Cockney-accented flower vendor Eliza Doolittle in My Fair Lady, when ushered into a fancy bathroom. Times have changed since then and baths have acquired an even more formidable reputation. Enlivened with animated colours, elaborate fixtures and wainscoting, this is a space that's being reinterpreted every day. So washroom snobs, you can surely do better than the clinical white number that was once a staple. Design professionals are rooting for an over-the-top shade card as bold is

Tips `n' Tricks
B Use anti skid patches in the bathtub and other wet areas, and floor mats with suction to prevent slippery surfaces. B Place flower stems in the bathroom with burning incense-- the fragrance will add a wonderful feel to your space. B Install grab bars in the shower/tub areas, toilet area and near the sink. B Consider using handles for doors and fixtures instead of round knobs--these are tough to grasp when your hand is wet.

s-10

SIMPLY DELHI N FEBRUARY 2012

SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story

Tips`n' Tricks

DINING ROOM

Delightful dinners
Even before the food you serve at your dining table becomes a conversation starter, the décor can bring in a host of complements your way. Says interior designer and owner of Design House, Sachin Gupta, "A contemporary look with woodwork and straight lines work well for modern, minimalistic homes while English style furniture with wood in-lays and oriental carvings look good in a classic setup." He adds, "Play around with a variety of materials and finishes--use lacquer, brocades, semiprecious stones and mirror embellishments." Lighting in the dining area can also pep up the mood. Low hung glass lamps over the dining table are

interesting, as are stylised lamps shaped like a leaf or a pattern of your choice. Also consider unconventionally designed or funky wall clocks. Add more zing with trendy tableware in rich colours of ruby and mandarin blue, adding an Oriental flavour to your room. Geometric prints are eye catching, especially when teemed with bold colours. If your table top is covered with glass, opt for table mats that come in a variety of materials ranging from cotton to leather and bamboo. Bring out bright runners with tassels, fringes and decorative threads to cover up the consoles in the dining area. A crystal vase with fresh flowers adds instant charm to the table and candles are a sure-shot mood lifter.

B Place your herb plants near the kitchen window so you can pluck what you need while cooking. B Decorative pots and baskets suspended from

window ledges make the facade of your house stand out. Flowering perennials paired with trailing plants will have a dramatic effect.

B Bamboo is a hardy plant that prospers even in restricted spaces. A deep window box is just the thing you need for a small bamboo grove.

Tips`n' Tricks

BEDROOM

Practically pretty
Are sensational bedrooms the stuff your dreams are made of? If so, there's help at hand. Interior designers are now creating glamorous bedrooms with exotic themes, vintage furniture and luxurious linen. There are dozens of themes to choose from, but the idea is to keep things streamlined. Clearly, the bedroom has moved up the pecking order, morphing into a high-octane personal retreat with design flourishes. Décor experts are all for a minimalist décor which is one way of preventing a multi-functional bedroom from looking cluttered. "White is a classic choice and for the coming

summers, embroidered textures, layering, soft patchwork and techniques in white work the best," says Sarita Handa, textile expert and owner of the brand Sarita Handa. "Even orange is a great hit for spring summer. One can go to extremes and try a total orange look in the room or add some orange accent pillows and accessories to brighten up the room," suggests Handa. Furniture makes the bedroom look complete. So, it is wise to invest in pieces like beds with nice headboards, sofas, side tables, comfortable seats and cocktail tables. "A nice occasional chair done up with a beautiful fabric to accessorise the room is a good idea," says Handa. B If you have artworks in your bedroom, go for walls in muted shades or decorate them with black and white family photographs, mirrors and clocks.

Breath of fresh air
Residents of space-starved apartments have found a way to brighten up drab rooms--they are growing gardens in boxes. It's a neat gardening idea that works well. What's more, this gardening concept does not restrict itself to windows. The idea can be stretched to include the entire facade of the house. A motley bunch of climbers and seasonal blooms clambering over walls add a great deal of spunk to an uninspiring exterior. So, here are a few handy tips for urban green thumbs eager to convert their window into a planter's paradise. Delhi-based hortculturist Satish Mathur tells us how. Container call: Wooden containers shaped like tubs, troughs or halfbarrels hold moisture quite well and hence, need less watering. Ideally, a window box should be customised to fit the space available and have a width and depth of at least 20cm. Secure it right: Consider the weight of the box before securing it

GARDEN

B Make sure there are enough plug points and table surfaces which allow you to play with lowlevel lighting.

B Use reflective decorative plates instead of placemats for a chic look. B Old photo frames can be repainted and hung in an

interesting arrangement to make for inexpensive wall art. B Dress up your chairs in colours of your choice--

the brighter the better. Keep the table stark by using a black glass top-- this will add to the overall impact.

Tips`n' Tricks

B Accent walls, or a wall

that is a strikingly different colour from the rest of the walls can brighten a room. Use a high gloss paint for this.

B Bookshelves work great as utilitarian room dividers. B Border wallpaper adds an interesting touch to a room. B If you want to replace the

flooring, you can go for wallto-wall carpets as they are less expensive than wood. B Invest in good quality reading lights, mood lights and lamps.

to your window ledge. The window ledge should also be sturdy enough to support the weight. Plant passion: Prepare the boxes for planting when they are already fastened to the ledge so that you don't have to haul a box of soil all the way to the window. Lay broken crockery at the bottom of the box, ideally at a depth of 1.3cm. This will prevent the soil from being washed out through the drainage holes. Splash of colour: Though gardeners swear by lush foliage, colour provided by seasonal flowers is a sight for sore eyes. It's wise to create a verdant base for the window box using shrubs, conifers and trailing plants like Hedera helix (variegated ivy), Wedelia urticaefolia or any light-growing climbers like Jasmine. Try and plant something new each season so that your windows look arresting every single day of the year.
IText and photographs by India Today Home (with inputs from Ekta Marwaha, Shilpa Mehta and Ekta Alreja)

s-12

SIMPLY DELHI N FEBRUARY 2012

