SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

In the City
RESTAURANT

STORE
City based designer, Sarita Handa has launched her exclusive lifestyle and boutique store in Delhi. Located in Khan Market, the store offers designer accessories and ornaments for various parts of your home. Plush cushion covers, bed linens, cream drapes and an assortment of gift boxes are amongst the items on offer here. Price Rs 250 onward At 16, 1st floor, Khan Market Tel 43521824

House this!

Take it easy
A vibrant, modern establishment that caters to Guragon's crowd looking for a leisurely meal, Cafe Bel Cibo is like an extension of your living room--literally! Decorated with art works from the owner Aftab Sidhu's own living room, the space has a comfortable, homely feel. The same warmth is reflected in their Italian menu which consists of fresh salads, thin crust pizzas, pastas and sandwiches. We had their baked penne mozzarella pasta which had an Indian twist to it--served with pav and cooked in red sauce that is reminiscent of our local bhaji. For a traditional Italian flavour, try the seafood risotto and ravioli di
CHANDERDEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

SPA

Wheels to heal
Dying for a long, relaxing massage, but don't feel upto making a trip to the spa? No worries--all you need to do is give Tatha Mobile Spa a call and they will send their trained therapist who will create a wonderful spa ambience in the comfort of your home. They carry all the equipment required, including fresh linen, soft towels, a massage table and aromatherapy candles. The spa treatment includes a body massage, body scrub/body wrap, facial therapy, hand treatment and foot massage. The rituals are customised according to your zodiac sign, which aims to effectively restore the imbalances in your body. Price Rs 6,000 plus taxes Book your spa at 9953600088

ONLINE

Eyes on you
Popular eyewear store GKB Optical has launched their online store, gkboptical.com. The website provides an online space for purchasing eye wear from various brands and a large spectrum of price ranges, with over 5,000 products slated to be available online. Features such as a virtual mirror, where users can upload their photo and try on a range of eye wear and a face shape guide are set to add excitement to your online shopping experience. Products bought through the website can also be serviced at any of the 60 GKB retail stores across the country. A cash-on-delivery option is also available. Price Rs 400 onward; gkboptical.com

OFFBEAT

Dated
margo, which are both flavorful and wellcooked. Save room for their chocolate lava cake, which is a sinful, sweet ending to your meal. The banana mascarpone dessert is also worth a try. Catering to your young`uns is their special menu which boasts of pizzas with toppings of their choice, shakes, nuggets and homemade ice-creams. Bring your kids on a Sunday afternoon for activities such as book readings, movie screenings and art workshops. Average meal for two Rs 850 plus taxes Where 17-18, Ninex City Mart, Ground Floor, Next to Fortune Hotel, Sohna Road, Gurgaon I by Shilpa Mehta Tel 0124 4231492 Having just launched his tenth fine art calendar, this time photographer Rohit Chawla has found inspiration in Mexican artist Frida Kahlo's art. For this limited edition calendar for the Bird Group, Chawla has photographed 12 distinguished women from various walks of life--Bollywood actresses Konkana Sen Sharma, Neha Dhupia, writer Kalli Poorie and artist Anjolie Ela Menon amongst others--in a never seen before avatar. Styled by designer Sabyasachi Mukherjee, the ladies are all uni-browed and dressed in keeping with the theme. The props that are used in each photograph deceptively look either superimposed or photo-shopped. However, they are all real, tangible products, especially made in 3D so as to not look flat in the photographs. "One of the most significant artists of the 20th century, Frida has been my most enduring love. This homage is for us to bring her into our minutes, our days , our hours" says Chawla of his muse.

s-16

SIMPLY DELHI N FEBRUARY 2012

SIMPLY DELHI
STUFF

Buzz

Just a call away
Gift your loved one a Smartphone from Porsche Design and RIM this Valentine's Day. Called the P'9981, the Smartphone will be available in a silver grey hue. The first phone that has been launched by Porsche Design, features include a 2.8 inch touch screen and HD quality video recording. Price On request At Porche Design, Shop 201A, 1st floor, Vasant Kunj

Sinful delight
This Valentine's Day express your love with Bagels and Brownies special designer cakes. Choose from heart shaped cakes in dark or white chocolate, fruit flavours or even alcohol filled cakes--and add a personalised message on top. Also available are heart shaped chocolates with fruit infusions. Apart from this you can stop by at any of their outlets to relish their much talked about bagels with a cuppa coffee. Enjoy! Price Rs 1,299 for a one kg cake. At Bagel's Cafe outlets across the city; bagelsandbrownies.com

Hand crafted
With Valentine's Day just a heartbeat away, Jugaad Factory, makers of bespoke goods, launches its new collection of hand crafted and personalised products. Jugaad Factory gives you a number of gifting options from its inimitable array of home décor, apparels and accessories. Price On request At S-111/9 Kishan Garh, Aruna Asif Ali Marg, Vasant Kunj Tel 46063734

Shirty affair
This Valentine's Day dress up in shirts with floral motifs, which are part of the newly launched Van Laack shirts collection. The Dutch designer label has released shirts to fit the mood, with an extensive range of bright prints and Oriental motifs. Price On request At Emporio Mall, Store 225, First Floor Nelson Mandela Marg, Vasant Kunj; vanlaack.de

Bedazzled
City based jewellers, Minawala, are launching their new Bejewelled collection on the eve of Valentine's Day. The collection includes exquisite diamonds and rubies crafted in modern designs and rubies embedded in white gold. Price On request At 230, Vasant Kunj , DLF Promenade; minawala.com

Watch it!
Designer label Fossil has reintroduced their Stella line of watches. Crafted in lustrous aluminum, these timepieces are designed to always look in vogue, whether at office or at the club. Price Rs 9,495 onward At Select Lifestyle, Shoppers Stop, Helios and Ethos outlets

