BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

BREAD AND BRAND IN HONG KONG
Mao Zedong resurrected China's geography up to Tibet eudalism was spacious. Capitalism is priapic. Communism was dogmatic. Democracy is, alas, to the west, but was strangely circumspect about a tiny isa bit chaotic.The world's postage stamp for capitalism, land to the east. Mao's ideology did not need Hong Kong Hong Kong, keeps rising: my highrise is bigger than yours. but, in a twist of history that might have left a corkscrew The pride of real estate is no longer a mansion sprawling embarrassed, Mao's successor, Deng Xiaoping, did. Deng around a mountain peak, gated in faux colonial gold, saved China from turning into a family business and reinbut an officious perpendicular structure that does what vented it instead as a Communist corporation. He so many cousins across the world merely claim but shrewdly blindsided dogma by turning a mirror on prosperity. Hong Kong became a spur, not a slur. Deng opened never achieve. It scrapes the skies. The dukes of this new royalty sit among the clouds. the doors when China's per capita income was $300 and Finance is not fond of metaphors. Its nose is hard. Its heart Hong Kong's $10,000, and the world changed. Deng upturned Mao's recipe of cadre and struggle is immune to bleeding. Its eyes are beady. But it does encourage ego. It might count money with a microscope but into meritocracy and stability. He set the theme for the new mandarin bureaucracy: popular welfare before peopurchases the sky with abandon. Hong Kong was the second city of the British Raj. ple's will. He fashioned four spaces of graded reward. The Calcutta was the first and, as capital of the empire, fulcrum dominant space belonged to the mandarin, a ruling elite of its fortunes. The worst mistake that the British made with defined rules of promotion and stately lifestyle. Then was to shift the epicentre of their authority from Calcutta came the heady set of state-protected entrepreneurs to Delhi in 1911. They actually reached Delhi only a granted private sector joys of ownership, flashy toys decade-plus later; within two more decades an empire and permissible levels of corruption. A bedazzled middle built over two centuries was gone. By 1947 the British class, which had watched its parents punished and humilseemed almost relieved to depart, because they knew that iated in the Cultural Revolution, bought into this new social geometry with amazement at its good fortune. The India was a responsibility as much as an occupation. If Calcutta was a need, Hong Kong was a passion last reservation was a gradually expanding space on the that seemed beyond the logic of decline. I can only margin for the poor. This formula's success reinforced the speculate on the reasons. Perhaps Calcutta was a mere deep mandarin contempt for democracy, which not only capital, while Hong Kong was a club. The British had threw up an odd assortment of heroes and crooks, but also had the temerity to threaten the divine to co-exist in Calcutta, a tension SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com mandarin right to rule. which ratcheted up by the decade as Hong Kong, instead of offering a traIndian aspiration became the uninditional kowtow to Beijing after British tended consequence of British educadeparture, turned into a plucky tion. But they could be aloof in Hong guardian of the fifth space, democracy. Kong, and manage its cosmopolitan Beijing, which had assimilated capitalneeds through mechanisms so dear to ism without much fuss, is troubled, anthe British sense of order, like elections gered and fascinated by Hong Kong's to the club committee. continuing commitment to oddities like India required a succession of earls free speech. Patience is a mandarin and viscounts who kept the front door virtue. Beijing believes it can whittle open for gentry and left an entrance for away democracy in the same way it tradesmen. India's ancien regime unsabotaged Maoism, by retaining the derstood the uses of snobbery. But the shell but gutting the content. Pesky mainland Chinese mandarin had no deHong Kong, however, will not surrensire for social or any other form of intercourse with kilts and top hats who The British had to co-exist der. You can hear democracy in the sold in currency and bought in shares. in Calcutta. But they could spring of its step, or the chatter of its radio waves. Beijing depends on time. Opium eater adopted a minimalist approach to opium seller, even while the be aloof in Hong Kong, and But time does not come dressed in manage its cosmopolitan guarantees. It is a foxy delivery boy. You slow poison induced both self-loathing and hatred for the foreign devil. China needs through mechanisms never know what it might bring. It seems strange to quote the Bible had once rejoiced in the glories of a so dear to the British sense in China, but we will find out whether good emperor, and suffered the degraof order, like elections to the mandarin can live by bread and dations of a bad, but hallucination was brand alone. a new form of rule. I the club committee.

F

FEBRUARY 20, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

50

