Soc iety FASHION

Transparent eco-friendly fabrics, androgynous cuts and vintage colours comprise the look for 2012

Sheer Comfort
ALLTHATSKIN
Ritu Kumar champions the transparent movement in fabrics, signalling the growing confidence of India's youth.

GO GREEN
Wendell Rodricks leads the environmental charge in design and sustainable materials with his acclaimed aquatic collection.
By Varoon P. Anand

ONE UP ON MEN
Namrata Joshipura kicks off a debate on whether androgyny can work for the Indian frame and market.

COMFORTOVER STYLE
Tarun Tahiliani typifies a movement towards an easier-on-the-skin fit with broader cuts, elevated waistlines and lighter fabrics.

LIFE IN ARETRO
Abraham & Thakore reinvent the swinging 1950s with figure flattering curved lines, vintage colours and longer lengths.

t's eight degrees Celsius in the open courtyard of the Aman hotel in Delhi. A collection of the Capital's most delicately dressed ignores the chill with generous swigs of the sponsor's vodka concoctions. The shivering frames bring the bright floral prints, slated to be a big hit this spring/summer, to swaying life. In the basement, Ashish Soni, 42, is marking 20 years since the launch of his eponymous brand with a lavish retrospective of some of his pieces shown at fashion weeks in London, New York, and Paris. Upstairs at the hotel, star designers who are showing at this year's LIFW--David Abraham, Rohit Bal, Varun Bahl, J.J. Valaya--are jostling for a bit of the pre-show brio to rub off on their collections, surrounded by an assortment of lesser-known television celebrities, statuesque eastern European clothes horses and a few new models. The 138-designer-strong, Fashion Design Council of India (FDCI)-backed Wills Lifestyle India Fashion Week (WIFW) at Delhi's Pragati Maidan from February 15-19, the year's first of more than 14 (and counting) fashion weeks, introduces us to the looks for this spring/summer. If attention is anything to go by, Abraham is most likely to set the tone for the year. The Singapore-born, Bangaloreraised 57-year-old, part of the designer duo Abraham & Thakore, began the year with a tribute to 1950s Broadway with a collection presented at the Chivas Studio, a popular decade to revisit in times of economic crises. While designer

I

Soc iety FASHION
Swapnil Shinde did the same in 2008, Abraham & Thakore may have timed their collection better as the desire for more curves, tiny waist, and full hips takes centrestage. The continued assertion of women in the Indian workforce leads to two dramatic changes in pret collections this year. The first is that comfort will take precedence over style. "Layered cuts will be in. You will see them in the form of tunics, tights, and gilet jackets with chunnis and scarves," says design legend Ritu Kumar. Abraham weighs in, "Shapes are getting easier, much more fluid after the closely fitted silhouettes of the past few seasons." Another united call for transparency has been echoed in the movement towards the use of sheer fabrics this year. Silks, chiffons, and lace seductively reveal what they sheath, stating plainly that there, really, is nothing to hide. The bold choice is likely to appear on the sleeves of the youth as a personal expression of identity and honesty. Carrying off a piece that shows more of you indicates a growing confidence and assertion of sexual freedom and power among urban youth. As trend forecaster Harilein Sabarwal puts it, "Transparents are the real you emerging in the fake status world." The choice of models for this year's WIFW is already courting a fair bit of controversy with eight of the 11 new models light-skinned. Is it a calculated move to woo western buyers by demonstrating that Indian designs and silhouettes can appeal to Western form and aesthetics? Or is a latent colour bias at work here? Fashion choreographer Vidyun Singh, one of the selectors, dismisses the controversy. "It's more indicative of the fact that LIFW has become an appealing stop for foreign talent. Models are chosen purely based on the requirements of the collection." The logical corollary, then, is that majority of the collections were designed to fit a lighter skin tone. The prevalence of eastern European models such as Mariana Pendrak, Klaudie Kovacova, Iana Zakharova, Mariia Chernakoych, Inna Dalievska and other unpronounceable names is a testament to India's never-fading fetish for fair skin. But the beauty who has created the biggest buzz is a homegrown one. Dayana Eerappa, 21, the towering 5'11'' leggy beauty from Bangalore, is being courted by titans such as Abraham & Thakore, Gupta, Tahiliani and several others presenting this year at LIFW. She has managed to land herself a spot on both the WIFW and Lakme Fashion Week runways, a feat that is usually the prerogative of well-established models. With models more interested in Bollywood than the catwalk, and designers more concerned with foreign markets than reaching the Indian consumer, is Indian fashion cross-eyed? Sunil Sethi, FDCI president, wants to build on the Rs 25 crore-plus from October 2011's WIFW for spring/summer, even inviting three designers from Japan to present a Tokyo Fashion Week. In 2011, Rodricks received a staggering $200,000 (Rs 1 crore) order after his `Himalayan Live Natural' collection which, unfortunately, later went abegging. We'll know soon if this time around, Indian fashion can give us more than a show. 

he second is the rise of androgyny, which has sparked a debate over maintaining an Indian aesthetic versus catering to Western markets. Delhi-based fashion maven Tarun Tahiliani, 47, does not believe a gender-neutral collection would ever work for India. "Power dressing and power shoulders are all fashionably here, but I don't think this is true or will ever be true to the Indian silhouette or the sari since the Indian aesthetic has always been more feminine." Goa-based designer Wendell Rodricks agrees: "Donning a man's suit or cutting her hair short is alien to Indian women. I can't see the trend stick." Ironically, Rodricks's `Moonlight Beach' collection, presented in October 2011 for WIFW Spring/Summer 2012, focused on "androgyny and a signature fluid style". Mannoj Mehra, founder of high-end retailer Study By Janak, says, "Customers are ready to experiment with the opposite sex's wardrobe pieces. It's not only girls hijacking their boyfriend's closet for an oversized coat. Even guys are sneaking into the girl's closet for scarves to pep up their ensemble." Rodricks's August 2011 `Himalayan Live Natural' collection showcases the environmental theme which is making a large impact this year as well, especially in terms of soothing colours and natural materials. "We will see a lot of depth in colours. Deep hues with industrial elements like teal, indigo, deep red, dirty pink, strobe effects will find reflection in design collection," says budding designer Gaurav Jai Gupta, who bagged trade body International Apparel Federation's Most Commercial Collection award in Mexico in October 2011 for his hand-woven natural materials.

T

THE MODEL CREATING THE BIGGEST BUZZAT THE FASHION WEEK IS TOWERING 5'11''BEAUTY DAYANA EERAPPA,21, FROM BANGALORE.

72

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

