In terview SHIMON PERES

"Greatest single centre of terror is Iran"
AP PHOTO

way. Since there are no more national economies, only a global economy, it's not a change of ideas but of situation. Because, you see, until now the world used to be defined by geography. Land is real estate, tangible. You know the nature of the land, size of the products, calculate the national resources. The minute science replaced land, finished. Science doesn't have borders and science doesn't have presidents. Everything is new. How can you define modern reality merely in terms of nations? A young boy of 27, who didn't have an army, didn't have a party, didn't have a police force, nobody

38

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

,,

When, 20 years ago, India and Israel normalised relations, no one could have predicted the proximity that has evolved. Trade and cooperation are the least part of the story. The glue is defence: Israel has become India's most reliable supplier of arms and the two nations have embarked upon an ambitious partnership in arms production. It is not widely known, however, that Israel first offered India arms in the aftermath of the 1962 war with China, which exposed the fragility of India's defence preparedness. Jawaharlal Nehru, according to Israeli sources, apparently was willing to accept these weapons, as long as they did not come under the Israeli flag. Israel refused. In 1953, Shimon Peres, now president of Israel, became the youngest ever Director-General of the Ministry of Defense at the age of 29. He became a minister in 1959. He has seen it all, and today, in his 80s, would like few things more than a state visit to India. Delhi remains reluctant, although in January, S.M. Krishna made the first official visit as a foreign minister. Things are changing, but not enough to persuade Delhi to invite Peres. Peres was too polite to mention this in an exclusive interview with INDIA TODAY Editorial Director M.J. AKBAR in January in the informal environment of his home in Jerusalem. But he did confirm that Israel had offered India arms in 1962--and Nehru refused the offer. Q. Did Israel offer India weapons after the 1962 war with China and did Nehru refuse the offer? A. Yes. Yes. There were three things. Nehru was by spirit a democrat, by inclination pro-Russian and still connected with England. He had proposed Mountbatten to be the president of India. [Editor's note: The position was that of governor-general of India, which Mountbatten accepted.] Q. He did. But we had a dominion status between 1947 and January 1950. Technically, we were not free.

A. Yes. Nehru had called upon all the English administrators to stay on in India. So it was a very mixed policy, very complicated. And, I think, because he belonged to the Non-aligned... whose heroes were Nehru, Nasser and Tito, and Chou en Lai... [he found it difficult to establish relations with Israel]. Q. During his January visit to Israel, India's Foreign Minister S.M. Krishna made a statement, after his meeting with Israel's prime minister, that the efforts of natural allies like India and Israel should be to checkmate and ultimately eradicate terrorists. But did they discuss who is a terrorist? A. We did discuss. And we identified them--terrorists you don't know, and the terrorists you know. Today, the most terrorist country, openly, is Iran. Let's not talk about the nuclear story and Iran. Iran's Hezbollah is destroying Lebanon, the Hamas is destroying Palestine. And just now in Thailand the Hezbollah were caught, for trying to kill some Israelis there. The greatest single centre of terror today is Iran and all sorts of organisations are coming from there. But the problem today is the following: it is a war between the forces of democracy who have the will and support of the people. But to terrorise, you don't need that. I saw how difficult it was for India to mobilise its democratic spirit, to fight terrorism, which is anti-democratic. It does not respect law. It almost killed all the members of your Parliament. Q. Yes. December 13... But did you convince India that Iran is a terrorist country or one that supports terrorism? India, as you know, has very good relations with Iran. A. I didn't try. I knew India had good relations with Iran. But I think we have to fight dangers, and not enemies, in the new world. Terror has become global. It doesn't necessarily carry a flag. And the problem for all countries is that globality is embarrassing nationalism, in a

We have to fight dangers, not enemies, in the new world. Terror has become global. It doesn't necessarily carry a flag.

knows anything about him and he doesn't know anything about himself... until he creates Facebook. He builds an empire, which has not only an economic impact but a social effect. Nobody forecast it, neither Adam Smith nor Karl Marx. They would have been surprised. So we live not in a world of the known, but a world of the unknown. Q. This is fascinating in the con-

text of changing nature of war. But just to get back to India-Israel relationship: if we do not have a common definition of terrorism, how do we cooperate? Would India cooperate against Hamas, who are terrorists in your eyes but not in India's? A. The world we live in today, informal relations are better than diplomatic relations. The intelligence service is

,,

more efficient than diplomatic relations in fighting terror. Since terror is not a national agenda but a phenomena, and it's global, and it's intelligent and modern, and it can appear to have a place and cause if it can create unbelievable damage. So we have to cooperate, in preventing, by informing, by warning against terror attacks... You don't want something to happen in a hotel in India or your Parliament... Israel had unfortunate problems: lack in agriculture, where we had nothing; and in security, we had too much. So we have had to be specialists. So far as we are concerned, India is first of all a culture. You must understand that India is sophisticated, it has vision, legends, it's not something dry that can be contained within the diplomatic psyche. To give you a simple example, most of our children are going to India... It brings them a sense of spiritual affinity. And now I see, in a way, Gandhi was a prophet. Prophets are now more important than kings. So we feel an affinity. Q. Does Mossad's intelligence help India in Kashmir? A. I wouldn't know. If I did I would not answer (laughs). Intelligence is not my domain. We can give advice on how to defend life, about home security. Q. I asked that because one of the most important terrorist groups involved in the attack against India consistently, the Lashkar-e-Toiba, whose leader sits in Lahore, has identified India, Israel and America as his three principal enemies. Strategic relations are formed not on the basis of friendships but on the basis of common enemies. Have the terrorists brought India and Israel together? A. It's a nice theory but I don't think it works. The new definition is not enemies but dangers. Q. Do you see Pakistan's nuclear bomb as a danger to you? A. Look, the problem is who will control it (the Pakistan bomb)? Bombs don't shoot themselves. For example,

FEBRUARY 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

In terview SHIMON PERES
if Switzerland had the bomb, I am not sure many people would worry. But when North Korea has a bomb, it becomes a problem. So it depends very much on who is in control in Pakistan. Q. But Pakistan has called its bomb an Islamic bomb rather than a Pakistani bomb. What are the implications of that definition? A. Look around the world. They are too small for it. Also I have to say, what does `Islam' want? To conquer land, to destroy nations? I can understand Allah, but it's more difficult for me to understand those who misuse His name. Allah's message is friendship, love and understanding. And so when you ask, what is a Muslim, I say, what is the politics of those Muslims? Q. Do you see Pakistan falling under the grip of the ultra orthodox or extremists? A. I am not sure, because the prescriptions extremists offer to Muslim men and women are counterproductive. Take the Middle East and take Pakistan as well. The real problem is not politics but poverty, lack of food, jobs. And now if they begin to punish themselves, beginning with not giving equal rights to women, then what's the state for? I mean, the idea that money alone can bring an answer to poverty is not right. India was saved neither by Russian money nor American money but by an internal change that was profound. So when you talk about Muslims I say, ok, what sort of Muslims? I don't see any contradiction between science and Islam. But what is holding back many countries in the Middle East are husbands! They don't want to give rights to their women. They don't have women as equals in government. I can live with it. But for their own sake they have to have gender equality. If you do not do that, you are going to be poor. And Islam hasn't said anything that discriminates against women. Q. Isn't Israel also slipping from gender equality, thanks to the rise of the ultra orthodox factions? Today's Jerusalem Post has a story that they want to stop women singing. A. They are a tiny little minority. You are in the business of papers. I would say (about the story) that it was there and stop being suspicious. That would be a catastrophe for us. Your suspicion is our deterrent." Q. Do you think through Natanz and its nuclear programme Iran has also created a zone of uncertainty? A: What for? They don't need it. Israel is threatened... even by Iran. Who threatens Iran? They don't have to have it. We have had to and we did it with a great deal of restraint and understanding. [Editor's note: The implication is, creating uncertainty.] Q. At what point do you think this Iran situation could hit critical mass? Would, for instance, closing the Hormuz straits by Iran be a casus belli for war? A. We don't send our forces to Hormuz. But America cannot permit it, England cannot permit it, nobody can permit it. The Hormuz straits is an international oilway and nobody can be permitted to stop this lifeline. Q. Were you surprised by the Arab Spring? A. I don't want to boast but I was sure it would happen. There is this spring in the world and you cannot come to spring in winter clothes. It's a new world. What happened is the young generation were more educated and used modern equipment... and said, look, we are bored, we don't have jobs, we don't know what to do with ourselves, wasting our time and life on dictatorship, on corruption... Q. How do you analyse the consequences? Again to quote Barak, he says he finds the rise of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt is worrisome for Israel. A. First of all, Israel cannot dictate what's happening in Egypt. But if the Brotherhood is a threat, the young Egyptian generation is a hope. I don't think it's a clash of civilisations. I think it is a clash of generations. I am sure the young generation in Egypt will win because the old generation doesn't know how to meet the basic needs of its own people. For us, the better their options are, the better a neighbour we shall have. We don't have any hate towards Arabs because they are Arabs, to Muslims because they are Muslims. The world has globalised economically and it's also globalised intellectually. I think, for example, globalisation will eventually end racism. Q. Absolutely. But the young are also changing the nature of conflict-- Internet attacks have been launched from Saudi Arabia. A. Yes. But before that we have also had an Internet where the young-- Israeli, Arabs, Palestinians--are chatting. Peacefully. So these are the two faces of the Internet, you see. Q. Has the Internet become the instrument of insecurity now? A. It has become a great problem because we depend so much on electronics. And electronics is running almost every corner of our lives. So I believe in the next ten years, electronics will be replaced by biology. Q. The brain? A. I mean, you can make computers with brain, like biological elements. The coming 10 years will be revolutionary years. Q. Why is Israel so certain Syria's Bashar al-Assad's days are over? A. Basically there's a limit to a killer. They kill too much. People call him to resign. He kills. Today, dictators are living in terrible conditions, because they have lost three things: they cannot blind the people. There are too many instruments against blindness. They cannot hang on to the wealth of their citizens because they cannot bluff anymore. And they cannot hang on to their own army, which doesn't want to shoot its own citizens. So I don't see a great future for dictators. And the president of Syria is a dictator, a killer. 

The prescriptions extremists offer are counterproductive. The real problem is not politics but poverty, lack of food, jobs.

the strength of the sensation and not the size of the danger. Q. The Economist says in its December 10 issue that orthodox Jews form 40 per cent of the ruling coalition of the country. And 40 per cent of the new army officers are combat soldiers. That is not tiny. A. It's not the case. The ones against women are may be 3 per cent of the 40 per cent. I mean, the newspapers don't distinguish between them. The extreme ones have several hundred or several thousand members, that's it. But it's sensational. It gets headlines. Q. Do you see Iran as an existential threat to Israel? A. I see Iran as a threat to the whole world. I wouldn't like to monopolise! Look, they don't even give us priority. They are impolite! They say, if the greatest Satan is America, we (Israel) are just second. They abuse, discriminate. I think many Arab countries are trembling because Iran is ambitious. They want to be the hege-

mon of the Middle East in the name of religious control. Q. Israel's Defence Minister Ehud Barak said that he gives Iran about nine months to have the bomb ready. Does that make war inevitable? [Editor's note: On February 15, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad inaugurated three new nuclear projects and said, "The list of acts of aggression the arrogant powers of the world have done are inexhaustible. They have looted the world."] A. I think there are other avenues. They don't have to start with the military. I am not talking about just Israel. I am talking about the whole world. Sanctions are beginning to act. The problem in Iran is not the bomb but the nature of the government. The problem is not just that they are trying to build a bomb but trying to destroy. They hanged 600 people this year without trial. And after that they said they were homosexuals. They kill. They send terrorists even to South America. See the instance of the

,,

FOREIGN MINISTER S.M. KRISHNA (RIGHT) WITH ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU
GETTY IMAGES

40

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

,,

S.M. KRISHNA WITH BENJAMIN NETANYAHU

Saudi diplomat they wanted to kill. They are killers. They are bluffing. Look, for me, at my age, in my experience, I think Iran is the symbol of corruption. Q. Surely you mean the government, not the people. Would Iran be acceptable if there was a regime change? A. Why should I answer that? I think, we have to realise that if there's a regime change maybe they won't make the bombs. Q. Is security the rationale for the Israeli bomb? A. What happened is, we built our nuclear reactor base. Then we announced that Israel has built a nuclear option, not in order to have a Hiroshima but an Oslo. Israel will be a power centre for scientific research. Amr Moussa, the Egyptian politician and diplomat, one day came to me and said, "Why don't you take me to the nuclear reactor near Dimona?" I said, "Are you crazy? You will see our people laughing

