Signature
R O U G H

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

IT'S A REAL DOGFIGHT
black cat crossing your path signifies that the animal is going somewhere,'' A Groucho Marx said wisely. No, no, not for a minute am I alluding to Beni Prasad Verma, though the Congress already seems to have found in him a scapegoat for a possible defeat in Uttar Pradesh. But we have been having a rather wild time in the run-up to the Assembly elections, haven't we? There's the elephant, which is either shrouded in tarpaulin or on the rampage in Rahul Gandhi's speeches. There's the barsati maindak, which is what Priyanka Gandhi Vadra is compared to every time there is an election. Her loyal brother claims he is a bigger frog. There's even a BJP minister from Bihar who has compared the all-party wooing of Muslim voters to dogs fighting over a bone. And yes, we know a certain Supreme Leader shed crocodile tears when news of the Batla House firings was broken to her. Perhaps it is because we are living in an Orwellian world where pigs are running the farm. Or perhaps it's just that the long election is testing everyone's baser instincts. But animal similes are everywhere. The Caste Iron Lady describes anyone with a legitimate grievance as the Opposition's paltu kutta (pet dog). The Princeling is worried about the elephant's cash-rich diet. The Safari-clad CEO insists Congressmen are fighting like donkeys. And there is bound to be horse-trading in a hung Assembly. Now, I am no animal lover, but I do protest this verbal abuse of animals and I insist that PETA investigate. Why should Nitin Gadkari compare the amiable donkey to squabbling Congressmen? The only burden they have ever borne is that of dynasty. If Gadkari had read Animal Farm he would not use it as a pejorative--the donkey lives the longest and also has the luxury of a foul temper. Why should Priyanka Gandhi be compared to the charmless frog? Indian politics is in dire need of star power and she provides welcome relief from the tyranny of khadi-clad claptrap. So with apologies to George Orwell, here are my own favourite comparisons. Pigs will not be mentioned but we all know who Snowball and Napoleon are. A clue: Napoleon even employs a taster, called Pinkeye. Moses, The Raven That would be Digvijaya Singh. He knows the answers to all questions including the location of Sugarcandy Mountain where everyone goes if they work hard enough for the Family. Muriel, The Old Goat That would be Beni Prasad Verma, the only one who can read the writing on the wall. Boxer, The Horse Akhilesh Yadav. He's dedicated, kind, respectable, and always willing to work harder. The Hen Babu Singh Kushwaha, the BSP rebel. Like the hens in Animal Farm, he seems to have protested when asked to lay even more eggs. The Sheep Uma Bharati. She can be relied upon to follow blindly and shout endlessly. The Squealer Any senior Congressman. In Orwell's world, he is a brilliant talker who can turn black into white. Benjamin, The Donkey That's us, the voter. We live long, are thoroughly cynical, and believe that life is inherently tough.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

WHY SHOULD PRIYANKA GANDHI BE COMPARED TO THE CHARMLESS FROG? INDIAN POLITICS IS IN DIRE NEED OF STAR POWER AND SHE PROVIDES WELCOME RELIEF FROM THE TYRANNY OF KHADICLAD CLAPTRAP.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Noted Urdu poet and Jnanpith winner Akhlaq Mohammed Khan, popularly known as Shahryar, in Aligarh. The 76year-old poet was suffering from cancer.
SHAHRYAR

FOUND DEAD Iconic US singer and actor Whitney Houston, 48, at a Beverly Hills hotel room. She was the most honoured female artist of all time, garnering 415 awards according to Guinness World Records. ANNOUNCED Former Australian first-class

pacer Joe Dawes, 41, as India's new bowling coach. He will replace South African Eric Simons following the team's dismal overseas Test performances in recent months. AWARDED The National Medal of Arts and National Humanities

Medal, to Indian economist Amartya Sen by US President Barack SEN Obama. Sen is the first Indian to be honoured with the medals, typically awarded to US citizens.

18

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

NEW

