ELECTIONS 2012
Rahul Gandhi changes his style and gets up close and personal with both voters and candidates
By Priya Sahgal

UTTAR PRADESH
Raniganj constituency, dressed in a flashy checked jacket and dark glasses, addressed him as "Naujawanon ki shaan, kisano ki jaan (Pride of the youth, beloved of the farmers)", Rahul looked up from his phone and waved to the crowd. He's also begun playing to the gallery. At a Lucknow rally on February 15, he tore up a sheet of paper saying this is what he thought of the Opposition's tall promises.
(LEFT) RAHUL IN KAUSHAMBI; RITA JOSHI AT THE PARTY OFFICE IN LUCKNOW

hat does India Shining mean?" Rahul Gandhi asks a young man dressed in a red sweater, referring to BJP'S 2004 campaign slogan. The response is immediate. "Bharat chamak raha hai (India is shining)." The crowd gathered at Soraon, near Allahabad, on the afternoon of February 11 claps and cheers. Rahul raises his hand for silence. "But that's wrong," he says. "If only the BJP had said India Will Shine, you might have voted for them in 2009. If only BJP leaders had spoken to you and you (points to another youth and a young girl), you would have told them, `My parents work night and day for a few rupees, I go to a school where the teachers don't teach and I don't know if I will be able to go to a college, yet you say India is shining.' If only they had come to your homes as I did, they would have understood that India is not shining. But they say they saw a TV advertisement that said India is shining, just like Bahugunaji's jacket here." He then reaches out to a slightly embarrassed Shekhar Bahuguna, the Congress candidate from Phaphamau dressed in a black shiny bundgullah. Bahuguna beams at being singled out for his shiny sartorial taste while the crowd laughs. Rahul has conflated the BJP's 2004 slogan into 2009 to score a rhetorical effect. Suddenly, the Congress general secretary's rallies are no longer aloof. They have become participatory events where both the crowd and the candidates are drawn in; he has learnt how other politicians behave on the election trail. This was not so even during the initial phase of his campaign for the Uttar Pradesh elections. Then, there was little interaction with either the crowd or the party candidates on the dais. His speeches dwelt at length on the achievements of the Centre, favourite themes being the Right to

W

AP

MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE INTIMATE CAMPAIGNER
Information Act, Food Security Bill and MGNREGA. There was little mention of local issues. Take his tour of eastern Uttar Pradesh in the last week of November 2011. He visited the encephalitis-hit areas of Maharajganj and the sugarcane farmers of Balrampur but made no mention of the area-specific problems. Now, whether in Soraon where he talks about the lack of colleges in the area or in Sonbhadra where he holds forth on tribal land rights, Rahul makes it a point to include local flavour in his speeches. His earlier speeches seemed like recitations; now they are delivered with a lot more emotion and gesticulations, a favourite move being thumping the fist in the air to emphasise a point. The speeches end with a polite `thank you'. The intimacy deficit may have been rectified, but the enigma persists. "Rahul bhaiya Hindi mein bolen (he spoke in Hindi)," said a surprised Sheelapati Yadav, a local village pradhan. "I thought he studied abroad, so he won't know any Hindi." While the women love his India Shining joke, the men say that they liked his promise that he would continue to work for the farmers whether the Congress gets two seats or 400. "Rahulji responsible person hai," said Hasin Ali, a dhaba owner who had, with an entrepreneur's flair, hiked the price of a cup of tea from Rs 2 to Rs 6 during the Soraon rally. Over the last two months, Rahul has also slowed down the hit-and-run nature of his stump speeches. Where earlier he would deliver a short speech, shake hands with all the candidates and fly off to his next meeting, he now spends at least an hour at each meeting. Unlike Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Mulayam Singh Yadav or Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) leader Mayawati, there is no special sofa on the dais for Rahul. He sits with the rest of the candidates on a steel chair. But when Rahul speaks, they all respectfully stand up, even a veteran 10 Janpath favourite like Captain Satish Sharma. To keep sitting would be lese majeste before the crown prince. Rahul also makes it a point to let the local candidates address the crowd before him while he fiddles with his BlackBerry. When an enthusiastic Rampal Yadav, the candidate from During the speeches, Rahul's trusted aide Kanishka Singh meets local leaders behind the dais. He jots down local issues to be highlighted and the candidates' names and hands them to Rahul. The short, bespectacled Kanishka has emerged as a key craftsman in Rahul's campaign. Slowly, local Congressmen are realising that the shortest cut to Rahul is an SMS to Kanishka. The Hindi-speaking politicians from the cow belt often ask journalists to help frame an SMS in English for K (as Kanishka is known). "Woh chhota kaun thha? Kanishka Singh?"

exclaims a disappointed party worker who has obviously missed his moment with `K' after Rahul's chopper flies off. Rahul made another important mid-course correction just before the first phase of polling. Congress leaders point out that initially their campaign had targeted Mayawati. As rumours of a hung Assembly began doing the rounds, there was talk of a possible alliance between the Congress and the SP. When it became apparent that the SP was gaining, there was a concern that it might eat into the Congress vote bank, since both were wooing the same Muslim-Kurmi-backward vote bank. Rahul then held a press conference in Varanasi on February 6 where he categorically stated that the Congress would not be supporting SP. He referred to the BSP as a party of chors (thieves) and the SP as a party of goondas (hooligans). The ploy seems to have worked, at least somewhat. "I was going to vote for the BSP until Rahul said that he won't support the SP," says Vijay Aggarwal, an advocate at Allahabad High Court who had turned up at the Soraon rally. "The BSP may be chors but the SP is a party of hooligans. We don't want them." Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh further decodes Rahul's position, saying, "If we are not able to form the government, there will be President's Rule in the state." There is thinking within the Congress that a coalition government now would be suicidal for the party in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls. Apart from the anti-incumbency, a coalition with the SP would also eat into whatever vote base that Rahul has gathered in the campaign. "We can't impose the same government that people have rejected," says Rita Bahuguna Joshi, the state Congress chief, adding, "We are not hungry for power. We are here to stay." While Rahul's rallies are getting the crowds, there is a genuine fear in the party that these may not convert to

42

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

ELECTIONS 2012
votes. Unlike the BSP, SP or even the BJP, the Congress lacks a committed cadre. The current elections are being handled entirely by Digvijaya, assisted by Rahul's Youth Congress. Youth Congress posters are visible at the rally grounds. It is Youth Congress cadre who gather the crowds. For campaign purposes, the Congress has divided the state into 10 zones, each zone covering roughly 40 Assembly constituencies and eight Lok Sabha constituencies. There is a zonal observer for each of these. Reporting to these observers are eight others, each handling one Lok Sabha constituency. These are mostly Youth Congress workers and party MLAs from outside Uttar Pradesh. There are as many as 15 MLAs from the Northeast alone. With their cell phone tunes belting out folk songs from Shillong, they have been camping in the state for the last three months. "It's a highly professional and organised set-up which has direct access to Rahul via Digvijaya Singh," says Surendra Rajput, Congress leader from Uttar Pradesh and member of the media campaign committee. Union minister Rajeev Shukla and Digvijaya supervise the media briefings while MP Raj Babbar has played a key role in drafting the advertising campaign. Rahul's campaign schedule is fixed from his office in Delhi and then faxed to Lucknow. This sometimes leads to confusion. For instance, Rahul's rally in Amethi on February 11 was fixed by his office in Delhi for 3 p.m. But party workers in Amethi thought that the rally was to be held at 12 p.m. By 5 p.m. when Rahul had still not shown up, the crowd was ready to leave. "Thanks to the Election Commission rules, we don't even get the two samosas and a laddoo that we got earlier," said a disgruntled lady who had travelled two hours for the rally. "This would never happen at a Mayawati rally," says a Congress worker ruefully, "her voter is much more committed." That sums up Rahul's biggest challenge for his Mission Uttar Pradesh. 

P O LL S A P A R T

MULAYAM'S MESSAGE
Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Mulayam Singh Yadav arrived 15 minutes ahead of schedule for his 12.30 p.m. rally in Bakshi Ka Talab constituency. The crowd shouted `Jiska naam Mulayam hai, Uska jalwa qayam hai (He who is named Mulayam, Has stature that is self-evident)' as he reached the dais. He sat down on a sofa placed in the middle of the stage, drank a glass of water and then took the mike. The applause drowned his words."Pehle sun lijiye, phir taali pitiye (Please listen to me before you clap)," Mulayam appealed, before delivering the punchline of the day: "Agar aap sabhi log poora vote daal dein to poore pradesh mein aadhe se zyaada virodhi ummidwaron ki zamanat zabt ho jayegi (If all of you cast your vote, half the Opposition candidates in the state would lose their security deposit)." There was a reason why Mulayam chose this constituency for his first rally in Lucknow. The decision to field Gomti Yadav, a turncoat from the BJP,

MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

MULAYAM AT A RALLY IN BAKSHI KA TALAB

had upset local leaders. Mulayam wanted to quell the dissidence with his presence. His ploy worked as the sulker-in-chief, Rajendra Yadav, promptly pledged support to Gomti since this was "Netaji ka aadesh (Mulayam's diktat)" . by Ashish Misra

BORROWED SOCIALISTS
Former Samajwadis form the backbone of the Congress campaign

RAJ BABBAR, 59, FOUR-TERM MP
The former Samajwadi Party (SP) MPis a key player in Rahul Gandhi's media campaign.Rahul's `angry young man'look is said to be Babbar's brainchild.He joined the Congress in 2006 but it was in 2009 that he impressed Rahul by beating SP leader Akhilesh Yadav's wife Dimple in the Firozabad by-election to the Lok Sabha.

RASHEED MASOOD, 64,TWO-TERM MP
Aparty-hopper, he was with the SP from the 1990s until he joined the Congress bandwagon in December 2011.Desperate to woo the Muslim vote,the party immediately made the two-term MPfrom Saharanpur a special invitee to its Working Committee.He is expected to deliver the Muslim vote in north-west Uttar Pradesh.

BENI PRASAD VERMA, 71, FIVE-TERM MP
The former SP leader could be the Congress's chief ministerial candidate if he delivers the 35 Kurmi-dominated seats in eastern Uttar Pradesh.He joined the Congress in 2009.Explaining the elevation of the MPfrom Gonda,Rahul Gandhi told a colleague,"The Congress has done many experiments.Beni is one of them." by Priya Sahgal

44

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

P O LL S A P A R T
THE ORDER OF THINGS
The crowds at Mayawati rallies are evidence of the numbers that are missing in opinion polls. Despite the huge turnouts, there is great discipline at these rallies. Bahujan Samaj Party workers dressed in blue, the party colour, move around ensuring everyone gets a place to sit. Crowds often gather for hours, as they did in
T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

HOME TRUTHS
am Vilas Paswan seems a bit confused as to whether he is campaigning in Uttar Pradesh or Bihar. Releasing his party manifesto in Lucknow a fortnight ago, he attacked Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar, saying, "Corruption in Bihar is no less than in Uttar Pradesh. There is a scam of Rs 67,000 crore." He scoffed at Nitish's plan to campaign for his candidates in Uttar Pradesh PASWAN against the BJP: "The BJP could pull down his government in minutes." Paswan declared that his Lok Janshakti Party will field grassroots workers and not party hoppers at the polls. Six of his candidates have joined D.P. Yadav's Rashtriya Parivartan Dal since. Wonder what Paswan makes of this shift at the grassroots.

Ballia on February 8. Before Mayawati arrives, a green carpet is laid out on the route from the helicopter to the dais and taped to the ground to remove creases. The minute the plane lands, she is first escorted to a tent which houses a makeshift drawing room where she meets the local candidates. She is then taken to the dais, the others following barefoot. Mayawati then sits down, hands outstretched, on a sofa as the compere welcomes her as the "iron lady" . Introduction over, she walks to the podium.Amid pin-drop silence, the show kicks off as she begins reading from a sheaf of papers.
by T. Narayan

R

BSP VOLUNTEERS CONTROLTHE CROWD ATA RALLY IN BALLIA

Jagdambika Pal, the verbose Congressman from Uttar Pradesh, is busy camping in Lucknow. As former chief minister of the state (so what if it was only for a day), he is eager to share the wisdom of his experience at TV debates. But even Pal was at a loss for words when a Hindi news channel anchor asked him,"Rahul Gandhi has been to many Dalit houses. Can you tell us when Dalits will be visiting Rahul's house?"

CONGRESS

BSP

Kyon pade ho chakkar mein, Koi nahin hai takkar mein. (Why are you in a tizzy? We have no competition.)

VS

Tilak lagao haathi par, Baki sab baisakhi par. (Vote for the elephant, Leave the rest on crutches.)

MERI BHARTI MAHAAN
adhna Bharti c/o Digvijay Singh, general secretary (AICC). That's the calling card of Vishvakanya Sadhna Bharti, 18, one of the youngest political campaigners in these elections in Uttar Pradesh. Originally from Delhi, Bharti is the Congress's answer to fiery BJP leader Uma Bharati. Both are sadhvis, Lodhs by caste and orators par excellence. The Congress is putting Bharti to good use in

S

Vote for the BJP if you want to see me alive, hale and hearty and to save me from going to jail. --in Allahabad on February 11

46

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

``

``

BABU LAL KUSHWAHA

YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Bundelkhand, where Uma is standing as the BJP candidate from Charkhari Assembly constituency. At Jhansi, the teenager launched a fullon attack on the BJP leader: `Umaji lost ground in Madhya Pradesh and is now in Uttar SADHNA Pradesh. She says BHARTI Shivraj Singh Chouhan is her brother. Why did the brother send her out of the state?" May the best sadhvi prevail.
by Piyush Babele

Compiled by Abdus Salam

MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

