AN imPACT F E A T U R E

Banking onTechnology
Banks are fast using information technology as a strategic vehicle to provide customers easy and efficient access to banking services 렁

T

echnology has enabled banks to conceive, deliver, manage and integrate their products in line with the customers' changing need. A range of services is now provided to both retail and corporate customers covering different financial products, sweep-in or sweep-out facilities, RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), internet banking and mobile banking are just a few to name. The multi-channel banking has acquired further dimensions to include third party payments, such as utility bills, through different channels including ATMs and mobile banking. The day is not far off when the banks would be viewed more as technology companies offering banking products and services. While bank branches would continue to function, they would reorient themselves as relationship centres rather than routine banking service providers. We have come a long way from the ubiquitous ATM machines, which dispensed cash to machines that do a lot more than that. Today banks have imbibed technological ecosystems that allow them and their customers' real-time access to banking applications and services over the Internet, much like with email. The moves has not only improved efficiency, curb fraud, cut costs, comply with regulatory changes; it has also taken products to the market faster. For customers, the increased IT adoption by banks offers greater convenience, safety and accuracy in monetary transactions. Bank customers have various channels of interaction today--automated teller machines (ATMs), the

Internet, call centres, branch offices and even mobile phones. A simple text message can effect a financial payment as reliable and secure as with a few mouse clicks on a Web portal. An average customer today, has a savings account, fixed deposits, a credit card account, and in all probability a housing or a personal loan. Banks need to link and keep track of all these on one page and evaluate credit worthiness dynamically, not just to assess risk but also to reward loyal customers with tailor-made products. For customers, cash flow management, and maintaining records has eased without physically visiting the bank branch for most of these transactions. For banks, technology has helped in reducing the cost of doing business. Technology as the differentiator has become the driver of the Indian banking business since the past decade with the financial sector reforms providing firm foundation. The question of implementing technology has now transformed into 'how from the estimate, the cost per transaction through a branch, ATM and Internet works out to about Rs 66, Rs 22 and Rs 10 respectively, ignoring the extreme variations owing to the investment cost compared to the number and nature of the transactions. Moreover, technology has resulted in improved quality of service, any time and any where banking, focused product delivery, cross selling opportunities, multi-channel touch points for consumption of services. Moreover, technology has helped reign fraud with the ample analytics available today are capable of preventing even seemingly innocuous but fraudulent transactions. If a credit card is swiped in Bangalore and an hour later in Malaysia, a bank's IT system will block the transaction.

AN imPACT F E A T U R E
| Slate Bank of India Pure Banking. 'with you - a l l the way Nothing else.

jr*
The future lies in converting the physical wallet into a digital wallet on mobile phones which is enabled by the convergence of several factors. The communication devices, the security on these devices, integration of banking IT infrastructure, and the regulatory framework and guidelines from RBI (Reserve Bank of India) are all in place that is encouraging banks and customers to adapt and adopt to technology making banking easy and efficient. Already insurers and capital market brokers are using the opportunity available through banks to provide their products and services to existing bank customers, thereby cutting the middlemen and allowing technology to seamlessly transverse across platforms, products and services.

One of the widest banking operators in the country; State Bank of India has a whole lot of banking facilities that are backed by sound technological applications. The bank's website has plenty for every type of accountholder including a distinct feature for the visually challenged, which allows them to bank online with safety and security. The other features backed by technoJogy offered by SBI include  Access to global fund transfers through SBI Global  Bill payment facility for utilities, online shopping, and mobile banking through secure transactions.  One can get provisional home loan interest certificate, make specific state government related payments such as payments to Punjab transport department or West Bengal government motor vehicle taxes and fees.  One can view Tax Credit Statement (Form 26AS), enquire on TDS and more.  There is provision to make secure card transactions, receive foreign travel card  Several value added services are available through online banking such as online fee collection for SSC and UPSC examinations, mutual fund investments, Donation to Prime Minister's National Relief Fund, Credit Card (Visa) Bill Pay, Use your 3-in-1 account to trade online and more.

Bank of Baroda
This bank has fast adopted technology to have a full-fledged internet enabled service which offers accountholders not just easy access to their bank accounts and funds; it also facilitates customer service on 24 X 7 through Baroda Connect which is completely free. There are several customised services that the bank offers such as  Immediate fund transfer or schedule for a future date to self linked and third party  Paying direct and indirect taxes online such as Excise Duty, Service Tax, Customs Duty and Income Tax which serves the need of retail and corporate clients.  The Baroda Easy Pay facility allows payments for utility bills like electricity, mobile, Donations, Subscription and online Travel booking including rail ticket through IRCTC.  Corporate accountholders can set up multiple workflow of initiators and approvers for transactions and requests and view all trade finance related facilities availed such as export, import LC, inland or export bills, forward contracts bank guarantees, packing credit account and more.  Use upload facility for single debit-multiple credit, multiple debit-multiple credit and single credit-multiple debit.

Bank has an aggressive outlook on technology and alternate channels of service delivery. More than 55% of its transactions are through electronic channels supported by a base of 8 million debit cards and a net work of more than 3200 ATMs a robust net banking and mobile banking platform. Some of the outstanding products and services of bank are as under: 1. Empowerment of customer through self user capabilities for all alternate channel services and also for regeneration of pins and passwords meaning no paper work, no wait for customers. 2. Value added services like remittance products viz. NEFT, IMPS, Union e-Cash, mutual funds, bill payments, tax payment, mobile recharge etc. on ATMs. 3. A versatile netbanking secured by two factor authentication providing online transfers, NEFT/ RTGS, Bill payments etc. along with corporate services. 4. A rich mobile banking application providing a host of services through a client application and also on unencrypted mode. 5. An advanced 24x7 Call centre servicing customers 24x7 in nine languages. 6. The fastest growing mobile wallet service 'Union Bank Money' in collaboration with Nokia. 7. A progressive website disseminating information on bank and products and providing online loan application and grievances option. Bank is continuously enhancing its capabilities to reach its customers through enhanced usage of technology.

^^ '

1 17) Union Bank of India

