Na tion ASSAM

RIFT WITHIN RANKS FINAL
YOUTUBE

Two influential Congress ministers are locked in a turf war. Whatever the outcome,the party stands to lose face.

FRONTIER
N
ext time think again before berating your child for watching videos on YouTube instead of studying. For this is how 12 Indian students became finalists in a global contest that could end in one of their experimental ideas being turned into reality 250 miles above the Earth. Gushes Nitya Raju, 14, a finalist from Oakridge International School, Hyderabad, who applied at the last minute to the space competition hosted by YouTube, "I'm so happy that I've got this far. This is the first time that I tried something like this." Raju, who dreams of becoming a scientist, says her experiment is on how liquids with different viscosities behave under microgravity. The competition entries show confident, even if a tad self-conscious, students presenting their ideas lucidly. It took Nesar M.N., 18, from Delhi Public School, a couple of retakes before he got his video right. "I was quite nervous while making the video," he confesses. The astrophysics enthusiast's experimental idea is on the metabolic and reproductive behaviour of Deinococcus radiodurans, the toughest microbe that can survive cold, dehydration, vacuum, and acid. Out of 60 global finalist teams, two each were selected from Delhi, Bangalore and Chennai and one each from Kolkata, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad. In March, two global winners from the Space Lab contest will choose between a trip to Japan to see the rocket with their experiment head for the International Space Station or a unique astronaut training experience in Russia.
by Shravya Jain

Twelve Indian students reach the finals of a space contest

GAUTAM ROY

SIDDEQUE AHMED

wo ministers of the Tarun Gogoi government in Assam have locked horns in a bitter turf war, causing major embarrassment to the Chief Minister. The recent flash point between Gautam Roy and Siddeque Ahmed, two influential Congress leaders from Barak valley, came over the foundation stone-laying ceremony of a local FM station. On January 13, Border Development Minister Ahmed, 44, met Gogoi at home and urged him to restrain Public Health Engineering Minister Roy, 63, from interfering in his activities. Ahmed and Roy represent Karimganj South and Katlicherra Assembly seats respectively, both in Karimganj district. The provocation was the foundation stone-laying ceremony for All India Radio's FM station at Inatpur in Karimganj. According to Ahmed, on January 6, Roy reached the proposed site uninvited and forcefully laid the foundation stone. "He wants to take credit for everything. I fought for this FM station for years and when it finally became a reality, Roy arrived with his men and laid the foundation stone," Ahmed told INDIA TODAY. Gogoi has termed the incident unfortunate and assured Ahmed of a probe. Roy denies the allegation and says

T

that he was invited to lay the foundation stone by Karimganj North MLA Kamalakhya Dey Purakayastha. "I was invited because I was actively involved in bringing the FM station to Karimganj. Ahmed had no role in it," says Roy. Purakayastha agrees. This is not the first time that Ahmed and Roy have been involved in a public war of words. In December 2011, Ahmed alleged that funds allotted for border development were siphoned off by corrupt officials when Roy was heading the ministry in the previous government. Congress insiders say both ministers have been asked to stop this game of one-upmanship. Ahmed is a former block Congress president who fought polls as an Independent candidate in 2001 and 2006. He won both times. In 2011, he got the Congress ticket and was inducted as a minister. His quick rise has ruffled Roy. A senior Congress minister, however, feels the tiff is orchestrated. "The ministers are fighting to consolidate their respective votebanks. Roy wants to be the messiah of Bengali Hindus in the Barak valley, thus neutralising the BJP effect; Ahmed's forte is minority politics. It's a mutually agreed upon game plan," says the minister. by Kaushik Deka

38

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

