BYWORD

by M.J. AKBAR

THE TORTURED ELEVEN
he historic moment has arrived for a radical revolu- start bowl. He continued at the crease. We should now tion in the rules of the game. There is no other option, apply that useful principle to Sachin Tendulkar: let him if we want to protect hapless Indian masses from se- get his 100th 100, and get on with stitching together a tovere bouts of depression, leading directly to loss of national tally new team, including at least one 17-year-old who can vigour and collapse of carefully nurtured pride. Cricket become our next Sachin. Perhaps it is wrong to get harsh with Sachin Tendulkar, must now be played according to the laws of boxing. Compared to cricket, boxing is a humane and civilised who still has runs to offer. Cricket is not a game you sport. It knows when to stop. If the referee feels that a con- can play alone. But Sachin might yet want to recall test has become a one-sided exercise in hammering, and what Vijay Merchant, the great Mumbai sportsman, once infers that while a boxer might remain technically on his said: You should retire when the public still asks why, not feet but his brain has become softer than an election can- when. But Merchant belonged to a generation when a didate's morals, he arbitrarily stops a bout. By all norms Test player got one pound sterling as spending money per of decency, the Australia-India series should have been day on a foreign tour. Those players didn't know how to halted. It is immoral to see eleven mature men, a fusion of spell a five-letter word called `crore'. Don't get me wrong. There is nothing unethical about superb spirit and individual brilliance, pummel a patchwork coalition of Dad's Army and Mum's Brats with ruth- the wealth that now dominates the game. But money inless ease and consistency. One of the significant successes creases accountability. Indian cricket is, instead, conof 20th century diplomacy was the Geneva Pact. It has trolled by a crony system in which administrators, banned torture. Why then does this callous world permit selectors, players and their chosen commentators protect such unbridled torture on the cricket field? Why doesn't one another. Australia became invincible in my book on the SPCA (Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Amateurs) the day its captain Michael Clarke refused to cross Don Bradman's score when he could have easily done so. That intervene in such a humanitarian crisis? Purists will argue that India lost its way when Rahul was not merely team before self; it was homage to Dravid dropped Mike Hussey at Melbourne in the first Test, Australia's history, and a young genius telling us, with astonishing humility, that he would not and Australia recovered from 27 for 4 SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com break an implicit honour code. to an unbeatable 240 in the second inIf there was a Border-Gavaskar tronings. That sort of comment might, at phy for alibis, however, Indians would best, fetch you a free coffee from naive have returned with heaps of silver. friends. Wars are not lost because an ofGautam Gambhir's throwaway accuficer dropped a flag. Every Indian joursation that the hosts had fixed the pitch nalist on tour has by now met the was beneath contempt. Lose, but don't Australian taxi driver who asked the cry. It was not defeat that shamed question, "What's gone wrong with India, but the manner in which the side your team, mate?" That question crumbled repeatedly. Of course the misses the point as inevitably as Indian players never allowed their performbatsmen miss the ball. India does not ance to affect their camera-perfect have a team. It has half-a-dozen playpreening. These guys are professional. ers who are punishing their ageing One of the significant all, they spend more time on tellimbs in search of even more cash from successes of 20th century After evision than soap opera stars. Even a an indefatigable lottery. Some batsmen are more anxious about the prospect of diplomacy was the Geneva newcomer grimaces with distaste at free land from chief ministers under the Pact. It has banned torture. the umpire after having pitched four short and one full in a single over. spurious excuse that they are setting up Why then does this callous balls Nothing is ever his fault. And he either cricket academies, than about their world permit such unbri- already has or will soon get an advernext score. A heretical question is circling around even the finest we have dled torture on the cricket tising contract to prove it. The majestic Dr Grace had some seen: are you playing for Bharat or for field? Why doesn't the useful advice for fellow cricketers the Bharat Ratna? The formidable pa(SPCA) Society for the faced with columns such as this one. trician Dr W.G. Grace, whose beard was as long as his wit was sharp, once told Prevention of Cruelty to "Never read print, it spoils one's eye an uppity bowler who had the temerity Amateurs intervene in such for the ball." If India's present eleven had any eye left for the ball, there to get him out that the British spectator a humanitarian crisis? wouldn't be such print either.  had come to see Grace bat, and an up-

T

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

