Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

MISSING THE MUMBAI BOY
Has Delhi been the villain in Vinod Mehta's roller coaster career?
By Shobhaa De

D
LUCKNOW BOY: A MEMOIR
byVINOD MEHTA Viking Price: RS 499 Pages: 356 BETWEEN THE COVERS The biggest letdown in this memoir is the absence of any asli masala.The earlyyears are self-indulgently chronicled but reveal nothing beyond the trite `escapades'of a lazyschoolboyhaving `fun'with friends.

ekho bhai, aapun toh aisech hai. Being a Mumbai Girl, it is somewhat difficult to digest a 306-page tome from a Lucknow Boy, that's filled with Delhi style bragging (it happens! Delhi does that to the best of us). Vinod Mehta has packaged the material into a memoir that is, ummm rather dull. As an admirer of Mehta's roller coaster career--I find it hard to believe he could have written such a book. What happened? Something obviously got in the way, and let's blame it on Delhi. Had Mr Mehta continued to live and work in Mumbai, I am certain he would have written a far more readable book. In any case, it's going to be a little tough to find readers who are keen on following the frequent hirings and firings of a maverick editor, for that is the only real meat in the memoir. The world has changed dramatically from the zamana Mr Mehta lovingly chronicles. When he looks back with nostalgia, it is a little like inviting young readers to a torture session (uncles and aunties love doing that!), during which they are force-fed on stuff they really couldn't care less about. Even ones own children run away from conversations that begin with, "In my time..." Mr Mehta's sepia-toned recollections may be of some interest to his colleagues and assorted politicos who wish to be featured in the magazine he so ably edits. Give them Sunny Leone's unedited life story in ten easy chapters instead--now that's riveting stuff. What the trade calls a `good read'. The biggest let down in this memoir is the absence of any asli masala. The early years are self-indulgently chronicled but reveal nothing beyond the trite "escapades" of a lazy schoolboy having "fun" with friends. Which makes this particular sentence from the book somewhat ironic, "In Lucknow at that time you could be a liar, a
SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

crook, bigot, miser, ugly, lower caste--that was okay. What you couldn't be was a bore!" Oh dear God...how did the young Mehta survive in that case? Did nobody tell him? Or did that happen only after he moved to Delhi to slay the lions? It has to be Delhi that is the villain of this memoir. The Mumbai Mehta was an amiable chap. He wasn't boastful. And he could out-bitch anybody in the room. Most of the time, the bitching was about those absent. Everybody laughed--including his highly "intellectual' friends tiresome then, far worse now. But Mr Mehta had not turned as pretentious...nor did he drop names. It's back to blaming Delhi for his parivartan, folks! One can hardly blame Mr Mehta. Proximity to politicians and power brokers can numb a journalist's sharper instincts. But a memoir surely needs to deliver more than a loosely strung account of job-hopping? Is sniping a substitute for insights? What about the author's oldfashioned self-righteousness that pops up on every second page? And all those tedious justifications? So, he pays his own bills. Is that something to boast about? The ballgame has changed, and one wonders whether Mr Mehta's avuncular advice to aspiring journos will be paid the slightest attention to by this lot. But at least, having dealt with his bugbears and demons in print, one sincerely hopes he gets his old groove back before his bosses start looking around. The one magazine Mr Mehta missed editing, and he could still do a brilliant job of, is Stardust. Well-written gossip never goes out of style. One wishes Mr Mehta had packaged his gossip more accurately and engagingly. That's the price you pay for leaving Mumbai, Lucknow Boy. Come back Vinod Mehta. All is forgiven! 

54

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

