E

L XC

U

V SI

E
SECURITY
on and at whose behest. But the deployment of these listening devices by the army raises worrisome questions. The army is not among the list of nine designated agencies such as Central Board of Direct Taxes, IB, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, CBI, Narcotics Control Bureau and local police, authorised to tap telephones. Senior army officials, however, admit that they acquired the capability to snoop in on conversations through the backdoor. In 2010, the army acquired extensive electronic warfare capabilities under the Rs 1,000-crore Project Suraj. The highly classified project gave the army the ability to listen in, jam and destroy communications across a range of enemy communication devices such as satellite phones, mobile phones and VSAT terminals, the enemy presumably being across the border. They say it is possible that some elements of this project appear to have been diverted

Na tion

BUG SCARE IN ANTONY'S OFFICE
After the dispute over the army chief's age, distrust between the defence ministry and army has grown
By Sandeep Unnithan

anic gripped South Block on the morning of February 16 after a bug alarm was triggered in Defence Minister A.K. Antony's South Block office. A hand-held bug detector wielded by Military Intelligence (MI) personnel beeped, indicating the presence a monitoring device. The two-man team of plainclothes MI was asked to leave. The minister's staff then alerted the home ministry. A counter-intelligence team of the Intelligence Bureau (IB) was called in later in the day. A senior IB official said "a discrepancy" had been noted in the defence minister's office. Both IB and defence ministry have begun high-level probes into the security breach. The mystery over the bug continues. The list of suspects seems endless. The Ministry of Defence (MOD) will decide contracts worth over $100 billion (Rs 5 lakh crore). It also steers military relations with global powers. Antony also forms part of Congress President Sonia Gandhi's core team of political advisers. A range of interests ranging from foreign powers to defence contractors and rival political parties would like to know his thoughts. A needle of suspicion has, ironically, been pointed at the army. Sources say it is possible that the MI team stumbled upon a bug planted by another team. This could be the reason why the MI officials were asked to leave the defence minister's office as soon as the bug was discovered. A senior army official dismissed

P

such suspicions and said that the MI still conducts daily morning sweeps in the defence minister's office. "The IB was called in only to get a second opinion. They discovered the alarm was triggered off by two telephone wires that had short circuited. Defence Secretary Shashikant Sharma was briefed about the incident a few days later and was satisfied with our explanation," he says. Intelligence officials said the bugging device would have to be planted by someone with easy access to the defence minister's office in Room No. 104 on the first floor of South Block. Distrust between the MOD and army has been growing following the row over the army chief's date of birth. General V.K. Singh became the first service chief to take the Government to court. He wanted the Government to treat his date of birth as 1951 instead of 1950. On February 10, the chief withdrew his petition after a two-judge bench ruled in favour of the Government. An MOD spokesperson expressed happiness that the controversy had been put to rest. The mutual suspicion, however, has only grown. On February 23, the army served a

ANTONY (RIGHT) WITH SINGH

MOD OFFICIALS BELIEVE THE ARMY HAS BEEN DISCREETLYTAPPING CELL PHONES AROUND SOUTH BLOCK. THE ARMY HAS REFUSED TO COMMENT.
for use away from the borders. MOD officials say they are also concerned about the activities of a shadowy unit called the Technical Support Division (TSD) within MI, which has reportedly been equipped with surveillance equipment. Who the targets were and for what purpose, is still not clear. TSD is headed by a colonel and has five lieutenant-colonels from the MI directorate who are posted at military stations across the country. The name of a retired director general of MI too has been linked to this covert outfit. Detailed questionnaires to the army on deployment of passive cellular surveillance systems and the composition, role and function of TSD did not elicit a response. I

A HAND-HELD BUG SCANNER INDICATED THE PRESENCE OF AN ELECTRONIC DEVICE. THE ARMY SAYS IT WAS CAUSED BYA FAULTY PHONE LINE.

notice to the chief, stating he would retire on May 31, 2012. This is usually served to government servants six months before their retirement but it had been delayed by the court case. A few days after the notice was served, MOD scrapped the chief's March 16-18 official visit to Israel. It cited "the critical situation in the Middle East" as the reason and said the army chief's trip was only being postponed. But insiders say it was a calculated snub. The chief was also not called to a key February 28 defence ministry meeting to review security preparedness. The vice-chief of army staff Lieutenant General Sri Krishna Singh was invited instead. Defence ministry officials believe

the army was snooping on phone conversations around South Block. They believe the army had deployed `off-theair interceptors' in the vicinity of the sensitive zone over the past year. Fitted in vehicles, these portable desktop computer-sized snooping devices extract mobile phone conversations from cell phone towers. The machines had been deployed at two locations-- Sena Bhavan, that houses offices of the three armed forces, and the Delhi cantonment. An MOD official said the army had admitted to using what it calls "passive cellular surveillance systems" to listen in on conversations. No further details were made available on whose communications were being listened in

40

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

NEW

NEW

