Na tion ASSAM
GITIKA TALUKDHAR

RUNAWAYPRIDE
Assamese writer Janhobi didn't leave home to join rebel group ULFA, after all. Marital discord explains her flight.
arital discord forced Assamese writer Janhobi Mahanta Rajkonwar, 42, to leave her Nahorkatiya home on February 13. It was reported earlier that she had left for Myanmar to join militant outfit United Liberation Front of Asom (ULFA), as claimed in a letter written by her. An INDIA TODAY investigation has found that the government school teacher and mother of two collegegoing sons boarded the 15930 Dibrugarh-Chennai Express from New
RAJKONWAR

M

Tinsukia Junction and is now suspected to be in Tamil Nadu. An autobiographical note discovered by INDIA TODAY reveals Janhobi wanted to end her marriage with Shantanu Rajkonwar, 45, but didn't want the stigma of divorce. In August 2011, Janhobi had written a column in a daily slamming the anti-talks faction of ULFA, after which she received several calls from a top leader of the rebel group. A close relative of Janhobi said that a compromise

was reached between ULFA and Janhobi that while she would pledge her support to the outfit, it would facilitate her rehabilitation outside Assam. Former Assam DGP G.M. Srivastava claims Janhobi was in touch with Abhijit Barman, the new ULFA chairman. "She would talk to me about a top ULFA leader who called her. She admired that person though she was against their armed struggle," a close associate of Janhobi said.
by Kaushik Deka

KERALA

PRICE OFCONSCIENCE
Israeli author alleges that police in Kozhikode are victimising her over pro-Palestine content in her book
NATHAN

FORM-IV
1. Place of publication 2. Periodicity of publication 3. Printer's name Nationality Address : New Delhi : Weekly : Ashish Bagga : Indian : Ashirwad, A 4/2, DLF City, Phase I, Gurgaon-122 002 : Ashish Bagga : Indian : Ashirwad, A 4/2, DLF City, Phase I, Gurgaon-122 002 : Kaveree Bamzai : Indian : K-9, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-110 001.

A

Britain-born Israeli author, Susan Nathan, 63, has been asked to leave the country by the Kozhikode police. While police claim the reason behind the order is the expiry of her visa in March 2011, Nathan says she is being victimised due to her book The Other Side of Israel. The proPalestine book was published by Random House in 2005 and later translated in Malayalam in 2011. Repeated requests for renewal of her visa have been pending with the

Union home ministry. "I am stunned and saddened by the way I am being portrayed as a spy," she says. Nathan filed a petition in the Kerala High Court on February 10 against the order. But while considering her petition, the court asked the government to take serious note of the practice of foreigners overstaying in India. The police say that the allegations made by Nathan are baseless. "We have neither kept her under house arrest, nor have we warned her not to step out," says Kozhikode City Police Commissioner G. Sparjan Kumar. Nathan claims she has been under the scanner since the publication of her book by Other Books, a publishing house in Kozhikode. It is reportedly run by Auswaf Ahsan, former state president of the banned Students Islamic Movement of India. Nathan has also published pro-Palestine articles in Tejas, the mouthpiece of Popular Front of India, a radical Islamist outfit. "I never knew these groups had links with extremists," she says. by M.G Radhakrishnan

4. Publisher's name Nationality Address

5. Editor's name Nationality Address

6. Names and addresses : Owner: of individuals who own the M/s Living Media newspaper and partners India Limited, or shareholders holding K-9, Connaught Circus, more than one per cent New Delhi-110 001. of the total capital Shareholders holding more than one per cent of the total capital of the owner company: 1. Mr. Aroon Purie, 6, Palam Marg, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi-110 057. 2. Mrs. Rekha Purie, 6, Palam Marg, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi-110 057. 3. Mr. Ankoor Purie, 6 , Palam Marg, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi-110 057. 4. Mrs. Mandira Purie (Fawcett), 5, Carlow Avenue, Napean, Ontario, K-2 GOP 9, Canada. 5. Mrs. Madhu Trehan, B-4, Maharani Bagh, New Delhi. 6. The All India Investment Corporation Private Limited, K-9, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-110 001. 7. World Media Private Limited, K-9, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-110 001. I, Ashish Bagga, hereby declare that the particulars given above are true to the best of my knowledge and belief. Sd/Ashish Bagga Signature of publisher

Dt: 01.03.12

46

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

