NET FLUX
GETTYIMAGES

by AVANTIKA SHARMA

Show Stealer
The Academy Awards are as much about rewarding excellence in acting as it is about gawking at dresses on the red carpet. But on February 26, a new star was born and quickly became an Internet sensation. It was Angelina Jolie's leg. On the red carpet,Jolie made sure to stick her skinny right limb out of the slit-up-to-there black velvet Armani gown. She also remained faithful to the pose when she was on stage to present an award. Soon, a parody Twitter account called `Angie's Right Leg'was set up, declaring,`I'm a leg, get a load of me!'The website Buzzfeed had a photo album of Jolie's right leg, dubbing it "the breakout star of this year's Academy Awards".An Angelinajolieing.tumblr. com page was also created and readers posted hundreds of funny photos channeling the pose. Now that's a breakout performance, all right. Enough to beat Jennifer Lopez's accidental nipple display, which goes by the Twitter handle @JLosNipple.

TWO GEMS FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet India's Social Standing

JOLIE

In What is Facebook Worth? A View From India on India.blogs.nytimes. com,Boston Consulting Group executive Prashant Agarwal discusses what India means for the Internet giant. "Facebook may not have figured out all the ways to monetise its massive customer base,but the view from India is clear--it has grabbed the interest,and the income of users,rich and poor alike," he writes.

Be Happy

Top of the Lot
app alert
This week's selection features three bestselling apps. These will make your smartphone more useful: All-in-one conversion app Converter+ works for everything from currency to interest figures. Dragon Dictation transcribes whatever you say into text in a simple notepad. Social media addicts' favourite Instagram is a light photo editing and sharing app.

buzz watch

Censor for Good
Popular micro-blogging site Tumblr has announced that it will remove blogs that glorify or promote anorexia, bulimia and other eating disorders, self-mutilation and suicide. "Online dialogue about these acts and conditions is incredibly important. This prohibition is intended to reach only those blogs that cross the line into active promotion," said a company announcement. Tumblr is known for blogs of this nature and the topic's popularity is facilitated by easy photo-sharing and the reblog feature, as well as the ease with which such blogs can be found.

Sixty-one per cent of American voters feel that the country is headed in the wrong direction. In Chill out America--the land of the free is doing just fine on Blogs.telegraph.co.uk, author and historian Timothy Stanley says the US has several reasons to feel confident. "Like before,I have no doubt that it (the US) will imagine and innovate its way out of crisis.In a land of dreamers,mediocrity is never an option," he asserts.
STANLEY

blog watch web wow

For the Love of Cinema
In an effort to organise information about Indian mainstream and independent cinema, film buff Shiladitya Bora, 29, launched his blog Long Live Cinema."It is just a hobby for me. My full-time job is to manage PVR Director's Rare," says Bora, a Mudra Institute of Communications graduate. His blog lists details of films festivals, trailers and new releases."We are also launching a database on independent films in late March," he says. Hurrah.

Share Alike
Travelling professionals rejoice. You can now attend meetings in your office wherever in the world you are.The website Join.me lets you share you computer's desktop with up to 250 people on the Internet.The free website is useful for conducting presentations as well as for brainstorming.

MARCH 12, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

89

