Nation ONGC
Government's ambitious plan of raising money from disinvestment comes a cropper. It needs a serious rethink if it plans to divest shares in other public sector majors.
By Shantanu Guha Ray
BARRING THE 1970S FIND OF BOMBAY HIGH, ONGC HAS HAD LITTLE TO BOAST OF IN RECENTYEARS

he Government wanted to raise Rs 13,000 crore from private retail investors by auctioning 5 per cent of its stake in the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC). In the end, it raised just under Rs 2,000 crore from such investors. The auction was poorly marketed and shoddily executed on March 1. The shares were aggressively priced at Rs 290 each and drove away institutional investors. Faced with serious embarrassment, the Life Insurance Corporation (LIC), a public sector institutional investor, was prodded to bail out the Government. The shares, sold at the volume-weighted average price of Rs 303.67 apiece, ultimately raised Rs 13,000 crore but most of it was funded by an agency of the Government itself, not private investors, the actual target. The Government (read ministries of finance and petroleum and natural gas) was embarrassed because the ONGC fiasco was seen as its failure to revive stock sales in state companies for the common retail investor and trim a yawning fiscal deficit. "It was bad planning and bad management. This is not the way to handle disinvestment. There was very little marketing done for the auction," said Pronab Sen, principal adviser, Planning Commission. He said the disinvestment department, which now hopes to unload shares in Bharat Heavy Electricals, Steel Authority of India Limited and Oil India, will have

T

LIC SAVES ONGC FROM FLOPSHOW
to do some "serious rethinking" while managing and pricing the deals. Another issue that weighed heavily against ONGC was lack of clarity on how much of India's hefty oil subsidies would be borne by it. "This was a key deterrent for a host of foreign institutions and bankers," said Sen. Earlier this year, the Government announced that the state-run oil and gas producers would share nearly 38 per cent of revenue losses on fuel sales from downstream retailers like IOC, HP and BP during AprilDecember, up from the 33 per cent share in the first two quarters of this fiscal year. The higher provisions drove down ONGC's third-quarter profit (ending December 31, 2011) to Rs 6,741 crore from Rs 7,083 crore in the same period of 2010. Officials of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas were anyway a little circumspect about the auction. Only as recently as December 2011, McKinsey made a presentation in December 2011 to Petroleum Secretary G.C. Chaturvedi that ONGC had showed little growth for more than four decades and totally lacked a global focus. In comparison, companies like China National Offshore Oil Corporation, Norsk Hydro of Norway and Petronas of Malaysia displayed tremendous growth potential, bagging major hydrocarbon projects across the world. Barring the 1970s find of Bombay High, ONGC had little to offer to its investors. Surprisingly, key officials were missing from the meetings before

It was bad planning. This is not the way to handle disinvestment. Very little marketing was done."
PRONAB SEN, Principal adviser, Planning Commission

the auction. A week before the March 1 sale, ONGC Chairman Sudhir Vasudeva left for London to negotiate an insurance deal. Officials of the Department of Disinvestment, a wing of the finance ministry that pushed for the auction, were surprised by his absence because there was no urgency for the meeting. The ministry officials were also aware that ONGC did not have a fulltime finance director who, in normal circumstances, would have handled such auction efforts if the chairman was away. Worse, the company's top officials made no efforts to recall D.K. Sarraf, its former finance director and current ONGC Videsh head, to push the auction agenda. Expectedly, institutional investors found the March 1 stake sale--a litmus test for Delhi's stalled privatisation agenda--badly managed. Five bankers--Citigroup, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, HSBC, Morgan Stanley, Nomura and India's JM Financial-- hired by ONGC to raise the required finances also failed to evoke positive response from the country's retail in-

vestors to the issue. "The Government saved the day for ONGC," claimed former finance minister Yashwant Sinha in a telephonic interview. His reaction came after Disinvestment Secretary Mohammed Haleem Khan claimed, in what appeared to be a face-saving exercise, that the Government was happy with the ONGC response. Khan told a hurriedly convened press conference in Delhi that it would be ridiculous to think that "the finance ministry bailed out ONGC". Khan claimed that LIC, which has been raising its stake in state-run companies in most public offerings, has picked up a 5 per cent stake each in Bank of Maharashtra, Indian Overseas Bank, Punjab National Bank and UCO Bank for Rs 2,310 crore and is estimated to be spending roughly Rs 1,400 crore in purchasing shares in five other lenders. Others disagreed. "It was bad timing because the Indian hydrocarbon sector has not offered anything in the last year-and-a-half," said veteran energy analyst Narendra Taneja. The auction itself drew widespread criticism. The websites of the Bombay Stock Exchange and National Stock Exchange failed to update bid activity after 3.20 p.m., ten minutes before the close of the auction, leaving investors in the dark on the bidding outcome for several hours. Some television channels reported twothirds of the shares had been bid for but had no official confirmation. The result was finally announced seven hours later by the exchanges that claimed some buy orders had been erroneously rejected by custodians. Eventually, on March 2, the finance ministry said bids worth roughly Rs 3,700 crore were cancelled or rejected due to insufficient funds. Valid bids were received for 420.4 million shares. LIC bought 377.1 million shares for Rs 11,069.6 crore. On March 5, the ONGC closing price was Rs 283.35 and LIC's loss on the investment Rs 384.26 crore. The Government will struggle to achieve its disinvestment targets unless it does a better job of selling public sector stakes. 

KERALA

ALLATSEA ON COAST
No clue yet about Kerala hit-and-run
FISHERMEN RECOVER JUSTIN'S BODY

ndian agencies' failure to identify the ship that hit a fishing boat and killed three fishermen from Kerala on March 1 has once again exposed the vulnerability of the country's coast. Two other fishermen and their boat are still missing. Xavier Antony, 43, Justin Leon, 42, and Santhosh Stephen, 28, were among those killed. The hit-and-run happened at the same location off the Kerala coast where two fishermen were shot dead by marines aboard Italian merchant vessel Enrica Lexie on February 15. After a week of joint investigation by Navy, Coast Guard and Marine Enforcement Department, it is now suspected that MV Prabhu Daya, a Singapore-flagged ship owned by Indians, was the culprit. The vessel has been intercepted and ordered by the Directorate General of Shipping to anchor at Chennai port for interrogation. Prabhu Daya was among the four ships that passed through the area on the day of the incident. On March 5, the state government sought the services of a private agency to locate the bodies. Incensed fishermen say this is the 15th fishing vessel in the past three years to have run into trouble with large ships passing too close to the Kerala coast. The fishermen want immediate action. by M.G. Radhakrishnan

I

MARCH 19, 2012  INDIA TODAY

53

