Mail

Bicycle Chief
MARCH 5, 2012

Projecting himself as a moderniser, the urbane, tech-savvy son of Mulayam Singh steals the show in Uttar Pradesh and revives hope of a resurgent Samajwadi Party.

Akhilesh is a suave politician who has taken concrete steps to make the Samajwadi Party a much more acceptable party now.
AMBAR MALLICK,
Kolkata

In Safer Hands
It will be refreshing to see a youth (Akhilesh Yadav) as a leader in the otherwise dirty politics of Uttar Pradesh ("Bicycle Chief", March 5). He will surely bring a lot many new and innovative things to the table and that is what sets him apart from other chief ministerial contenders in the state. It is people like him and Rahul Gandhi who should lead from the front to take the country into a new era.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

NITISH

In the Name of Terror
The Union Government is trying to paint everybody with same brush over NCTC ("Rise of the Eastern Front", March 5). It being opposed by many chief ministers is a setback for the Government. The home ministry's failure to consult the states has led to the fiasco. There should be no compromise in the fight against terrorism in the country but at the same time, the Government shouldn't ignore states' concerns.
RAMA VIJ, Kolkata

Akhilesh Yadav sounds authentic and convincing in what he says at his rallies. He is competent enough to revive the fortunes of the Samajwadi Party. Due to his strong campaigning, his party became the main beneficiary of the anti-incumbency votes. He will be

In India, the powers of arrest and search belong only to NIA and CBI at the central level and the police in the states. By giving these powers to NCTC too, we are going to create confusion in the investigation and prosecution of terrorism-related cases.We will be taking an unwise step.
K. G. SHARMA, Tamil Nadu

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

``

``

at the helm of the affairs in the Samajwadi Party, irrespective of who becomes the chief minister.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

MAMATA

The rise of Akhilesh Yadav signifies the change in the voters of Uttar Pradesh and the need for the party to adapt to that change. While Congress and BJP lack an effective state leadership, BSP faced antiincumbency; SP appeared to be the main beneficiary. Earlier, the party, because of its opposition to the English language and the use of computers, had a limited appeal to voters in urban constituencies. The change that Akhilesh promises to bring in the party's agenda, with a stress on modernity and development, has the potential to take India's largest state out of the BIMARU syndrome and

Mail
bring back the time when the country's leading politicians, intellectuals, and administrators belonged to this region.
PARVY CHOPRA, Bangalore

35
the actual happenings.
ANIL GOVIL, Delhi

Justice for All
It is sad and most unfortunate that two Indian fishermen were killed by the Italian marines aboard the Enrica Lexie. The deliberate action by the marines shows arrogance ("Is Cardinal Alencherry More Loyal To Italy Than Kerala?", March 5). The Kerala Police swinging into action and arresting the two Italian marines is a step in the right direction. Justice must be ensured at any cost for the two fishermen who lost their lives just because their boats came close to the ship. Even though both sides have decided to carry out separate investigations into the incident, it is baffling that Catholic priests belonging to Kerala are exerting pressure on the government to view the incident leniently for some inexplicable reasons.
K.R. SRINIVASAN, Secunderabad

It is very disappointing that Cardinal Alencherry has chosen to defend the actions of the Italian security guards. His remarks have come as a huge shock to the family of the deceased, the state and the country. It has been proven that the attack took place on Indian waters and the matter is therefore subject to Indian investigation and laws. This being the case, how can Alencherry advocate a "fair trial" for the accused? This gives the impression that he is supporting the Italians as their country is home to the Vatican. It is high time that minorities such as Christians and Muslims make it clear where their allegiances lie: Their religion or India.
ARCHIT A., Bangalore

therefore first seriously introspect and do an honest soul searching before doling out lame excuses.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
A P R I L 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Poor Pitch Report
Team India's dismal performance in Australia has raised many issues ("Dhoni's Team Are Champions of Self-Pity", March 5). The team needs to be revamped with younger talent. The selectors need to do a good job by leaving out those who are not in form due to age or physical fitness, and induct more all-rounders. The present rift within the Indian team might reflect that players focus more on individual effort than collective effort. The fans should appreciate and be critical of overall performance of team than to focus on individual aspects of the player's success or failure.
PIYUSH OHRIE, www.intoday.com

The Prolonged Slump
The Indian steel industry has never had it so good as during the current fiscal year with its record production and record exports.At the same time, it never had it so bad, with more than 1.3 million tonnes of saleable steel lying with it as stocks and with every prospect of it remaining unsold till next year.The stocks are not much for major steel producers like Japan and the US. But for India, with its present production of 6.8 million tonnes of saleable steel expected to be reached by the end of the current fiscal year, it forms a substantial percentage of about 20 per cent. The steel ministry, however, maintains that as it forms only two or three months of production, it need not cause alarm. With six steel plants, India had until last year a saleable steel capacity of about 6.9 million tonnes. Of these, TISCO and the Russian-aided Bhilai had been producing satisfactorily to their capacity. But the main problem had been the British-assisted Durgapur plant which had not been producing even half of its capacity because of labour and other problems.The Germanaided Rourkela plant also had some technical problems. TISCO, which was until recently in the private sector, is also not yet out of the woods.
by Lata Sudershan Bhatia

Numbers' Game
Notwithstanding Maharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan's reported rationalisation for their humiliating defeat in Mumbai's municipal elections ("Mumbai Jolts Congress", March 5), the stark reality is that the Shiv Sena-BJP combine has been returned to power by Mumbaikars not because of performance, but because they had to chose between the devil and the deep sea. Chavan needs to

Troubled Skies
Pakistan International Airlines needs to downsize the number of its employees to drastically cut expenses ("Broken Wings", March 5). Besides, it can tie up with some stable airlines like Emirates to boost its image and morale. The government should also contribute finance for its revival as it is a matter of salvaging its goodwill across the world.
RAJAN SAXENA, Hyderabad

It is unethical on the part of Alencherry to defend Italian guards. The mariners should be tried in the Indian courts as per our own law while providing them every opportunity to defend their case and they should meet the fate they deserve based on

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

UNSOLD STOCKS PILE UP--NO CAUSE FOR ALARM?

MARCH 19, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

