Nation

UTTAR PRADESH

DOORS OPEN FOR BUSINESS
The investor-friendly SP has inherited five years of consistent growth from Mayawati
he share prices of Anil Ambani's Reliance Power and Reliance Infrastructure surged on March 5, after exit polls over the weekend predicted emergence of the Samajwadi Party (SP) as the single-largest party in Uttar Pradesh. The younger Ambani is perceived by the markets to be close to SP. During SP's last term in office in Uttar Pradesh between 2003 and 2007, Ambani was commissioned to build the world's largest gas-fuelled power plant in Dadri, a project that was stalled by Mayawati's government over land clearance issues. "The Reliance Dadri

T

power project will get a fresh lease of life," says Sanjay Bansal of investment bank Ambit Capital. In sharp contrast, the shares of the Jaiprakash Gaur-founded Jaypee Group registered a decline in the runup to counting day on March 6. The Jaypee Group has grown rapidly in Uttar Pradesh during the five years of Mayawati's government, building highprofile infrastructure projects. Markets were concerned about an adverse impact on the group once Mayawati leaves office. A.V. Srikanth, executive director at Anand Rathi, an investment bank, calls it investor panic and says the company is good at managing the political environment. "The investors are playing it up a little too much." The SP government needs to be friendly to business. It is Uttar Pradesh's tragedy that only Anil Dhirubhai Ambani Group (ADAG) and Jaypee are viewed by markets as key stakeholders in India's largest state of 200 million people. The new government needs to ensure that both Reliance ADAG and Jaypee prosper so that other businesses

IN THE BALANCE ARE RELIANCE ADAG'S 7,480 MW DADRI GAS PLANT AND JAYPEE'S PROPOSED TOWNSHIPS ALONG THE YAMUNA EXPRESSWAY.
ANILAMBANI JAIPRAKASH GAUR
BANDEEP SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

could also follow their lead. The sugar industry, which had a more favourable policy regime during SP's last term in office, is expecting a turnaround. The stocks of sugar companies such as Bajaj Hindusthan and Dhampur rose 0.55 per cent and 1.31 per cent respectively on counting day. The real estate industry on the other hand is gripped by uncertainty. While analysts expect Sahara India's projects to do well, there isn't similar clarity about the projects commissioned in Greater Noida, which are in the midst of land acquisition disputes between the farmers and builders. SP is beginning its fourth innings in Uttar Pradesh, but to attract business, it must start from scratch. "The government's priorities should be to ensure law and order and build infrastructure, particularly power. Only then can private investment flow into Uttar Pradesh in a big way," says Rajiv Kumar, secretary-general of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry. Laveesh Bhandari, economist and co-author of INDIA TODAY's State of the States Report, says, "Law and order and combating corruption are priorities. Bihar's experience shows that those two can help give an initial surge." The new Uttar Pradesh chief minister will inherit a better foundation than what ousted chief minister Mayawati had inherited in 2007. The state's GDP has grown by an average of 7 per cent per annum over the five-year BSP rule, marginally lower than India's 8 per cent average. During SP's previous government, the state had grown at 5 per cent anually. Says Kumar, "If Uttar Pradesh could register 7 per cent growth for five years without attracting much private investment, it shows what the potential is." Will SP help Uttar Pradesh realise its full potential?
by Dhiraj Nayyar and Shravya Jain

NEW

