Na tion ARMY

LT-GENERAL BIKRAM SINGH (LEFT) WITH ARMY CHIEF GENERALV.K. SINGH

GENERALS ATWAR
By Sandeep Unnithan

Army turns on its own, says serving and retired officers conspired against chief
Lt-General Bikram Singh would take over as the next army chief on May 31, the day the present army chief retires. The announcement was a break from tradition. The army chiefdesignate is made known only two months before the retirement of the incumbent. In this case, the decision was made 90 days early. The implications of the announcement: The army chief will now have to keep his successor in the loop on all major decisions. It was the defence ministry's way of indicating its deep displeasure with the present chief. More disturbing was an assertion by the Intelligence Bureau (IB) that the army had deployed `off-air interceptors', to snoop on conversations between key decisionmakers in MoD and the Government. These Ukraine-made `interceptors' are fitted in vehicles to extract mobile phone conversations from cellular towers. "It is just fiction, it does not deserve any reaction," General Singh said on March 5, responding to media reports on phone monitoring. But the same evening, the army issued a sulphurous press release that targeted Lt-General Tejinder Singh, former director-general of the Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA) that operates under National Security Adviser Shiv Shankar Menon. "The officer, along with some disgruntled serving officers of the military intelligence against whom disciplinary and administrative actions are in the pipeline, has worked out this fictitious story," the release said. It went on to accuse Lt-General Tejinder Singh of bribery. "This officer was the Ex-DGDIA (he retired in July 2010) and has been earlier questioned on the purchase of the `Off the air Monitoring System', without sanction by the technically empowered committee. This officer has also been

n February 29, Chief Vigilance Commissioner (CVC) Pradeep Kumar called on Defence Secretary Shashikant Sharma in South Block. Kumar handed over an anonymous letter that made sensational claims against the Indian Army. It alleged that the army was tapping telephones of bureaucrats and decisionmakers at the behest of army chief General V.K. Singh. It also spoke of secret Military Intelligence (MI) funds being diverted to run a campaign against the Ministry of Defence (MoD). The letter was unsigned but evidently, its contents were disturbing enough for it to be personally borne by the CVC. It signalled a historic low in the already frayed relations between the army and the MoD, which has ordered an inquiry into the source of the letter. On March 2, MoD announced that

O

56

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

COURTESY: DPR, Ministry of Defence

Na tion
an allottee in Adarsh Housing Society in Mumbai and has also offered bribe on behalf of Tatra and Vectra Limited, which supplies vehicles to BEML (Bharat Earth Movers Ltd)." The statement did not mention who Lt-General Tejinder Singh attempted to bribe. An army spokesperson said it was being kept confidential and that the ministry had been kept in the loop on the episode. Officials stated off the record that Lt-General Tejinder Singh had attempted to bribe the army chief himself. The army chief reported the alleged bribery attempt to Defence Minister A.K. Antony in 2011 but did not pursue the matter to its logical conclusion, says a senior MoD official. Lt-General Tejinder Singh has termed the allegations "laughable" and is contemplating a defamation suit against the army chief. On February 16, a bug scare gripped the defence minister's office. A hand-held bug scanner wielded by an MI team beeped, indicating the presence of a listening device. An IB team was subsequently called in to investigate the `discrepancy'. Officially, the army said the bug scanner had developed a malfunction after a voltage drop. An army official privy to the incident said the scanner beeped after two telephone wires had crossed each other in a short circuit. Defence preparedness has clearly been a casualty of the bitter feud between the army and the MoD. The army has failed to acquire significant weapon platforms in the current financial year. This month, it will return over Rs 3,000 crore in unspent funds to the Government. The promotions of over 40 brigadiers and major-generals have been halted for the second time in a year. The ministry has referred the army chief's controversial new promotion policy to the law ministry. The new policy gives the seven army commanders and the army chief greater leeway in promoting officers of the rank of general. The ministry is worried that the new policy which it terms "arbitrary" would result in lawsuits by disgruntled brass. 

AN APPEAL

CYCLONE THANE REHABILITATION FUND
CARE TODAY
AN INDIA TODAY GROUP INITIATIVE

CARE TODAY appeals for generous donations

A VILLAGE DESTROYED BY CYCLONE THANE

C

yclone Thane, a severe storm with wind speed of 140 kmph, hit the Indian coast on December 30, 2011, resulting in massive damage to villages in the coastal districts of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry. The fury of the cyclone resulted in loss of 48 lives, damage to more than 2 lakh houses and to standing crops in excess of 1 lakh acres. Care Today has established the Cyclone Thane Rehabilitation Fund to support the victims. Against our previous appeals, till March 2 we have received only Rs 1,40,279. We sincerely appeal to our readers to contribute generously and be a part of the process to make a difference to the lives of affected communities and give them renewed hope.

We thank the following donors who have contributed in excess of Rs 5,000:
Bhushan Maideo P.S. Srinivasan Panduranga Bhat Alok Aggarwal Rs 5,000 Rs 5,001 Rs 5,000 Rs 10,000 Arulvadivoo K. Rs 6,000 Vandana Misra Rs 5,001 Bharat Sevak Samaj Rs 5,100 (Delhi Pradesh) West Delhi Zone

MAKE A DIFFERENCE
Please draw cheques or demand drafts in favour of CARE TODAY A/c The Thane Rehabilitation Fund payable at Delhi and send to: CARE TODAY

9th Floor, Videocon Towers, E-1, Jhandewalan Extension, New Delhi-110 055
Contributions are eligible for tax exemption under Section 80(G) of the Income Tax Act. We do not accept cash or money orders.

For further queries, please contact C. Balaji Singh at 011-23314216/+91-9810088836 or email balaji.singh@intoday.com
MARCH 19, 2012  INDIA TODAY

SOS CHILDREN `S VILLAGES OF INDIA

57

