GLOSSARY
LOUD AND PROUD
It's no secret that actress Kushboo Sundar, 41, has been dragged into many controversies for speaking her mind and has come out unscathed. Recognising her determination, the United Nations has invited her to speak at a youth empowerment conference to be held at the UN Habitat's headquarters in Nairobi later in March."More than the struggles I have gone through, emerging successful against all odds was more important for me," she said. Kushboo has already started working on giving an inspiring and interesting speech. You go girl!

MOVE OVER BOLLYWOOD
Regional cinema takes over at the 59th National Film Awards leaving its flashier cousin Bollywood far behind
Girish Kulkarni, Best Actor and Best Dialogues He's played a farmer before, but never so successfully, the Marathi actor bagged both awards for his role as Keshya in Marathi film Deool, which highlights the repercussions of globalisation in Indian villages. Next, he will be producing and acting in the film titled Masala, based in rural Maharashtra.What else? Gurvinder Singh, Best Director His debut film Anhe Ghorey Da Daan (Alms Of The Blind Horse) also earned the best Punjabi film award. Shot over 40 days in Bathinda it highlights the plight of Dalits in Punjab. Trained at the Film and Television Institute of

India in Pune, Singh trotted around international film festivals, picking the special jury award and the $50,000 black pearl trophy at the fifth Abu Dhabi film festival. Vidya Balan, Best Actress Her rolls of fat and lusty moves in The Dirty Picture had already helped her bulldoze through most awards, so this win throws up no surprises.Yet another woman-centric drama is ready to unveil with Sujoy Ghosh's Kahaani.

New iPad iMpresses

As Apple CEO Tim Cook unveiled the new (numberless) iPad, the retina display, iPhoto and 4G wireless features got instant feedback. Hear it from the experts:
 The Wall Street Journal: One of the key selling points of the new device appears to be superior graphics.  Gizmodo.com: It's almost like looking at a glossy magazine page.And it's 4G ready.  Slate Magazine: The ability to get built-in LTE (4G) makes the tablet an attractive alternative for travelers who'd prefer not to hunt around for a Wi-Fi hotspot.

GETTY IMAGES

FOTOCOP

LOVE, YASH CHOPRA STYLE
OF THE

WEEK

Anupam Kher: If I just watch Akshay Kumar exercising (yoga in water) for one month I'll have a better body than Salman Khan.

WELL-MATCHED

AFP

COOK
AP PHOTO

CINEMA PARADISO
At 21, he was assistant director to Sanjay Leela Bhansali on Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam. Meet Sandeep Mohan, 36, whose brief stint in Bollywood made him lose interest in films.After dabbling careers as a copy and scriptwriter, over a decade later, he is realising his celluloid dreams, this time as an independent filmmaker. His film, titled Love, Wrinkle-free, with actors Ash Chandler and Shernaz Patel in the lead, is about a couple dealing with unplanned pregnancy."I like making films with universal appeal," he says.
MOHAN SHARMA (LEFT) WITH JOSHI
YOGEN SHAH

BIG BREAK
Parambrata Chatterjee, 31, gave up a Roman holiday for just a `story' . In his maiden Bollywood filming, the Bengali actor will be seen as a young policeman alongside Vidya Balan in Sujoy Ghosh's Kahaani. "Not opposite really," says the actor, who shared the screen with Balan in her debut film, Bhalo Theko (2003).
KAIF (LEFT), SHAH RUKH SHOOT FOR YASH CHOPRA'S FORTHCOMING FILM IN LONDON
SUVASHIS MULLICKA/www.indiatodayimages.com

VS

DHARIWAL

CHATTERJEE

Katrina Kaif is going places. Literally. Last week, we saw pictures of her romancing Salman Khan while shooting Ek Tha Tiger in Cuba. And now it's London with Shah Rukh Khan for Yash Chopra's untitled project. The photos showcase all of Yash Chopra favourites--beautiful locales, a gorgeous leading lady, stunning clothes and a love-struck hero. Shah Rukh looks refreshed after the torment of Ra.One. Katrina complements men almost twice her age only too well. Anushka Sharma also stars, back with the star who launched her in Rab Ne Bana Di Jodi. Picture perfect, we say.
KUSHBOO

It's wedding season in the world of gutka barons. After trying his luck in films at daddy Jagdish Joshi's expense, Sachiin Joshi tied the knot with fellow actor Urvashi Sharma on March 3. Next up is Rasiklal Manikchand Dhariwal's daughter Janhavi, 27, with an engagement to Rahul Shah of real estate group Sumer on March 18. "Destiny brought us together last November. He was the first person my parents considered for me four years ago but it didn't work out then. He is a lovely human being," she says. An engagement at Amanora Park Town in Pune will be followed by a December 9 wedding, also in Pune.

by Nishat Bari, Prachi Rege, Avantika Sharma, Lakshmi Kumaraswami and Tithi Sarkar
MARCH 19, 2012  INDIA TODAY

78

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

79

