So ciety PRISON REFORMS
PRISONERS AT LAJPORE CENTRALJAIL IN GUJARAT

Photographs by SAILASH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

THIS JAILHOUSE ROCKS
By Uday Mahurkar

From a swanky building to vocational training, Lajpore Central Jail makes prison bearable
from the cramped, bug-infested jails of yore. This swanky new building has taken giant steps in initiating reforms for its inmates, from providing abundant space to academic and vocational courses as well as revenue generation from activities inside the prison precincts. The courses are being run through a collaboration between the private and the public sector. Spread over 2.18 lakh square metres with state-of-the-art landscaping, the prison has provisions for sports like cricket, football, volleyball and basketball. The jail will soon provide vocational training in diamond polishing, artificial zari-making and sari weaving, all initiatives that have become possible due to industry houses stepping in. For the past few years, the state government has worked out a private public partnership (PPP) model for jail welfare by signing agreements with local commerce bodies and corporate houses. In Surat, diamond, textile and zari associations have been roped in while in Vadodara, the collaboration is with the local chamber of commerce. This is not only for established skills, but also for professions of the future. Recently, an FM radio channel trained 25 prisoners of Ahmedabad jail how to host shows. Says Nagjibhai Desai, 47, superin-

R

aju Vasava, 45, is undergoing a life term in Surat jail for killing a young man who eloped with his daughter and later refused to marry her. He can't wait to move to Lajpore jail from Surat Central Jail, where he is currently lodged. Neither can Manji Ramji, 49, another convict undergoing a life sentence in Surat jail: "My jaw dropped on my first visit to the new jail last week. I can't believe it's a prison." Welcome to the new central jail constructed by the Gujarat government at Lajpore near Surat, a far cry

MARCH 19, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

So ciety

PRISON REFORMS ANDHRAPRADESH

Hunt for Riches
Authorities scour tourist spot in Hyderabad for its legendary treasure trove
ich history, old stories and an affidavit. That is all it takes to send authorities on a treasure hunt. On February 19, the Directorate of Archaeology and Museums (DAAM), led by its Director Professor P. Chenna Reddy, and the National Mineral Development Corporation began a hunt for riches at Naubat Pahad, a foothill in the heart of Hyderabad which is a popular tourist spot. A team of `explorers' excavated open areas near Vidyaranya School, which is situated on the foothill. "It is believed that the city had two underground palaces, the Dad Mahal and Moti Mahal, built by the Qutb Shahis to keep Mughals away. And that treasures were hidden in air ducts, chambers and tunnels," says Reddy, also the state's treasury trove officer. The search will intensify when the school closes for the summer in April. The mission began after nine persons had declared in an affidavit on February 17 that there was a tunnel which needed to be explored. Satellite imagery showed indicators of the presence of a structure. It remains to be seen whether the structure contains any hidden treasure. "We saw an iron gate and did not go further. Excavation along the rocky terrain on the school premises will definitely lead to the tunnel," says T.S. Raju, a Coal India executive and signatory of the affidavit. The Vidyaranya School authorities, who bought the property from a Parsi family in the 1930s, rubbish the theory. "My father never talked about any such treasure," says the school's owner Pradeep Rao whose father Raja Rameshwara Rao III was a local jagirdar. "How did DAAM find credible the claim of a few who trespassed the school premises?" asks Rao. Sadly, no one has answers. by Amarnath K. Menon

R

THE HI-TECH CONTROL ROOM AT LAJPORE JAIL

tendent of Lajpore jail, "Vocational and educational courses are available in Gujarat even to inmates of the smaller, tehsil-level jails which is not the case anywhere in the country." Study centres of the Indira Gandhi and Babasaheb Ambedkar Universities will be set up within its precincts and a centre of Annamalai University for the prisoners' spiritual development is also in the pipeline. The study centres are an extension of a state government policy that has seen around 5,500 prisoners out of a total of 12,000, across Gujarat's jails, enroll themselves in short-term and long-term education programmes offered by the three universities. "Lajpore jail symbolises Gujarat government's innovative and unique jail reforms programme which aims at reintegrating the convicts into society," says P.C. Thakur, additional director general of police, prisons, Gujarat. Jail reforms have been on the agenda of the state government for the past few years. For example, the old Surat jail and the Sabarmati Central Jail in Ahmedabad have pakora centres which are quite popular. They sell snacks cheaper than market rates and are known for their quality. Profits accruing from sale of pakoras are used to pay prisoners labour charges. It also

contributes to their jail welfare fund. The snacks centre of the Surat jail has a turnover of Rs 60 lakh a year. Lajpore prison offers 47 square feet area to every prisoner in the barracks--7 feet more than that required under international norms. The jail can house 3,000 prisoners although initially it will have only 1,500 inmates. The shifting of inmates from the old Surat jail to Lajpore is on at the moment and is expected to be completed within the next two months. Each barrack, measuring 52x16 square feet, will have only 20 prisoners and has been equipped with a television set besides a state-of-the-art water filtration system--a first in jails across India. Apart from measures for prisoner reformation, security is also a high point of the Lajpore jail. As many as 805 closed-circuit television cameras have been installed to keep a roundthe-clock vigil, trailing every movement of the prisoners lodged within. The need for prison reforms has long been felt in India. Jails need to work more as correctional centres that prepare prisoners for subsequent rehabilitation in society rather than make veritable pariahs out of them. The reforms in Gujarat are an acknowledgement of the rights of even those who have broken the law. 

64

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

