NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA
If you logged on to Twitter last week, chances are you saw #Kony2012 trending.A documentary film by Jason Russell, director and founder of the non-profit organisation Invisible Children, Kony 2012 premiered on YouTube on March 5, 2012, and got everyone talking.The film is about the notorious leader of Uganda's Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), Joseph Kony, and the LRA's atrocities, which include the murder, rape, and abduction of tens of thousands of people over the past two decades. Most praised the film, but some took a contradictory view. The blog Visible Children The bulk of Invisible Children's spending isn't on supporting African militia, but on raising awareness. TWO GEMS FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

Kony Who?

smart sheet Laid Bare
On Espncricinfo.com Rahul Dravid's wife Vijeeta writes about his retirement in "My Husband,The Perfectionist" .In the tribute,Vijeeta reveals the man behind the forever calm exterior."In the last few years he worked doubly hard to make sure he played the game in his best physical condition in the toughest phase of his career physically.He was able to hold off shoulder surgery despite a problem in his rotator cuff because he found ways to keep it strong," she reveals.
RAHUL DRAVID

The Atlantic's Max Fisher (The campaign) subtly reinforces an idea that has been one of Africa's biggest disasters: That well-meaning Westerners need to come in and fix it.
African blog Unmuted This approach obviously denies realities on the ground,inflates fantasies abroad,and strips Ugandans of their story.

KONY
AP

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for fun, music and reading. If you own a smartphone, these apps must feature on it: Shazam helps you identify songs. Perfect if you love a song and don't know who the artist is. Instapaper removes extra data like tags, ads and videos off a page and leaves you with text. Highlight sends you alerts when you are near people you have something in common with.

viral video

AP

Blink and Miss

Eyeing a Win
In an NYTimes.com blog post, author and international business editor Marcus Mabry discusses the incumbent French President Nicolas "Can Sarkozy's battle for re-election. In" Sarkozy, the Candidate, Make Voters Forget Sarkozy, the President?" Marby writes,"With the economic problems facing France, and Mr Sarkozy's recent attempt to raise the valued add tax, Sarkozy The Candidate may find it hard to distance himself from Sarkozy The President."

buzz feed

Viral Gran
North Dakota's Marilyn Hagerty,85, doesn't read blogs.But social media stumbled upon her review of a new branch of American chain restaurant Olive Garden and took to ridiculing her.When a reporter told her that she's gone viral,Hagerty asked, "Could you tell me what viral means?"

To get people to notice their latest car, German automobile giant Mercedes Benz made it invisible. A video titled Invisible Mercedes has gone viral. To get the effect of an invisible car, engineers matted one side of the car with LED lights, in effect forming a car-shaped television screen. On the other side of the car, a video camera was placed and configured to transmit the view to the LED side. The video explains the process and shows passers-by first looking confused, then amused. It also highlights the vehicle's fuel cell technology, which ensures that it doesn't emit any carbon. Critics say the clever concept also hides the car's unappealing design.

web wow

Each One, Teach Many
In 2004, hedge fund manager Salman Khan began tutoring his cousin over the Internet.Two years later, he began uploading educational videos on YouTube. Soon after, he left his job to work full-time on Khan Academy, which has now turned into an online, one-man university. It currently covers math and science. Khan has received funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
67

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

