UP FRONT

BIBEK DEBROY

THE SUBSIDYSHAM
ernard Shaw said that a government which robs roads) ones. In addition to the standard Central subsidies, Peter to pay Paul can always count on Paul's sup- we will have Food Security Bill and Rashtriya Madhyamik port. But that's not the real problem. The govern- Shiksha Abhiyan. We know budgetary targets for 2011ment robs Peter to pay Peter, except that Peter can't see 12 have not been met, especially for food and petroleum it. That's the nature of a subsidy, with a Latin etymolog- products. But even if one sticks to those Budget estimates ical origin in "behind". Costs of subsidies are not obvi- and exclude all other subsidies, it is Rs 1.44 trillion that ous. They stab you from the back. In 2007-08, the total could have been spent elsewhere. The only genuine case for subsidies can be redistribtax/GDP ratio was 17.7 per cent, with 12 per cent share for the Centre. Today, it has dropped to 15.4 per cent utive. One wishes to subsidise the poor. That's a conand 10 per cent. Tax exemptions are also subsidies. sumption kind of subsidy. But even there, caveats are Since 2006-07, Union Budgets have carried a revenue necessary. Are able-bodied people in working-age foregone statement. The bottom line is, had it not been groups willingly poor? They happen to be poor because for exemptions, tax/GDP would have been 5.5 per cent they don't have access to market-based opportunities in higher. Economics is about opportunity costs. Every re- terms of access to physical and social infrastructure, law source has alternative uses elsewhere. Subsidies are dif- and order, land markets, financial products, marketing ficult to compute because not all are visible and networks, technology. That's the true inclusive agenda transparent. Slightly dated figures are all subsidies, ac- to be rectified through public and private provisioning. count for 14 per cent of GDP. This is money that could There can be exceptions for old and disabled and have been spent elsewhere. It could have been spent on women-headed households. For these, and for other physical (roads, electricity, water) and social (education, marginalised and bypassed in the interim, there can be health) infrastructure and law and order. That's the rea- a subsidy agenda. But even there, it is better to have a son Peter is being robbed to pay Peter. No finance min- direct cash transfer principle, since that doesn't distort ister (Centre or state) has stood up and said, "This is the consumption decisions. However, we go round and amount of money one has. If I spend it on this, I can't round in circles identifying BPL (below poverty line), benspend it on that. Here are my priorities. And that's the eficiaries of subsidies. Apart from leakage and inefficiency, there is plenty of evidence to show present reason I am choosing to spend on this." There are different ways to classify subsidies--sub- subsidy regimes are pro-rich and anti-poor. UID isn't gosidisation of public goods, subsidisation of merit goods ing to solve the problem. It is only a tool. It isn't difficult (stuff that has positive externalities) and all the rest (non- to identify BPL. Decentralised identification is an option, as is geographical targeting. Nor is it merit). There is nothing that is a SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com difficult to identify APL (above poverty proper public good, but let that pass. line). The problem is in the middle, Examples of merit subsidies are subthose who want to be in BPL, but sidisation of elementary health, pubshould actually be APL. Central and lic health, sanitation, sewage state governments don't want to treatment, roads and bridges. With alienate them and the subsidy circus this classification, one should be subgoes on. Why should one pay full marsidising merit goods and services, not ket prices for something one has been non-merit. Non-merit goods and servgetting free, or at subsidised rates? ices should recover full user charges. That's the problem with a subsidy A dated National Institute of Public culture. Once it starts, it is difficult to Finance Policy study on Central govroll it back. In that sense, so-called ernment expenditure shows nonpopulism also has a rationale, though merit subsidy payments are almost it is an undesirable one. eight times the merit subsidy payMeanwhile, so-called benefits of ments. Instead of subsidising what one should, one is subsidising what one There are different ways non-merit subsidies are immediate. Opportunity costs of foregone merit should not. If subsidies mess around to classify subsidies-- with prices, they tinker with production subsidisation of public goods and services occur in mediumterm. All of us suffer from myopia. Why (including export) and consumption degoods, of merit goods blame political classes alone? cisions, and are a bad idea. Resource allocation is distorted. This is true of and all the rest. There is major Central subsidies (food, fertiliser, nothing that is a proper Bibek Debroy is professor at the Centre petroleum products) and state (power, public good. for Policy Research, Delhi

B

10

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

