Na tion KARNATAKA

D.V. SADANANDA GOWDA, Karnataka Chief Minister

GETTY IMAGES

SHOBHA KARANDLAJE, Karnataka Food and Civil Supplies Minister

Over 24 lakh of the 79 lakh LPG connections in Karnataka belong to `ghost' consumers
By Sowmya Aji

CYLINDERS AT A GAS AGENCY IN BANGALORE

(United), himself a gas dealer, told INDIA
TODAY: "As a politician, I am telling you

ore than one in four domestic LPG cylinders in Karnataka is sold to a `ghost' consumer. An e-governance drive by Karnataka's Food and Civil Supplies officials uncovered over 24 lakh fake domestic gas connections among 79 lakh in the state. Central exchequer subsidies are losing an estimated Rs 2,000 crore annually, costing the country Rs 10,000 crore over the past five years, in just one state. Jailed mining king G. Janardhana Reddy took a whopping 240 subsidised cylinders in 12 months. That is one cylinder for every one-and-a-half days. Compare this to a maximum of 12 cylinders a citizen gets annually. The Central exchequer lost Rs 1.92 lakh but Reddy didn't even get a rap on the knuckles. The Food and Civil Supplies Department (FCSD) and oil companies have found many Janardhana Reddys in every district, diverting gas cylinders to the black market. Former minister B. Somashekar of the Janata Dal

M

that 90 per cent of the LPG dealers and blackmarketeers in the state are either politicians, bureaucrats, or their kin." The political class's direct involvement is evident from a superficial look at the gas dealers in Karnataka. The gas dealers' association head is Radhakrishna, Union minister Mallikarjun M. Kharge's son-in-law. M. Nagaratnamma, wife of Union minister K.H. Muniyappa, also owns a gas dealership. Nearly every other gas dealer is either an MLA or the relative of one. The irregularities emerged after FCSD, in an effort to computerise its ration card database, put together ration card addresses, gas supply details and cross-verified these with the state's electricity supply companies' consumer data. Food and Civil Supplies Minister Shobha Karandlaje took these statistics to Union Petroleum and Natural Gas Minister S. Jaipal Reddy in February. "I asked him to estimate the country's overall losses. We need political will to stop it," she says. The Centre shells out about Rs 800

per cylinder as subsidy. `Ghost' consumers purchase each cylinder at Rs 415 and resell it at the market rate of about Rs 1,200. "All dealers supply more cylinders to fake connections as they get only small commissions from legal ones," Karandlaje points out. "From April to October 2011, we asked every gas consumer and ration card-holder for the revenue registration number of their electricity meters as address proof. We blocked nearly 24 lakh illegal gas connections," Food and Civil Supplies Secretary B.A. Harish Gowda told INDIA TODAY. Since October 2011, just 3.5 lakh consumers have come forward to submit documents for unblocking connections. As on March 2, 19.5 lakh connection-holders had neither submitted any documents nor claimed cylinder refills. The remaining 6 lakh connections have been moved to other categories like multiple or commercial connections. Officials estimate that a further seven lakh of the existing 49.5 lakh live gas connections are also illegal. But political will to act has been more scarce than LPG. Karandlaje's Cabinet colleagues shouted down her efforts to block illegal connections. On October 20, Chief Minister D.V.

Sadananda Gowda stated: "The government will not suspend supply of cylinders to consumers who have more than one connection or those who have failed to furnish the necessary documents to support their connection. We will not touch hapless families." The powerful lobby of LPG dealers admits there are some "bad apples" among them but claims that the figure of illegal connections is inflated. "We are being treated like villains, but there are data entry errors in the food and civil supplies database," contends former army Captain B.L. Lingaraju, 55, coordinator of the All India LPG Distributors Federation (Karnataka). People support the government's attempts to remove the illegal connections. Pushpa, 70, a manager in a bank, says that she did not mind going to the gas agency with the documents for verification. "What the government is doing is for our own good. Blackmarketeers must be weeded out," says Srikala B., 43, whose connection had been blocked and had to be re-verified. "We will file a public interest litigation in the Karnataka High Court later this month, demanding action against the gas and the PDS mafia," says Anna Hazare follower and India Against Corruption activist Prithvi Reddy. I

50

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

``

STINK OFA GASSCAM GAS SCAM

``

I asked S. Jaipal Reddy to estimate the country's overall losses. No government can survive this extent of illegalities.

``

``

The government will not suspend supply of cylinders to consumers. We will not touch hapless families.

UTTAR PRADESH

RUN OUTOFLUCK NOW
In the wake of SP wave, Mayawati's loyal bureaucrats scramble for postings in Delhi

M

ayawati's defeat in the Uttar Pradesh Assembly polls has spelt an uncertain future for bureaucrats who were close to her. They fear the regime change could result in them being relegated to insignificant postings and have thus applied for transfers to the Central Government. At least six of them applied for deputations in the second week of January. The period of such deputations is usually five years. When Mayawati lost Uttar Pradesh elections on March 6, Cabinet Sec-

secretaries and three secretaries. The future of Principal Secretary Netram, who also dealt with departments like excise and sugar industry, is also unclear. Given the allegations of rampant corruption in the privatisation of sugar factories in the state, he looks set to be shunted to postings in divisions with the State Revenue Council and General Administration Department. Mayawati's reliance on bureaucrats is evident from the fact that she never occupied the chief minister's
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

(FROM LEFT) FATEH BAHADUR, RAVINDRA, ANOOP MISHRA, SHASHANK SHEKHAR, MAYAWATI

retary Shashank Shekhar Singh was the first to resign. Additional Cabinet Secretary Ravindra Singh and Chief Secretary Anoop Mishra are also Delhi-bound. Others in the queue for deputations include Principal Secretary to chief minister Kunwar Fateh Bahadur, Principal Secretaries to the Chief Minister Durga Shankar Mishra and R.P. Singh, Secretary to Chief Minister Anil Sant, and Secretary to chief minister Chandra Bhanu. The Mayawati government had a cabinet secretary, five principal

office in the secretariat in Lucknow during her five-year rule. Her government was run out of the fifth floor in the secretariat by a group of powerful bureaucrats led by Shekhar. Even ministers had to get their schemes approved by him. A senior SP leader says the new government will abolish the posts of cabinet secretary and additional cabinet secretary. Akhilesh Yadav's bureaucracy will be steered by the chief secretary. It's tough times ahead for the power officers. by Ashish Misra

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

51

