Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

STRUGGLE OF THE LAST GANDHI
esterday was another day for Rahul Gandhi. For anyone else with less hereditary halo, Uttar Pradesh could have been his graveyard moment in politics. For Rahul, though, it was a cultural clash in which he was destined to get bruised. Well, they, the shirtless of that wretched place, didn't get the message. On the Day After, as the detritus of his much-hyped Mission Redemption accumulated on the battlefield, he was gracious enough not to blame them for squandering away an opportunity for a ride on the wings of history. Seduced by the subaltern sociology of his challengers, they failed to grasp his message of modernity. Silly, it was their chance to be part of the future--his future. Pity, they opted for the alternative of the imposter who pretends to be an insider--someone who can only take them down to the recesses of dispossession and violence. Look at this sickening irony of it all: they are even calling him, now the chief minister, the original homegrown boy, the one who has a direct access to the hearts and minds of those people--those thankless people. They will never ever get the difference between the real and the original for the simple reason that they live outside history. They are condemned to live outside time. For Rahul, Uttar Pradesh is his own personal history. And every voter who dared to repudiate that history was, in a way, challenging the political legitimacy of his surname. He has reason to be angry, quietly, invisibly, never before the cameras. His every appearance--an event--was an assertion as well as a reminder: Here I'm, your chosen Deliverer; vote for us and I'll make you happy. So spoke the most benevolent of princes, and his words were resonant with the pretence of the rulers of another era. The subjects were

Y

an abstraction--as abstract as the masses for the commissars. Throw promises at them, throw crumbs of bread, and happy they would be. Or so thought the Deliverers for whom there never existed an emotional covenant between the ruler and the ruled. Rahul only wanted to rescue the wretched from the infernal depths of the misruled state. He could never afford to be one of them. He was not. In that sense he failed the holy ghosts of ancestry. Nehru was unsentimental but not remote, didactic but never condescending in spite of being the most formidable mind of his generation, a mind that was somehow disinherited by the family. This one from one of his stump speeches circa 1957: "Elections will be over in a few days. I am interested in other big issues and want that you should try to understand them...The people must participate in the task of nation-building." For the daughter, campaign politics was a passion play, staged on the mass mind: "My family is not confined to a few individuals. It consists of crores of people. Your burdens are comparatively light, because your families are limited and viable...." The mythmaking of Mother India must have been emotionally exhausting for Mrs Gandhi. Even the haute Congressism of Rajiv Gandhi had a charm of idealism about it in the beginning when he "dreamed" of an India that was "strong, independent, self-reliant and in the front ranks of the world". Rahul has the credibility of a ventriloquist. By the current standard of global leadership, he should be a seasoned politician now, though a failed one. But unlike other failed politicians elsewhere, he has something to wait for. His patience is sustained by an inherited sense of entitlement.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

BY THE CURRENT STANDARD OF GLOBAL LEADERSHIP, RAHUL SHOULD BE A SEASONED POLITICIAN NOW, THOUGH A FAILED ONE. BUT UNLIKE OTHER FAILED POLITICIANS ELSEWHERE, HE HAS SOMETHING TO WAIT FOR.

S I G N P OSTS
RETIRED Rahul Dravid, 39, from international cricket. The former DRAVID India captain will be Rajasthan Royals' captain, coach as well as mentor in the Indian Premier League.

APPOINTED Lt-Gen Zaheerul Islam, as the chief of Pakistan's InterServices Intelligence. He will replace Lt-Gen Ahmad Shuja Pasha on March 18. DIED Former Mumbai Police commissioner Hasan Gafoor, in Mumbai

on March 12 following a cardiac arrest. He was 62. KILLED IPS officer Narendra Kumar Singh, on March 8 at Morena in Madhya Pradesh. He was mowed down while trying to stop a tractor-trolley carrying illegally quarried stones, which

was being driven by a suspected member of the mining mafia. DIED Actor Joy MUKHERJEE Mukherjee, in Mumbai on March 9. He starred in several Bollywood hits in the 1960s. He was 73.

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

17

