Na tion

KARNATAKA

BJP SEARCHES FOR NEWAGENDA
Party dumps communally sensitive issue in Chikmagalur by-election campaign

Pradesh, if the Lok Sabha byelection to Udupi-Chikmagalur in Karnataka on March 18 is any indication. After the Babri Masjid-Ram temple slogans failed to yield results in Uttar Pradesh, the saffron party quietly buried the southern version in this seat. The 2004 campaign to turn the Sufi dargah at Bababudangiri into a Hindu Datta Peeta shrine got five MLA seats for BJP in the region. Now, Chikmagalur MLA C.T. Ravi says: "That is not the only issue we have.'' Current Lok Sabha candidate, V. Sunil Kumar, 34, reportedly apologised in some Muslim pockets for his part in the earlier campaign. In contrast to the sober BJP, the Congress is inciting local fears. They claim Project Tiger, announced for 1,000 acres in this constituency, means tigers are going to be let loose in that area. "Tigers will come into our villages. The Centre proposed it, but this BJP government notified our land for this project and is responsible for the threat to our lives,'' local Congress leader B.N. Somesh said. As BJP counters this, an angry activist,

B

JP has learnt lessons from Uttar

D.V. Girish of the Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust, is preparing to file a PIL to get the issue clarified. The by-election is taking place as Chief Minister D.V. Sadananda Gowda resigned from the Lok Sabha seat to occupy Karnataka's top post six months ago. Despite voter fatigue, the ruling BJP has spent an estimated Rs 30 crore on the bypoll, against the Congress' Rs 8 crore. The Congress hopes to benefit from the BJP tussle between scamtainted former chief minister B.S. Yeddyurappa and his hand-picked successor, Gowda. Congress may grab the 90,000 votes of the former's Lingayat community. However, votes across castes seem to be consolidating behind the

(LEFT) BJP CANDIDATE V. SUNIL KUMAR; CONGRESS CANDIDATE K.J. HEGDE

THE BABABUDANGIRIDATTA PEETA SHRINE BECAME A HINDUTVA FLASHPOINT IN 2004. BJP REAPED RICH DIVIDENDS FROM IT.

"good image" of Gowda. "We will win by a margin of 70,000 votes,'' a confident Gowda told INDIA TODAY. No one is bothered about corruption allegations against Yeddyurappa or the disgrace of his blue film watching cohorts. Senior Congress leader B.L. Shankar said this was significant as "this bypoll is a semifinal for the 2013 Karnataka Assembly polls''. Congress candidate K. Jayaprakash Hegde, 59, a former minister with a clean image, says: "The people know we brought new rail lines and a Rs 1,400-crore-coffee package." But BJP has done more. "Our MLA D.N. Jeevraj has given us roads, water supply, houses and borewells. He makes no communal distinctions and hands out money to all. Why won't we vote for his party?'' asks Nouraq, 30, a Muslim voter. JD(S), once a strong force in the region, will be the spoiler. "Their candidate S.L. Boje Gowda will take both Congress and BJP votes and be the decider for who wins,'' says voter Pruthvidarshan, 40. by Sowmya Aji

46

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

Nation

ARUNACHALPRADESH

CHINA MAKES RIVER RUN DRY
Arunachal Pradesh government spokesperson claims a 40 per cent drop in the Siang's water flow, blames it on China building dams, and gets sacked
runachal Pradesh government's claim that the Siang river--also called Brahmaputra in Assam-- has dried up in certain patches in the state has once again raised doubts over China's ambitious plan to divert the river's water to its northern provinces. According to state spokesperson Tako Dabi, water flow of the river at Pasighat--headquarters of the East Siang district--has seen a 40 per cent drop due the Zangmu dam on the river in Tibet. There are also reports in local media that water level has dropped at Dhubri and Guwahati in Assam. Dabi lost his job following the Siang statement. Chief Minister Nabam Tuki says Dabi was allowed to go as he did not want to continue but Dabi says he was sacked because he spoke the truth. Though China has rubbished Dabi's claim saying that the dam at Zangmu has no adverse downstream effect, activists in Assam have raised an alarm over yet another Chinese dam planned at the Great Bend of the river during its course in Tibet. According to media reports, China is planning a 38,000-MW dam on the river at Motuo in Tibet. Environmental experts predict that water flow may de-

A

crease by 60 per cent if China goes ahead with its plans. "People have the right to know about the dam. The Indian Government must conduct an inquiry," says Akhil Gogoi of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti, which is leading an ant-dam agitation in Assam. China reportedly wants to divert water from Motuo to the arid areas of Xinjiang and Gansu in China. In May 2010, Zhang Boting, the deputy general secretary of the China Society for Hydropower Engineering, told The Guardian that the project was still at the drawing board stage. Sinohydro, a Chinese company, has even put up the plan details on its website. "It's 2012 now. India must find out the exact status of the Motuo dam," says Firoz Ahmed, an environmentalist based in Guwahati. Rising water shortage in northern and western China has prompted Beijing to tap the Tibetan rivers in the south. According to Tashi Tsering, a Tibetan scholar of environmental policy at the University of British Columbia, there are 28 dams on the river under construction or being actively discussed by the Chinese. Dabi's claims, however, have found

EXPERTS PREDICT WATER FLOW MAY DECREASE BY 60 PER CENT IF CHINA BUILDS A 38,000-MW DAM ON THE SIANG RIVER AT MOTUO IN TIBET.

no official takers. India's Central Water Commission says there is no information about any "abnormal" decline in the water level. Even District Commissioner of East Siang, Talem Tapok, who is a native of Pasighat, rubbishes Dabi's claims. He says the water level has gone up this year. "Average water level in January-February in 2011 was 148.10 m and the average this year is 148.92 m. That's an increase of 0.82 m. This is the lean period and water levels usually come down," adds Tapok. Dabi has not been able to produce any evidence to support his claims but he is not ready to give up. "I accept that it's a lean period, but was not it a Chinese dam bust that caused the devastating flood in Pasighat in 2000? The Central Water Commission should conduct an in-depth study about the effect of the dam on the water flow of the Siang in India," he told INDIA TODAY. The Arunachal Pradesh government has signed Memorandums of Understanding for as many as 168 hydel projects. But the strong anti-dam agitation underway in the state and neighbouring Assam threatens to scuttle those plans. Protesters have already stalled construction at NHPC's 2,000 MW Lower Subansiri hydel project since December 16, 2011. Agitators have now upped the ante against the two proposed hydel projby Kaushik Deka ects on the Siang.

THE SIANG RIVER IN ARUNACHAL PRADESH

48

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

KAUSHIK BASU

