UP FRONT

BINAYAK SEN

FOOD BILLIS ADISASTER
ur country is in a state of `stable famine' and if lows the Government to change from a PDS to a cashthe current draft of the Food Security Bill that is transfer system at any point of time. It is a step backcurrently before the Standing Committee of the ward from the existing system. Parliament is passed, it will get worse. According to the According to research by economist Utsa Patnaik, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau's adult malnu- there has been a steady decline in grain consumption trition figures, 37 per cent of India's adult population over a 10-year period. A family of five that used to conhas a Body Mass Index (BMI) below 18.5. The situation sume 880 kg of grain annually consumes only 770 kg is worse with specific communities--50 per cent of after a lapse of 10 years. And since this is a mean figScheduled Tribes and 60 per cent of Scheduled Castes ure, it means that the economically advantaged have have a BMI below 18.5. The WHO states that if more than actually increased their consumption and the decline 40 per cent of a community has a BMI below 18.5, it for the economically backward is far greater. We live in a world where famine is depicted as means that community is in a state of famine. The Food Security Bill, meant to alleviate this na- apocalyptic and that the main reason for famine is lack tion from such a fate, is a disaster. The bill shows three of food production. In India, it is the lack of access to categories--excluded, general (above the poverty line) food that is responsible. We live within a system that is and priority (below the poverty line). People in the gen- socially differentiated, where particular groups are eral category get a monthly 3 kg of grain per capita and more affected than others. We live in a country where the priority categories get 7 kg. The very basic method the government is thinking hard over spending by which they identify these categories is faulty. Rs 1 lakh crore to provide food, but easily spends Rs 5 According to the Government, an urban person whose lakh crore towards tax revisions for corporates. An affidavit, submitted by the Planning daily expenditure is Rs 32 or less and a rural person Commission in the Supreme Court in the PUCL case in whose daily expenditure is Rs 26 or less is BPL. The criteria and implementation are faulty, so how September 2011, revises the recommended calorific will the bill benefit the people? The People's Union for requirement downward to 1,800 per day; this is Civil Liberties (PUCL), of which I am a member, is part against the Indian Council for Medical Research's recof a coalition for the right to food, campaigning for an ommendation of 2,400 calories per day for people doing moderate work and 2,100 adequate supply of food for all citSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com calories per day for those doing izens of India. The campaign sedentary work. We need an extenstarted 10 years ago from a PIL sive public campaign to acquaint brought in the Supreme Court by people with the flaws of the Bill and the PUCL. The case is still on, but the need for a Bill that will enable the interlocutory orders passed by people to get enough food. the court have framed the subOn December 14, 2011, in a stantial architecture of the Public Cabinet meeting, Sharad Pawar, as Distribution System (PDS) as it reported in the press, asked how stands today. However, further the Government could be responsidevelopments are necessary in the ble for feeding every mouth in the system, including the universalicountry if there was a famine. This sation of the PDS and a substantial is one of the basic requirements of increase and diversification of the a modern state--if we are going to statutory rations allotted to the talk about rights at all, the most beneficiaries. The PDS could important is the right to adequate greatly benefit from universalisaWe live in a country food and potable water. Universal tion instead of the targeted apwhere the government is access to food is necessary in order proach currently undertaken --this would lessen grain wastage thinking hard over spend- to curb the widespread malnutriand was also recommended by the ing Rs 1 lakh crore to pro- tion seen across the country. National Advisory Council headed vide sufficient food, but by Sonia Gandhi. Binayak Sen is a public health easily spends Rs 5 lakh The grievance redressal sysspecialist and an activist. This article crore towards tax revitem proposed in the bill is also is based on his conversation with faulty. The Food Security Bill alLakshmi Kumaraswami. sions for corporates.

O

10

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

NEW

