Cover Story

ROWATSEA
marks have kicked up a furore because most of the state's fisherfolk, including the two slain persons, belonged to the Latin Catholic Church. Kerala is stunned by the killing. The state police have arrested the two marines on charges of murder and have also seized the ship. These measures have been opposed by the Italian officials who maintained their crew can be tried only under international law. "I like to believe that the cardinal did not say such things. Hope he would understand our family's grief too," says Derec, 17, son of Jelestin, one of the dead fishermen. Besides political leaders, fishermen's organisations and even members from the Latin Catholic Church have expressed dismay at the cardinal's reported remarks. The cardinal has also dragged in K.V. Thomas, Union minister of state for agriculture and food, into the controversy. Thomas was present at the Vatican where Alencherry was ordained as cardinal. The minister denied having discussed the issue with the cardinal. "We are all for taking the most stringent action against the culprits," he said. Italian Deputy Foreign Minister Steffan de Mistura, who flew down to New Delhi on February 22, apologised over the incident to his Indian counterpart Preneet Kaur. The minister said that he would travel to Kerala and express regret to the families of the murdered fishermen. According to an official present at the meeting, Mistura insisted that the two personnel be tried in accordance with Italian or international laws. He was told by Kaur that the two security personnel would be tried according to Indian law. "As far as the law is concerned, they have their interpretations and we have our interpretations," Kaur told the media. "As far as we are concerned in India, we will go by our law," she said. Mistura then jetted down to Thiruvananthapuram, where Chief Minister Oommen Chandy told him the same thing. The law would take its course. Coast Guard officials say there is no ambiguity in the law when it comes to trying the Italian security personnel

IS CARDINAL ALENCHER RYMORE LOYAL TO ITALYTHAN KERALA?
The head of India's largest Catholic church reportedly defends the killing of Kerala fishermen by Italian security guards, and puts his own reputation in the line of fire
By M.G. Radhakrishnan and Sandeep Unnithan
CARDINAL ALENCHERRY

ajor Archbishop Mar George Alencherry, 66, was ordained cardinal by Pope Benedict XVI at a serene ceremony in the imposing St. Peter's Basilica at Vatican on February 18. With this, the head of the Kerala-based Syro-Malabar Church-- India's largest and richest Catholic church with 3.7 million members-- joined an elite group of 213 cardinals that elects the next successor to the 84 year-old Pope. But barely three days after he recited the traditional oath of loyalty to the church before the Pope, Mar Alencherry and his church face a serious charge at home: are they more loyal to Italy than to their own country and people? The charge arose after the cardinal's interview in Rome to Agenzia Fides, the Vatican's official news agency. Alencherry spoke about the fatal shooting of two Indian fishermen off the Kerala coast allegedly by the security guards stationed on board the Italian oil tanker, Enrica Lexie, on February 16. "I am and will remain in close contact with the Catholic ministers of Kerala and I hope that they will help to pacify the situation. In particular, I trust in the work of the Tourism Minister, the Catholic K.V. Thomas, who participated in the consistory in Rome in the past days and attended the mass with the Holy Father and the new cardinals. He is a man of great moral stature and of significant influence, both in the local and Central Government, and he assured me his maximum effort. I guarantee,

M

AP

AP

ITALIAN GUARDS MASSIMILIANO LATORRE (LEFT) AND SALVATORE GIRONE

in the next few days, my constant involvement with the Indian authorities on the matter," Agenzia Fides quoted him as saying. "I learned the story of the Catholic fishermen killed; it is very sad. I immediately contacted the Catholic ministers of Kerala urging the gov-

ernment not to act precipitatedly. In the episode, of course, there were errors, since the fishermen were mistaken for pirates. But the point is another. It seems that the opposition party wants to take advantage of the situation and exploit the case for electoral reasons, speaking of `Western powers' or the `will of American dominance'," the Vatican

agency quoted him. Christians make up 19 per cent of Kerala's 33 million population and are a powerful community. The Latin Catholic and Syro-Malabar Church are the predominant Catholic denominations. Kerala has the maximum number of dioceses, 29 districts under the supervision of a bishop. They form an influential political block. The

Syro-Malabar Church, with 3.7 million adherents, is the richest religious organisation in the state. One of the largest recipients of foreign contributions, it has assets worth more than Rs 1,000 crore. Its economic clout rests in over 5,000 schools, colleges, hospitals and technical training institutions that it runs. The archbishop's reported re-

34

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

Cover Story

ROWATSEA

for murder. Section 188 A makes the Indian Criminal Procedure Code applicable throughout India's Exclusive Economic Zone (200 nautical miles from the coastline). Faced with public outcry over Alencherry's statement, the Catholic Bishops' Conference of India (CBCI) and the Syro-Malabar Church hurriedly issued statements saying the cardinal was misquoted. "The cardinal did not utter many of those words. All he said was that the issue be resolved without upsetting the mutual relations of India and Italy. How can he say this when the poor fishermen who were killed were also Catholics?" explained Fr Paul Thelakat, spokesperson of the Syro-Malabar Church. But the damage has already been done, and his remarks are on record. According to Thelakat, the cardinal wanted an amicable settlement as he was apprehensive about how the incident would affect Indians in Italy and those working on Italian ships. "The cardinal told me he did not speak to any minister on the issue nor did he intend to meddle in the legal course of action," he said. The chief minister, too, has said that none of his ministers was involved in any mediation on the issue. "All arguments put forward by the crew of the Italian ship are unacceptable to us. We will go to the maximum extent to book those who shot our citizens. Our government has all support from the Central Government and, particularly, from the external affairs ministry," said Chandy. The Syro-Malabar Church, one of

AFP

TANKER FLOUTED GUIDELINES ATSEA
IMO rules advocate extreme

caution in use of force
he Enrica Lexie disregarded guidelines which call for firearms T to be used only in an extreme emergency. The International Maritime Organisation (IMO) defines these emergencies as those when a vessel's crew is faced with threat to life or serious injury. The two Indian fishermen were shot dead off the Kerala coast allegedly by security guards on board the tanker, without any provocation. The guidelines were issued by the IMO in September 2011 after approval by the Maritime Security and Privacy Working Group. The guidelines were later included in the `Malmo Declaration' passed by the International Conference on Piracy at Sea (ICOPAS) organised by the IMO and the World Maritime University at Malmo, Sweden, in October 2011.

(LEFT) THE INDIAN FISHING BOAT THAT CAME UNDER FIRE; FREDDY FRANK, OWNER OF THE BOAT

laying submarine cables. The shooting incident has been a topic of serious debate in global maritime circles and has prompted the IMO, the specialised agency of the United Nations with 170 member states including India and Italy, to bring out detailed guidelines on the use of private security guards on board ships. The IMO guidelines were issued for shipowners, operators and shipmasters on the use of Privately Contracted Armed Security Personnel (PCASP) offering maritime security services for vessels transiting the pirate-infested zones.


to a pirate attack.
 Use firearms when faced with death threat or serious injury

According to the guidelines, the personnel must not use firearms against persons except in self defence or defence of others against imminent death threat or serious injury or to prevent the perpetration of a particularly serious crime involving grave threat to life.
 Master in command

The ship's master to remain in command at all times and retains the overriding authority on board.
 Detailed documentation of the incident

Avoid private guards on board

The guards accused in the present incident claim to be Italian navy personnel on deputation. The incident has highlighted the absence of guidelines regarding the use and conduct of navy personnel for maritime security services. Experts say the shooting incident could be far graver if committed by navy personnel instead of private

guards. "It can be seen as a hostile act against the coastal state," said P.K. Mukherjee of the World Maritime University. Mukherjee says even if the incident occurred in international waters, it does not constitute a freedom of the high seas as provided in the International Law of Seas Convention. The freedoms of high seas are only those for navigation, overflight and

The IMO guidelines start with the remark that it does not endorse the use of PCASP on board ships as an alternative for Best Management Practice and other protective measures.
 Prevent boarding, use minimum force
IMO guidelines clearly state that the guards' primary function was the prevention of boarding (by pirates) using minimal force. It is also required to provide a gradual response plan

The master should maintain a proper log of every circumstance in which firearms are discharged, whether accidental or deliberate. Such actions should be fully documented in sufficient detail to produce a formal written record of the incident concerned. The documents should include time and location of the incident, details of events leading up to the incident, written statements by all witnesses, the crew and security team, identity and details of personnel involved etc.
by M.G. Radhakrishnan

the 22 autonomous oriental churches in global Catholic communion, surpasses Kerala's all other religious organisations in economic might as well as political clout. Traditionally, the Syro-Malabar Church's writ has gone unchallenged in the Congress. The church has not only a direct role in policy formulations but it even

hands out its list of preferred candidates during every election. The anti-communist political formations in the state receive its most formidable ballast from the Syro-Malabar Church and the Latin Catholic Church. This church led the "liberation struggle". It saw the dismissal of India's first elected communist gov-

ernment which came to power in Kerala in 1957. Ever since, the SyroMalabar Church has always played a direct role in politics and has issued pastoral letters calling for defeating the communists in every election. The power of the church became evident even in the latest controversy. Even when most sections in Kerala con-

demned the cardinal's comments, the silence of Chandy and UDF leaders was eloquent. "I don't want to comment. Since the Syro-Malabar Church itself has said that the cardinal's comments were misquoted, there is no need to comment," the chief minister said. None in the government has uttered a word against

the cardinal's remarks. Opposition leader V.S. Achuthanandan said that if the comments ascribed to the cardinal were correct, it was unfortunate. "He should not have made those comments. It is strange that the cardinal has reportedly made these comments in Union minister Thomas's presence,"

FISHING IN TROUBLED WATERS
February 15,2012

Indian fishermen have been at the receiving end of high-handed treatment by security forces of other countries in the neighbourhood
July 28,2011
Thirty Indian fishermen were injured in an assault by the Sri Lankan Navy personnel off the coast of Rameswaram. Their catch and GPS equipment was taken away.

April 15,2011
Four Indian fishermen from Tamil Nadu went missing in the high seas. Their bodies were found subsequently. It was alleged that they were killed by Sri Lankan Navy personnel.

February 6,2011
Three fishermen from Rameswaram were thrown into the sea and their boat ransacked by the Sri Lankan Navy on the charge of straying into Lankan waters.

January 23,2011
An Indian fisherman was killed and two injured allegedly by Sri Lankan personnel off the Kodiakarai coast, sparking public anger in Tamil Nadu and condemnation by New Delhi.

April 9,2010
The crew of a passing foreign cargo ship off the coast of Oman fired upon a group of Indian fishermen fearing they were pirates. One person was killed and another injured in the incident.

March 2007
A day after the Lankan Navy shot dead an Indian fisherman, another was injured in similar circumstances near Katchatheevu, close to the international maritime boundary.

ENRICA LEXIE, DETAINED BY THE COAST GUARD (RIGHT)

Two Indians were killed after the crew of an Italian merchant vessel fired at a fishing boat. Italy said its personnel had mistaken the fishermen for pirates.

FISHERMEN PROTEST IN RAMESWARAM

36

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

37

Cover Story ROWATSEA
ITALIAN DEPUTY FOREIGN MINISTER STEFFAN DE MISTURA WITH PRENEET KAUR

HOWTHE ITALIANS WERE PICKED UP
Coast Guard laid a trap for the speeding Italian ship
he Indian Coast Guard used a T ruse to nab the Italian tanker Enrica Lexie within two hours of the February 16 shooting incident. Guards on board the vessel shot the fishermen at around 6.40 p.m. The incident was relayed by the fishing boat to police and Coast Guard authorities even before it reached the harbour. The Coast Guard Maritime Rescue Search and Coordination Centre (MRCC) in Mumbai, that responds to all emergencies in the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean, swung into action. The Coast Guard began tracking all ships in the vicinity that could have fired at the fishermen. They zeroed in on the Italian vessel that was steaming northwards along the Indian coast. The Enrica Lexie was asked to report any unusual activity. The captain said he had foiled an attempted act of piracy and that shots were fired. He confirmed he was carrying six armed marines on board. The MRCC asked the captain to turn his ship back to identify the suspected fishing vessel. Once the ship returned to Kochi, it was detained by two Coast Guard patrol vessels.

AP

Preneet Kaur, Minister of State for External Affairs

he said. The cardinal's reported comments have also angered the Latin Catholic church. Members of the Kollam diocese of the church protested against the comments. Fearing a potential split in the Catholic community, the Latin Catholic Church's head archbishop Dr Soosaipakyam swiftly intervened to say that the cardinal would never have made such anti-national comments. "His words must have been misconstrued. It is sad that the Vatican and the Pope are being needlessly drawn into this controversy by interested parties," he said. He also added that the Vatican does

not meddle in the temporal affairs of churches in other countries. Various fishermen bodies, too, have expressed dismay over the cardinal's reported comments. "It is extremely unfortunate that there are people from Kerala out to defend those Italians who shot dead our own people," the Kerala Fishermen Federation said in a statement. The BJP, too, has joined issue, asking Chandy to intervene and explain. "Are his ministers subservient to the people or their church?" asked V. Muralidharan, state BJP president. Some angry fishermen have even hinted at Congress President Sonia

38

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

``

``

As far as the law is concerned, the Italians have their interpretations and we have our interpretations. As far as we in India are concerned, we will go by our law.

Gandhi's Italian origins to charge that the Congress-led governments at the state and the Centre would not show courage to initiate action against the Italian ship. On February 18, Alencherry became the 10th Indian bishop and fourth from Kerala to become cardinal. He is the first elected head of the Syro-Malabar Church. Alencherry, who has studied biblical theology from Sorbonne University, was installed as the archbishop in May 2011. The controversy over his comments will cast a long shadow over the church as the trial of the Italian marines unfolds. 

