Goa Tourism Development Corporation -Making Goa a heaven away from home.
tfn the west coast of India, lies a land of unspoilt beaches, white-washed churches and green fields bordered by dramatically carved mountains. The wild cries of exotic birds echo over the vast expanses of green fields. You might even spot an olive ridley turtle nesting on the sands of a faraway beach. Goa has always been a land of mystery and magic - a land unique from all others, difficult to understand, yet strangely fascinating. The notion of Goa as a gentle fabled land with sunkissed beaches freeze-framed some time ago when tourism revolved around visits to heritage homes, a quick pop-in at a country eatery and a round trip of the popular sunkissed beaches. Sustained tourism efforts initiated by the Goa Tourism Development Corporation (GTDC) and Department of Tourism, Government of Goa have transformed Goa from a regular tropical destination to one that offers an addictive cocktail of charms including intriguing options like adventure, medical, heritage, hinterland, wildlife and well-being tourism for the seasoned traveller. Says Shyam Satardekar, Chairman, GTDC, "We are continually diversifying our markets and have developed new marketing strategies to draw in tourists from all over including China, Japan, Australia, South Africa and Canada. These have already started to bear fruit and we have been recording a significant increase in tourist arrivals ever since." From 1.27 million arrivals in 2000, the State has recorded 2.6 million arrivals in 2011 out of which 0.4 million were foreign tourist arrivals. This can be attributed to a world-wide innovative marketing strategy adopted by GTDC and Department of Tourism, Government of Goa encompassing various media including print, radio, television, web applications, mobile messaging, road shows and promotions. Several international buyers have begun showing confidence in Goa as a multi-faceted destination. This was evident at the second edition of the Goa International Travel Mart initiated by GTDC with the support of the Department of Tourism, Government of Goa and other travel and tourism groups. The mart was part of an aggressive marketing strategy that brought together over 450 international and domestic buyers and more than 2500 trade visitors under a single roof. There are various reasons why Goa has succeeded in capturing the interest of travelers the world over. Among them, are the intrinsic beauty of the State and its vast array of experiences including serene beaches, mesmerizing backwaters, culinary delights, affordable medical facilities, adventure sports, forests, wildlife, spice gardens, rich history, culture, festivals, fairs and MICE facilities. Moreover, GTDC has continually striven to offer better and more integrated travel packages to its visitors to allow tourists visiting the State an opportunity of savouring a variety of experiences. Right from the infancy of tourism in Goa, GTDC has been at the forefront to ensure that every visitor to Goa has access to accommodation at prime locations at prices as friendly as the Goans themselves. The properties managed by GTDC include the Panaji, Miramar, Calangute, Old Goa, Colva, Mapusa, Vasco, Farmagudi, Mayem Lake and Hotels run by Goa Tourism Development Corporation Panjim Residency +91 S32 2223396 Margao Residency +91 832 2715528 Vasco Residency +91 832 2513119 Mapusa Residencv +91 832 2262694 Calangute Residency +91 832 2276109 Miramar Residency +91 832 2464154 Colva Residency +91 832 2788048 armagudi Residencv +91 832 2335122' Old Goa Residency +91 832 2285327 Mayem Lake View +91 832 2362144 Britona Riverside +91 8322416107 Calangute Annexe +91 832 2276009 Britona Residencies. "Goa is beautiful, it has a pleasant tropical climate, the adventure sports are amazing and it has excellent facilities for tourists, whether they are on a shoestring budget or indulging in the luxuries of a swank resort." gushes Sandra Brown, atraveller from Britain. The ongoing marketing Campaign, was specially designed to try something unique in terms of creating an impact instead of the usual course of action. The campaign hooked on the concept of a 'big idea1 and was followed up by a series of supplementary promotional campaigns. Melvyn Vaz Managing Director, GTDC claims, "The quantifiable benefits in terms of increased profitability, infrastructural developments and customer satisfaction are ample proof that GTDC goes the extra mile to consistently provide a unique and memorable experience to visitors to the beautiful State of Goa." Even while its tourism numbers consistently show a marked increase, GTDC ensures that Goa maintains its inherent natural beauty by encouraging environmentally substainable efforts, so visitors to Goa can enjoy the seamless blending of East and West, contemporary experiences laced with old world charm. As Fredericko, a regular visitor to Goa, fondly remarks "A warm hello ... a friendly smile ... admiring the beauty of a golden sunset, or enjoying the peacefulness of a starry evening -- you know that Goa is the place to call home."

AN

FUTURE-

1

Interview:
Melvyn A. Vaz
Managing Director GTDC

beaches and police checkpoints at strategic locations. Tourist guides with security guidelines are circulated to all hotels, travel and tour operators. What are the strategies to draw tourists in 2012? We are attempting to reposition Goa and break the perception that we are a typical beach destination. We have to tell the world that Goa offers something for everyone, which we are doing through a series of marketing campaigns, road shows, trade fairs, exhibitions and promotions scheduled to take place within the country and abroad. What places of interest would you recommend for the traveler taking his / her first trip to Goa? For a first-time traveler who wants to explore all that Goa has to offer, GTDC has specially tailored itineraries and tours that are designed to open up a world of fun and excitement. The tours cover popular areas like the beaches, hinterland, waterfalls, historical landmarks, places of worship and boat cruises. What are the travel experiences available in Goa which are different from the rest of the country? Goa is not comparable to any other destination in the country. It is the only State in India where tourists can taste both the East and the West in equal measure. Moreover, it offers somethingfor everyone, be it peace of mindoran adrenaline pumping experience. ' What are some popular events in Goa that tourists can look forward to? We have ensured that we have an interesting calendar of events spanning the year through. Some of these events include the vibrant Carnival, Shigmo, Valentine specials, Sao Joao in June, International Film Festival on India (IFFl), Diwali, Christmas & New Year celebrations, and The Grape Escapade, Goa's only Food and Lifestyle Festival among others. Your message to tourists There's noplace like Goa. Visit once and we '11 give you several reasons to

What new ideas has GTDC developed to revitalize traditional markets, to work new and emerging markets? Tourism is essentially a people's industry. So, we are interacting with people across the world be it tour operators, foreign representatives, travelers, delegates from the local and overseas travel industry etc. GTDC is working closely with the local travel industry to develop new products and look for new opportunities that have perhaps remained untouched. We are creating awareness and accessibility through our network across the globe. Goa 'v top international markets are Russia, England and Sweden. However, Australia and Canada are the twonew markets chosen as ones with the strongest potential. Our job is to build and solidify our relationships with these markets. What new products is GTDC working on besides the "traditional" sun, sand and surf? There seems to be untapped potential as far as the hinterland is concerned. What plans on the anvil for that? Yes, the hinterland is one of our strongest selling points but has been fairly untouched till date. The Goa International Travel Mart 2011, sought to showcase the lush interiors of Goa and we succeeded to an extent. But this is just skimming the iceberg, there is a whole lot more that Goa has to offer like heritage tourism, well-being tourism, wildlife safaris, medical tourism, adventure sports, culture and arts etc. We plan to create special tour packages to highlight these offerings and create innovative mixes to attract an increasingly discerning tourist populace. How is GTDC coping with the demands for better security to tourists and on the beaches? Goa has always been a safe tourist destination. Nevertheless, we have stepped up security measures at beaches, at places of worship and other areas frequented by tourists. There are qualified lifeguards on all

Incredible India

A parted ftofldoy dsmnanon

Goa!

It's always been in your heart... Now, let it touch your soul.

Goa Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. Trionora Apartments, Dr Alvares Costa Road Panaji, Goa- 403001 Tel: +91 832 2424001/ 02/ 03, Fax: +91 832 24239267 2430133 Email: reservations@goa-tourism.com Website: www.goa-tourism.com

Soak in the spirit of Goa right from sinking your feet into warm sands to listening to the melodious strains of its music. The sights will entertain you as much as the people. With colourful festivals like the Carnival and Shigmo. to keep you in high spirits, Goa promises a vibrant.soui-stirring experience.

