So ciety DESERTED BYNRI

S
SARABJIT SINGH

THE NOWHERE WIVES
By Amitabh Srivastava

Complaints pour into the National Commission of Women at the rate of one a day from women deserted by their husbands based abroad.Will they get justice?

and Asit Jolly nitially, Sarabjit Kaur, 40, thought she had found her soulmate in Gurpreet Bal, 41, a lecturer in a Jalandhar college, when they married in 2002. The fairytale came to an abrupt end when Bal left for the UK in December 2003 without informing his wife, who was at her parents' home in Amritsar post pregnancy. Her daughter Harpreet Kaur was born in August 2003. When Sarabjit tried to go back to her in-laws' home, she was turned away. She filed a case against Bal for desertion in 2004. In March 2011, Sarabjit took her case to the Regional Passport Office (RPO) at Jalandhar following which Bal's Indian passport was revoked. Bal, according to Sarabjit, is now living illegally in the UK. "I have lost all hope of a settlement," she says. Sarabjit is one of the several hundred women abandoned by their husbands based abroad. The National Commission of Women (NCW) has registered 796 such complaints between September 24, 2009 and November 30, 2011, translating into one complaint reaching NCW every day. The Non-Resident Indian (NRI) cell was set up at NCW to look into the cases. Gurmit Kaur, 38, from Khanaura village in Punjab got married to an NRI `settled in the US' on November 22, 2000. Her husband Manjit Singh went abroad after marriage with a promise to send her immigration papers. A promise he never kept. She learned, to her horror, that Manjit was married with a son. "Not only this, he was not a well-settled NRI, just an unskilled worker in Seoul," a bitter Gurmit says. Women have been found to have been forcibly sent back by their hus-

I

bands have taken advantage of lenient laws in foreign countries to obtain ex parte divorces from overseas courts to deny maintenance to women dumped in India. NCW has received several complaints from countries, including US, UK, Australia, Thailand and UAE, of abandoned Indian women without proper immigration documents. In a written communication to INDIA TODAY, NCW Law Officer Neeraj Rawat says that Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Punjab are the most affected states on the basis of complaints received. Though the charm of an NRI groom has faded in recent years given the instability in global economies and availability of eligible men with good pay in India, the dream of settling daughters abroad is still a tempting prospect for some. "In their eagerness to not let go of such a match, families totally ignore even the common pre-

HELP AT HAND
Government has taken some steps to help deserted women

SARABJIT KAUR, 40 Married GURPREET BAL, 41, in 2002. Daughter was born in 2003.
Deserted less than six months after daughter's birth. Bal left for the UK. She filed a case of domestic violence against in-laws in 2007. She stopped Bal from emigrating to Canada and got authorities to revoke his passport.
SARABJIT SINGH

Ministry of External Affairs has set up a special cell in each mission abroad to help victims of NRI marriages. Since 2011, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs gives financial aid to women deserted abroad--$3,000 for developed countries and $2,000 for developing countries. Rs 32,86,709 disbursed between 2007-08 and 2010-11 by Indian missions to NGOs and 77 women deserted abroad. 796 complaints to NCW have been registered in just 14 months, from the time its NRI cell became functional in September 2009 to November 2011. State governments have been urged to make efforts to increase registration of NRI marriages, especially of girls hailing from rural areas.

REKHA SOHAL, 26 Married to VISHAL SUTTI, 29, in 2006; has a four-year-old son.
Deserted by Sutti, who left for Manila, Philippines, in 2007, while she was pregnant. He returned in 2008 and took her to Manila only to abandon her and flee to the US in August 2009. Rekha filed a case for maintenance in 2010. In March 2011, she got the Jalandhar RPO to revoke Sutti's passport. bands or held to ransom for dowry demands. There are also several cases where victims weren't picked up at the airport upon arrival in a foreign country. Some were slapped with abduction charges if they returned with their children, according to a background note jointly prepared by NCW and the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in February 2011. Many victims, says the note, have found that their husbands were either already married in the foreign country or gave false information about their jobs and immigration status. The NCW note also states that some of the husANIL DAYAL

GURMIT KAUR, 38 Married MANJIT SINGH in 2000. Daughter was born in 2003.
Learnt that Manjit Singh was already married with a son. He was not based in the US, but in Seoul where he was an unskilled worker. Manjit pocketed Rs 4.5 lakh in dowry and Rs 1.5 lakh from a relative of Gurmit's and left for Seoul with a promise to send immigration papers. Gurmit has filed a criminal case against Manjit.

cautions that are observed in traditional matchmaking," says 44-yearold Gurpreet Kaur Deo, inspector general of police, NRI affairs, Punjab. In the past three years, 159 criminal cases have been filed in Punjab against overseas husbands for abandoning their wives. Having represented scores of such brides in the Punjab and Haryana High Court, Daljit Kaur, 42, a Chandigarh-based lawyer, says Punjabis' preference for expatriate grooms is linked with the age-old fascination with the West. "Besides, divided holdings have left many families with shrunken farm income. The expatriate success stories tempt them to desperately seek foreign alliances," she says. Former Union social welfare minister B.S. Ramoowalia, who has taken up the cause of Punjab's abandoned brides, believes more than 15,000 women in the state have been deserted by their overseas husbands over the last two decades. "The husbands based abroad tend to exhaust the women by prolonging the cases," says the 68-year-old politician. In March 2011, Jalandhar's RPO set up a women's cell to address concerns of brides deserted by NRI spouses. Legal provisions of the Passport Act of 1967 have been invoked to confiscate or revoke passports issued to individuals who misrepresented their marital status or against whom criminal cases are pending. So far, orders to revoke passports have been issued in over 50 cases. But such orders are issued only if victims produce proof of marriage, rarely available with deserted women. The NCW cell has a few success stories as well. In the case of Gurpreet Kaur, NCW got a new passport issued after her husband dumped her in India. NCW also got an NGO to fight her case in the British courts. The panel is following up the case of Sunaina Devi in New Zealand. She was rescued from her home after her husband got her declared insane. While the `successes' are few and far between, the number of desertions indicates that the law still has some catching up to do to nab the missing husbands, most of whom exploit its loopholes to make their getaway. 

64

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

