Soc iety FASHION

FASHION FALLS AT INDIA'S FEET
GETTY IMAGES

Karl Lagerfeld to Christian Louboutin, the best in the West are taking inspiration from India

By Avantika Sharma

CHANEL
Karl Lagerfeld's ParisBombay collection has drama and jewellery in abundance. In the international fashion industry, India is synonymous with colours. But only pinks and the rare blue made it to the collection.

NAEEM KHAN
Mumbai-born, US-based designer's Indian prints, impeccable cuts and plunging necklines will make him a favourite with Hollywood stylists.

arl Lagerfeld doesn't believe in subtlety. When he unveiled Chanel's pre-fall 2012 collection in early December in Paris, he showed how. Part of the Metiers d'Arts series, his Paris-Bombay collection had every grand cliche from Indian fashion and more. There was heavy beading on Nehru collars, dresses with a sari drape as well as intricate embroidery with gold. Typically, given his mad-hatter streak, Lagerfeld did not visit India to research for the collection. "Fantasy is often better than reality," he told reporters backstage after the show, held at the Grand Palais. "It's much more inspiring not to go to places than to go." The 78-year-old designer said the collection was more like a marriage of English chic and Indian opulence. His muse was Lady Curzon, Vicereine of India from 1898 to 1904. "That's why I came out with model Stella Tennant at the end of the show, because she looks very much like her," he said. After the first flourish of zari borders on Gucci jeans and an Indian summer at Harrods in 2005 as well as late British designer Alexander McQueen's India-inspired collection in 2010, India has hit the international fashion circuit yet again. Lagerfeld, whose magnificent sets receive as much attention as the clothes themselves, HERMÈS turned the Grand Palais into a royal dinner The marriage of prints and colours party. Couturier Tarun with the rich fabric Tahiliani, who didn't atof Hermès would tend the event but read have won many about it in detail, said, hearts, but for "They even had a toy the price tag of train running across a Rs 3-4 lakh.

K

lavish dinner table, just like the Maharaja of Gwalior did." The clothes, though, were "simply Chanel", as Tahiliani says, "with an Indian twist". Mumbai-based designer Narendra Kumar felt that the Chanel head designer and creative director's interpretation of India was a "Bollywood adaptation without the colour". However, bridal couturier J.J. Valaya believes that when taking inspiration, there is no correct interpretation and no reason to be accurate. Taiwanese Canadian fashion designer Jason Wu, 29, also released his India-inspired Pre-Fall 2012 collection in New York at the same time as Paris-Bombay. Manhattan-based Wu sought inspiration in the era of maharajas. There was a streak of jewel tones and splashes of intricate embroidery, fused together with illustrations of American wildlife artist Charley Harper. "Combining the two meant a strict silhouette with stately embellishments," Wu explained. French shoe designer Christian Louboutin included the Bollywood shoes in his Spring/Summer 2012 collection, just in time for the opening of the label's first store in New Delhi. Adorned with Rajasthani needlework

CHRISTIAN LOUBOUTIN
Bright and over-decorated, Louboutin shoes are more likely to attract a Rajasthani folk dancer than India's stiletto set.

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

69

NEW

Soc iety FASHION
and kundan stones, the festive-looking shoe might woo fashionistas abroad with its `exotic' appeal, but the gaudy design and bright colours are unlikely to find place in the style-conscious Indian diva's wardrobe. This was probably why when Parisian house Hermès wanted to do something special to launch their second Indian store in Mumbai in September 2011, artistic director Pierre-Alexis Dumas opted for the sari. Priced between Rs 3 lakh and Rs 4 lakh, the Hermès saris sport intricate prints and vivid colours like orange, violet and green, and are made out of fine materials like silk and cashmere. The store also offers the option of custommade cholis. But with that price range, the clientele is obviously limited to a select few. Mumbai-born designer Naeem Khan, 54, looked back home for inspiration for his Fall 2012 collection, which he presented at the recentlyconcluded New York Fashion Week. "It all started with a dot," said Khan of the designs, whose collection was an interpretation of bindi. Mughal paisley prints and polka dots were in abundance in his largely black and white collection. However, the Indian inspiration ends just there. The flawless cuts bore no resemblance to Indian silhouettes. These foreign collections adapt India only through prints, jewellery and sometimes even colour, with the structure of the garments not based on Indian body type. So, while India is clearly the flavour of the moment on the international fashion scene, why is it that not many desi designers are making a mark on the international fashion scene? "Indian fashion designers excel in embellishments and embroidery, unparalleled to any other, with some cost advantages, but our fits are more suited to the Indian body type, which may not always work universally," explains Tahiliani. This is one aspect
CORBIS

JASON WU
In typical Jason Wu fashion, the collection is edgy and mirrors the New York-based designer's aesthetics. India figures in the elaborate threadwork.

"I think fashionsavvy Indian brides will wear Chanel for the brand, which is not an alien concept to Indian consumers."
NARENDRA KUMAR, Fashion designer

"Indian designers excel in embroidery, unparalleled to any other, but our fits may not always work universally."
TARUN TAHILIANI, Fashion designer

where Chanel's Paris-Bombay collection stood out. From the classic tweed to the heavy dose of pearls, each piece was intrinsic to the brand's trademark design. But the addition of full skirts, paired with embellished leggings, seemed to channel the current bridal favourite anarkalis and churidar suits. So will the fashion-conscious, brand-savvy Indian bride's wardrobe include Chanel as well? "Sure. I think they will wear it for the brand, which is not an alien concept to Indian consumers," says designer Narendra Kumar. Whether the West's fashion relationship with India will be a slow romance or a torrid affair remains to be seen. "It would be interesting to see a collaboration of an Indian designer and an international design house," says Tahiliani. Valaya feels Indian fashion is already making inroads in China, the Middle East and in a controlled manner, the US and the UK. "These days the western markets are not very lucrative anyway. So everyone is looking east," says Valaya. Is it time for Indians to make their mark abroad in fields other than customer support and software engineering? We will know the answer a few fashion weeks from now. 

70

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

