Soc iety FORTUNE TELLERS
BHASKAR PAUL/ www.indiatodayimages.com

By Aditi Pai

urkish coffee on the couch is an unlikely pit stop to confirm if one is pregnant. But a young Mumbai woman did just that when she walked into Simran Singh's cosy Bandra apartment--instead of the gynaecologist's chamber--for coffee and to have her `am I or am I not' question answered. The revelation lay in the residue left after she was done sipping her coffee. Singh, 35, scrutinised the patterns in the mug to confirm that her client was indeed pregnant. "Doctors had given her conflicting reports but the coffee mug answered her query. She was calm after that," says Singh, a cafeomancy expert who tells the future by reading coffee cups. This `test' may seem outrageous to rationalists but for believers, the soothsayer knows it all. In a world where people increasingly depend on Google and godmen, faith has taken a Anxious about the future? Sip some coffee. new route. Cafeomancy, cartomancy Or better still, a glass of Sauvignon. (fortune telling with a deck of cards) and scrying (focusing on shapes and And know what the stars foretell for you. symbols to interpret meaning), among others, offer new-age solutions to age-old existential problems. A new SHAILJA GUPTA 47 crop of astro-gurus who Gurgaon gauge intentions throWine reader ugh theta waves, read She picked up the craft during a visit to the future in tea cups the US.You pick your wine of choice and or wine goblets and ofsip it. Gupta then analyses the colour and body of the wine left in your glass to offer fer advice on Blacksolutions for your problems. berry Messenger (BBM), CHARGES Rs 5,000 have surfaced. onwards. To some, the desire to know what lies ahead is borne out of mounting expectations; for others, it's a panacea for rising stress and lack of a support system. "Growing competition makes people vulnerable and insecure. Talking about their problems has a cathartic effect and the readings give them a clearer perspective to take decisions," says Hetal Desai, 38, a psychic reader and wellness consultant based in Mumbai. Taking psychic reading to a new level, Delhi's Rachna Mehra, 48, relies on the brain's theta waves to connect

T

HAVE A DRINK, SEE YOUR FUTURE

SIMRAN SINGH 35
Mumbai

Coffee cup reader
She picked up the art from a neighbour as a young girl in Kabul. Drink the Turkish coffee, overturn the cup to drain the liquid and study the patterns that offer answers to your questions. CHARGES Rs 2,100 for an hour.

with the client. "When we go into a theta brainwave to conduct healing sessions, we are not only healing others, but ourselves as well," she says. Living the high life, India's elite is getting the future foretold while sipping on a Sauvignon Blanc. As Gurgaon-based wine reader Shailja Gupta, 47, puts it, "In the modern world, spirits and spirituality can coexist." The wine acts as a catalyst to put her clients at ease and helps establish a connection. The choice of wine, colour of the drink and the bubbles formed in the glass are signs that Gupta, a psychic reader, picks up to analyse the person's condition, problems and offer solutions.

HETAL DESAI 38
Mumbai

Tea leaf reading and candle wax scrying
The clinical hypnotherapist from California Hypnosis Institute follows laws of geomancy (patterns formed in nature) to read tea remains and designs formed by melted wax on water. CHARGES Rs 3,000 for an hour.

The queues might be getting longer at offices of spiritual guides, but queries have remained the same-- mostly pertaining to finances, career and relationships. The magnitude, however, varies. Mumbai's Ashwin Rele, 51, who predicts from the lines on soles of the feet, has young clients who ask him if they will own a BMW, a sea-facing penthouse or marry a man with a six-figure package. "People in older times had simple needs--roti (food), kapda (clothes), makaan (house). Now, they ask for specific brands, posts and figures," he says. If quirky fads are attracting the numbers, for the privacy-seeking, time-starved generation, the astrologer on the gadget is the new buddy. Websites like Astromangal.com throw up birth charts and readings in minutes. Mobile phone companies have introduced astro packages that offer live consultancy and even daily predictions for a fee. Renowned astrologer Bejan Daruwalla advocates synergy between astrology and technology. "We live in an Aquarius age which rests on the pillars of communication, collectivity and connectivity. Technology should come into full play and give impetus to the ancient Indian science," he says. And what better way to connect with the masses than on social media? The sheer convenience of the daily horoscope feed which pops up on millions of screens is working its charm on non-believers as well. Chandigarhbased Prem Kumar Sharma, 54, who spends most of his time catering to NRI clients on his numerology and palmistry website, feels that people enjoy the privacy and comfort that comes from a consultation via video call. Namita Vadehra, 40, uses her palm phone to check cosmic charts and BBM to discuss problems and solutions with her clients. "In Horary astrology, an ancient branch of horoscopic astrology, the time when the question is asked is a crucial element that goes into determining the answer. Through BBM, I can find out the exact time of my clients' queries and factor that into my calculations," says the Delhi-based Vadehra. Annie Mathew, BlackBerry

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

84

RACHIT GOSWAMI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

85

Soc iety FORTUNE TELLERS
maker Research In Motion's head of alliance and developer relations, NAMITAVADEHRA 40 says this is ideal for people on the Delhi go. "You can engage in a live BBM astrologer chat with an expert anywhere She has tables loaded on her phone and and anytime, and that is a libdraws up charts with those. BBM helps her erating idea," she says. record the time the question is asked-- needed in Horary astrology--and send If gadgets are vigorously predictions to clients. altering India's approach to CHARGES No fixed charges, horoscopes, exotic techniques depends on client's like candle wax scrying, water requirements. gazing and aura imaging are arousing interest, especially among the youth. Crystal ball reader Innduu Ahuuja, 39, who used to do daily astrology shows on E24 and Sahara Samay and now has a show called Bhavishya Fal Sitaron Se Hal on Imagine TV, gets around 20 queries in her inbox everyday, mostly from people in their 20s and 30s. "People want instant answers to the smallest issues," she says. Women comprise 80 per cent of the traffic Simran Singh gets, seeking tips on relationships, home, health and career. Men, on the other hand, MEHRA WITH opt for advice on matters related to fiA CLIENT nances or crises at work. "Women are more open and spiritual and pour their hearts out. Men are more headstrong," says Singh. Even as they decode the signs in crystal balls and water bowls, readers insist that these are mere guidelines, not cast in stone. Bangalore's Nawal Abdul Gani, 49, "guides, advises and offers solutions" rather than predict the future. "I uproot old roots that have `fungused' your tomorrow, implant new roots and tell you to go bear fruit," says the coffee cup reader who counts cricketers, politicians and actors--including Preity Zinta and Prabhu Deva-- among her clients. Similarly, Hyderabad-based aura and tarot card reader Inseeya Khambati, 45, tells her clients that the predictions are "only 75 per cent accurate" so that "people don't miss out on opportunities purely based on what I have said and ignore what they see coming their way". The influence of fortune telling is evident from corporate sessions that

RACHNA MEHRA
Delhi

48

Theta healer
She completed a master instructor's course from the Theta Healing Institute of Knowledge, US. She connects with the brain's theta waves to understand the client's problem and offer solutions. CHARGES Rs 3,000 for one hour.

Chennai-based astrologer, tarot card and tropical shell reader K.B. Gopalakrishnan, 42, conducts for ICICI Bank, Wipro and Citibank during customer meets. "Astrology is a small scale industry today. With a cell phone and a laptop, you can earn easily over a lakh per month," he says. It's no wonder then that foretelling techniques from across the world are making their way to the country, shaping the minds of how young Indians think.
with Mona Ramavat, Ayesha Aleem, Sibi Arasu, R. Pallavi, Shilpa Mehta and R. Ramasubramanian

86

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

