Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

FEMINISTAS ICONOCLAST
The memoirs of Ismat Chughtai bring out her rage against orthodoxies
By Mini Kapoor

T
A LIFE IN WORDS: MEMOIRS
byIsmat Chughtai Translated from the Urdu byM.Asaduddin Penguin Price: RS 499 Pages: 282 BETWEEN THE COVERS Despite the needlessly apologetic introduction byher able translator that these fragments of a memoir serialised in an Urdu magazine in 1979-1980 retain big gaps in the storyof her life,the episodic recollections highlight what kept Chughtai apart.

he fiction of Ismat Chughtai, whose place in the Progressive Writers' Movement of the mid-20th century has been steadily made more prominent with time, was shot through with defiance of orthodoxy. It was a theme of the time, and like many women writers before and after her, she reached back to her own experiences and stories overheard in adolescence to nourish her fiction. Therefore, the appearance in English translation of fragments of her memoirs sustains a guessing game on the side for those familiar with her work: Match the real-life character with his or her fictional counterpart. That, however, remains a secondary pursuit. Despite the needlessly apologetic introduction by her able translator that these fragments of a memoir serialised in an Urdu magazine in 19791980 retain big gaps in the story of her life, the episodic recollections highlight what kept Chughtai apart. (She passed away in 1991, and they were subsequently collected into a volume, Kaghazi Hai Pairahan, by her publisher.) One, she is a storyteller first--and while her fiction and non-fiction hold scathing social commentary, it is never allowed to weigh down the narrative. In fact, the story is the commentary, and wit is its unwavering handmaiden. Two, and this is what makes her such a delight to read and re-read, the fight for progress (in defiance of orthodoxy of all kinds) and especially women's rights, is presented less as a struggle, than as an attainment of the new normal. There is no heroic afterglow for her success in getting her middle class, well-connected family to let her study and choose her life partner--it's just the way it should be, so she can carry on in her quest for interesting experiences. Take a chapter from `A

Life in Words' that obliquely shows us what Chughtai was all about. In the 1940s, Chughtai raised a stir with her story Lihaaf, and soon enough, she was summoned from Bombay to a Lahore court on charges brought forth for obscenity. In her recollection of the episode, there is a suggestion of regret at having brought on this disruption (she goes so far as to say that the summons sparked arguments with her husband Shahid Lateef, the well-known film director, with even the threat of divorce flung at one point). But even as she began to fear her mail for the abusive letters that started to pour in, Chughtai soon fell back to her default position of taking life as it was and making the most of it. Saadat Hasan Manto too had been summoned to appear in the same court on the same charges. Off they went to enjoy Lahore in winter, feasting, shopping, socialising, eating maltas the local way. She writes: "Involuntarily, a prayer came out from my heart for people who had filed the lawsuit." (As for the suit, she won her point, with her detractors unable to cut through the suggestiveness in the story to find any words that could be considered obscene.) Other recollections are from Chughtai's younger days, and in the sprawl of family and friends in years spent between Aligarh, Lucknow and Jodhpur, she sketches characters who would later inhabit her fiction. Chughtai's way of drawing these profiles is based on curiosity and questioning. It is this questioning, really, that fired the feminism in her fiction: "The elders in the family never actually answered questions that exercised my mind. Whenever I asked them anything, they expressed annoyance or anger." But she would keep asking, drawing out stories. And it was the exercise of finding out what would not be told to her in the first instance, that made the story the feminist statement.  SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

88

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

