Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

REPUBLIC OF THE UNDEAD

T

he Indian story is being rewritten all over again. It has always been a captivating story with its psychedelic plotline and characters of such colourful variety. For the Oriental junkies of the yore, Hindustan was a land of permanent astonishments, and exotic India would never cease to keep the traveller in thrall. As the narratives of India Discovered and Re-Discovered continued to multiply, so did the stereotypes. We saw them passing through the pages of India of a million mutations, and each of them carrying within him a strain of the cultural exceptionalism of the East: the sepia-tinted parade of the Maharaja and the Mendicant, the snake charmer and the sadhu. Independent India provided its own set of types that would make one of the world's most volatile democracies home to every variation of freedom, every strand of ideology. India survived the temptations and perversions of its rulers, like any other democracy whose resilience was only matched by the stoicism of its people. It was a slow and steady story in national evolution, and more often than not, slower and hardly steady. Then, in the evening of the last century, the pace changed, and the Indian story began to be told in a different language. The Indian awakening became the newest Asian episode of hope and opportunity in globalisation. It was a remarkable leap from India Nowhere to India Everywhere. That was then. Just into the second decade of the twenty-first century and we could still say India is everywhere. But it is a different India, the irredeemable India. The exclamatory nation has been replaced by the exasperating nation. India is in denial, again. And its most

visible manifestation is the prime minister of India who is in perpetual stillness. Charges of corruption may swirl around him; institutions that make India the most evolved civil society in Asia may sway under political attack; an angry people may rise against the moral bankruptcy of his regime; his Cabinet colleagues may get exposed or even go to jail; but he, defying the laws of nature and political probity, will remain intact, infallible, incorruptible, and indispensable. In many ways, the evolutionary story of Manmohan Singh parallels the trajectory of India's descent. He was part of India's liberation story as an economy. He has become the still face of a rusty India, and the power of his powerlessness is a testimony to the political culture that legitimises his continuity. An honourable man of a distant yesterday is today a hologram of an India in tatters. Even as the UPA Government's each day in power is a reminder of the pathology of being in office, it is not that life on the other side of the political divide is any better. The Congress as a political force may be only as alive as the Undead, and the Dynasty may be coming to terms with the banality of being failed Gandhis. But India continues to be a staggering incomprehension to the BJP, a party too steeped in its existential crisis to see the world around it--a world full of opportunities. India still has a space for a modern right wing party, but the BJP is not that party. On economy, it is hardly on the right; and on culture, it is too conservative to win the minds of the twenty-first century youth. If the lights are going out all over the abandoned land of hope and aspirations, we should know who thrives in darkness. Well, the Undead of Indian politics.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE EVOLUTIONARY STORY OF MANMOHAN SINGH PARALLELS THE TRAJECTORY OF INDIA'S DESCENT. AN HONOURABLE MAN OF A DISTANT YESTERDAY IS TODAY A HOLOGRAM OF AN INDIA IN TATTERS.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Former BCCI president and former Union minister NKP Salve. He was 90. The Challenger Trophy, an annual one-day tournament organised by the BCCI, was named after him.

WON Gold medal by Geeta Kumari, in the 55kg category at the Asian qualifying tournament in Astana, Kazakhstan. Kumari is the first Indian women wrestler to qualify for the Olympics. ELECTED Aung San Suu Kyi, 66, to parliament af-

ter a historic victory in Myanmar by-elections. According to results announced by the state television, the Nobel laureate's party won 43 of the 44 parliament seats it had contested. ANNOUNCED Three-time Olympian and former

SALVE

captain of the Indian hockey team Ajit Pal Singh as Chef-deSINGH Mission for Olympic Games. He was unanimously selected by a seven-member committee to head the contingent.

16

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

