BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

BOUNTY ON THE MUTINY
ashington is famous for many things: Fragrant liceman, could claim those 10 million dollars (almost Rs 100 cherry blossoms in springtime; a slender steeple crore in Pak currency; not bad). The correspondent of monument in the middle of a park full of weekend London's Financial Times could apply as well, for he met kites; a cityscape planned by the secret society of Masons; Saeed in January this year at Rawalpindi and quoted him and a White House that is, on closer inspection, perfectly as saying, "Pakistan is facing very severe threats from both white but not much of a house. But it is not famous for sides--India is one side, America and NATO forces are on the generosity in strategic policy. other, and the agenda of both is Pakistan." The United States has not offered a bounty of $10 milThe problem then is not information, but capture. lion for "information leading to the capture of Hafiz Saeed" Information requires a cooperative ear; capture needs because Saeed is India's enemy. It did so because Saeed is guts. Does Zardari have them? Can Zardari touch a lesser America's enemy, and one ready to use terrorism in pur- target, Saeed's brother-in-law Abdul Rahman Makki, who suit of his manic fantasies, as he did when orchestrating may not make his captors as rich, but still offers a payout the attack on Mumbai in 2008. Washington is not in the of two million American dollars? There is a fundamental business of borrowing headaches; it has enough of its own. question trailing Zardari: How much muscle does he carry This is further evidence of an emerging fact, that India and in his baggage? So far, his government's only real response America are challenged by the same enemy on the battle- to America's bounty offer has been studied silence. The field of international terrorism. Wartime alliances are not Hafiz Saeed establishment has been more vocal. It disdefined by the presence of common friends, but by the ex- missed the threat contemptuously as an "April Fool's joke". istence of enemies in common. Why did Washington make this move now, adding The most important development this year in India- sulphur to the fires raging across US-Pak bandwidth? Pakistan relations is not President Asif Zardari's brief Why was the signal sent from Delhi on the eve of Zardari's Sunday lunch with Dr Manmohan Singh in Delhi followed "private" trip to India? This is an electric prod to Zardari, by a short prayer at the shrine of Gharib Nawaz Khwaja to force him off the fence. Moinuddin Chishti in Ajmer, but this decision made in Prayer is a useful metaphor for India-Pakistan Washington, for it offers Zardari a chance to choose his side relations, and rather better than cricket, which used in the war against terrorists. The triangulation is neat, al- to be General Zia-ul-Haq's alibi for a sudden dash to India. most perfect. It cuts through the fog The General, being ideologically SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com of political compulsions. The officloser to the puritan Jamaat-ecial, if unspoken, excuse for IslamaIslami, had no time for shrines bad's inaction against Saeed is that or 13th century saints. Zardari is it is impossible for any government not going to Ajmer to pray for in Pakistan to hand a leader of the victory in the next Pakistani elec`jihad' against India to Delhi. India tion. In any case, even divine interwill be satisfied if Saeed is sent to a vention may be inadequate. cell in America, because American Politics, not prayer, brings him to courts will ensure justice. Zardari India. He has done his cost-benefit can join the India-US alliance analysis. He is not spending a against terrorism, or straddle the Sunday in India to win brownie fence. There may not be closure, but points abroad and lose support at there will be clarity. home. Nor is he there to make calHafiz Saeed is not some inverted ibrated adjustments in the negative Robin Hood hidden in Nottingham list for trade. The fly on the wall forest, or even an Osama bin Laden during closed-door conversations lost in Karachi's urban jungle or a between Zardari and Manmohan Why did Washington make this safehouse in Abbottabad. He lives Singh will hear talk of war, not move now, adding sulphur to the quite publicly in Muridke, a suburb peace. But they will discuss a war fires raging across US-Pak of Lahore, appears frequently on beyond their boundaries, and wonbandwidth? Why was the signal television, and delivers speeches at der if there is a faint chance that his own heavily secured mosque. they just might, given enormous sent from Delhi on the eve of The problem with America's reluck and deadly circumstance, Zardari's "private" trip to India? ward for information might be one become distant allies. That chance This is an electric prod to Zardari, depends on what Zardari does of plenty. Every journalist in to force him off the fence. Lahore, not to mention every poabout Hafiz Saeed. 

W

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

