POWER PEOPLE

50
1
SONIA GANDHI
65, UPA Chairperson and Congress President (1)

The Political

Mother Superior
Because Congress
cannot do without her, in fair weather or foul. Because she has the best equation with allies, without whose support UPA is toast. Because when she asks for a Food Security Bill that pushes up the subsidy bill to Rs 1 lakh crore, Manmohan Singh calls a special meeting of the Cabinet armed with a rubber stamp. Because she was ranked seventh on the Forbes List of 100 Most Powerful Women in the World (2011), ahead of the first lady of USA, Michelle Obama.

TOP10
S
2
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
76, Finance Minister (3)

Power point When two
of Manmohan's most powerful ministers, Pranab Mukherjee and P. Chidambaram, got into a turf war in 2011, it took Sonia's intervention to broker a truce.

he is silent and ever more invisible. He is present but always inaudible. In the middle of the power troika is a veteran politician asked to extinguish raging fires. These are the men and woman who determine the future and fortunes of 1.2 billion people. A Government virtually at the mercy of a mercurial ally in West Bengal who forces the once powerful Congress party to bend to her populist will, and tries to offset her influence by seeking favour from a recently triumphant strongman in Uttar Pradesh. As India slips at the Centre, regional leaders exercise greater control, powering their own agendas and philosophies. Watch them carefully through the year. Among them may well be the future prime minister of the country, and no, it's not the one anointed by the grand old party.
GETTY IMAGES

Ethnic chic Muted handlooms and elegant silks. But when it's a salwar kameez, she usually ties her hair in a ponytail. Smart move Walking
across to Mulayam Singh Yadav in Central Hall of Parliament on the first day of the Budget session to congratulate him on the Assembly polls win.

THRONE OF POWER
10 Janpath. It's only when she wants to send a message to the media that she walks across to the party office.

3

MANMOHAN SINGH
79, Prime Minister (2)

The Survivor

LATEST ACQUISITION
ATwitter handle @PMOIndia. The PMO now trends on Twitter.

Man for All Reasons
Because whatever
the crisis, he is the chief troubleshooter, from Telangana to consensus on NCTC and in a time of relentless crises, he has become indispensable. Because he is the one politician who leaves Sonia Gandhi worried, which explains why she promoted Manmohan Singh to Prime Minister and a `ji huzoor' like Pratibha Patil to President. inches, he is still the tallest man in the Cabinet.

Because as the prime
beneficiary of paradox, his net worth has risen after his nominated heir Rahul Gandhi's collapse in Uttar Pradesh. Because despite the 2G and CWG scams, an offensive by army chief General V.K. Singh, a year-long siege by Anna Hazare and demanding allies like Mamata Banerjee, his Government survives. Because he has a far higher standing abroad than most world leaders, higher than his reputation at home.

ior ministers, as had happened at the last dinner he hosted on March 13.

Still believes in the foreign
hand conspiracy. During the Anna Hazare crisis in July 2011, he told Parliament there was an international conspiracy afoot to destabilise India's growth story. In February, he blamed the foreign hand for protests by NGOs against Kudankulam and GM crops.

One ally he can't control
Mamata Banerjee.

Has invoked Lord Indra
and Goddess Lakshmi (2011), Mahatma Gandhi, Kautilya and Amartya Sen (2009) during his Budget speeches.

Sacred space He
sits between Sonia and Manmohan in Parliament. If any MP tries to sit in his seat in Mukherjee's absence, he is immediately made to get up by Sonia.

HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

DID YOU KNOW?
Even though he gave up smoking in 1993, he still has a pipe that was gifted to him by Indira Gandhi.

He really should stop dinner
diplomacy. The RSVP list at 7, Race Course Road is a bit thin with senior allies deputing jun-

Height no bar At 5 feet 3

Last vacation Forty years ago, in Nainital. Whenever a break is suggested, he says, "But what will I do?" On holiday, that is.

58

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

AFP

POWER PEOPLE
4

50
MAMATA BANERJEE
57,Chief Minister,West Bengal (New)

Because she almost single-handedly
defeated the Left Front in West Bengal after 34 years of uninterrupted rule. Because she is the most unreliable ally of the UPA 2 Government, making her also its most powerful. Because she has not allowed power to corrupt her, financially. Because she is the only example of a rebel Congresswoman who has reduced the Congress to a minor party in her state. Because she is the only voice in her one-woman party.

Akhilesh taught him how to map out his campaign on a laptop. Mulayam was staunchly anti-computers until now.

MULAYAM SINGH YADAV

5

72, MP and Samajwadi Party Chief (New)

7

NITISH KUMAR
61, Chief Minister of Bihar (6)

In Demand

The Kingmaker
Because his sweeping win
in Uttar Pradesh has made him one of the most powerful players in Delhi. Because when he tells party workers in Uttar Pradesh to prepare for General Elections, every other party starts to search for candidates. Because despite vehement protests from party veterans, he successfully installed son Akhilesh as Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister, sparking off jokes that Uttar Pradesh is now Puttar Pradesh. Because he now sees himself as a potential Prime Minister.

Because he is on the
shortlist of potential PMs.

Power friends Arun Jaitley. Power statement Does not
use a mobile phone.

Because he has across-theboard acceptability, like Atal Bihari Vajpayee, being a darling of Right, Left and the emerging clan of federalists. Because he scripted a success story in Bihar, transforming it into one of the fastest growing states in the country.

High point Becoming the first woman chief minister of West Bengal. Brand loyalty Wears hawai chappals and white cotton saris worth a maximum of Rs 350. After office address She works all
the time she is awake.

Travel mode Official Ambassador car. Out of bounds He has kept
his only son, Nishant, an engineering graduate from BITS Mesra, away from politics.

Never late He is always punctual, sometimes arriving at rallies before his own candidate.

POWER POINT
Forced BJP to fall in line by getting four of the six Rajya Sabha seats in Bihar.

Did you know? He was nominated for the International Jurists Award 2012 by the chief justice of the UK.

POWER DRIVE
She rides a dented Santro given by a well-wisher.

Operates from 1 Anne Marg, Patna, the chief minister's official home.

ARUN JAITLEY

6

59, Leader of Opposition, Rajya Sabha (9)

The Great Communicator
Because he has kept
2 under constant pressure in Parliament, raising uncomfortable questions on corruption, price rise, NCTC and Lokpal Bill. Because he represents the moderate face of BJP. Because Parliament listens when he stands up to speak, always well prepared and updated with facts and figures. Because he is a strong contender as BJP's prime ministerial candidate.
UPA

Because the BJP's key strategist is taken seriously when he articulates the party's policies.

Firefighter His persuasive
skills help the party in sticky situations, and keep communication channels open with NDA allies.

SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

DID YOU KNOW?
Never misses his walks at Lodi Garden, where he often meets Congress leaders Jairam Ramesh and Anand Sharma.
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

60

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

SHEKHAR GHOSH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Hurricane Express

LATESTTALENT

POWER PEOPLE

50
SeiSen

9

RAHUL GANDHI
41, General Secretary, Congress (4)
GETTY IMAGES YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

The Lost Prince
Because when he messes up, his
followers rush to take the blame.

Because the Congress party
still feels that he can be Prime Minister at any midnight hour of his choice. Because with Sonia Gandhi taking a conscious step backwards, he will inevitably take charge of the party, a process postponed, not aborted, by the Uttar Pradesh elections.

Smart move Taking
responsibility for the Uttar Pradesh poll debacle.

GATEKEEPER
Wharton-educated Kanishka Singh, his political aide. Just call him K.

J. JAYALALITHAA

10

P. CHIDAMBARAM
66, Home Minister (5)

8

64, Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu (New)

Mr Omnipresent
Because when the Prime Minister's Office leaked a finance ministry note raising doubts about his role in the 2G spectrum allocation, he had the complete backing of 10 Janpath, and Sonia Gandhi ensured that the party stood by the home minister. Because despite a series of gaffes beginning with Telangana, he remains in office, seemingly immovable.
Loves to quote the Thirukkural
by poet-philosopher Saint Thiruvalluvar, an ancient Tamil compilation of advice for every situation. He has quoted from it in every Budget speech.

Southern Command
Because beneath surface calm, she
can wield influence over national policy when she wants to, as during India's vote at UN over Sri Lanka. Because she is a pivotal point of the budding opposition alliance that seeks to defeat UPA in the next General Elections. Because her popularity has gone into further ascent after her spectacular victory in the Assembly elections in 2011. POWER MOMENT She defused the political meltdown in Kudankulam by ending the antinuclear protests without bloodshed.

Coming soon The film Sister On, Sister Off 2, a joint-production between Jayalalithaa and Sasikala Natarajan.

FAVOURITE CHEERLEADER
Son Karti, on Twitter.
by Priya Sahgal, Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Partha Dasgupta, Amitabh Srivastava, S. Senthilnathan and Dhiraj Nayyar

62

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

