Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

FACTS ARE SACRED
A series of discrepancies mars a poet's otherwise beautiful retelling of the Mahabharata
By Bibek Debroy

THE MAHABHARATA
byShivK.Kumar HarperCollins Price: RS 399 Pages: 356

BETWEEN THE COVERS Everyone knows the core Mahabharata story. But there is merit in telling and retelling it,so that more and more people read it.ShivKumar is an applauded writer of fiction (both prose and poetry) and it shows.

ost people know about Abhimanyu. Arjuna was away, fighting elsewhere. The only one who knew how to penetrate (but not emerge from) Drona's chakravyuha was Abhimanyu. He entered, but Jayadratha prevented other Pandavas from following. Abhimanyu fought with seven Kourava warriors and was eventually slain by Duhshasana's son. There are depictions of Abhimanyu's fight, such as on the cover of this volume. It shows Abhimanyu whirling a chariot-wheel in the encounter with the deadly seven. However, this is factually wrong. By then, Abhimanyu had already killed one (Brihadbala) and there should have been only six around. Everyone knows the core Mahabharata story. But there is merit in telling and retelling it, so that more and more people read it and are aware of facts. Savyasachi is another instance. Savyasachi means left-handed and Arjuna was one. Yet, in depictions (such as in versions of Bhagavad Gita), Arjuna will be shown with bow in his left hand and arrow in his right, opposite of what it should be. The present author also interprets Savyasachi as ambidextrous. There are several versions of Mahabharata and they have been collated and authenticated in a Bhandarkar Critical Edition. If one desires an abridged rendering of entire Critical Edition Mahabharata, one can do no better than John Smith (Penguin). This isn't meant to be that. It is a retelling, beginning with Devavrata's (Bheeshma's) birth and ending with the final journey. Shiv Kumar is an applauded writer of fiction (both prose and poetry) and it shows. For instance, the Bhagavad Gita (focusing on its second chapter) is beautifully done. In addition to earlier ones, we now have Ramesh

M

Menon, Devdutt Pattanaik, Namita Gokhale, Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni, Maggi Lidchi-Grassi and Shiv Kumar. These shouldn't be regarded as substitutes for one another. However, I suspect all such retellers, if they don't read Sanskrit, should base their accounts on something like John Smith or J.A.B. van Buitenen, even if they choose to deviate from the Critical Edition. Despite Shiv Kumar's effort being a wonderful one, some things jar. Salva shouldn't be described as king of Saubala. Saubala means son of Subala; it isn't the name of a kingdom. The relevant kingdom was Gandhara. In any event, Salva wasn't king of Gandhara. Amba (later Shikhandi) prayed to Shiva, not Kartikeya. The charioteer who reared Karna was Adhiratha, not Atiratha. Pratikami (not Prathikami as stated) means messenger or gate-keeper. The Pratikami (whose name isn't mentioned) was sent to summon Draupadi to the assembly hall. Pratikami isn't a proper name and the Pratikami was certainly not Duryodhana's charioteer. Bheeshma didn't ask Duryodhana to keep Karna out of the war. Karna opted out (until Bheeshma was brought down), because Bheeshma had ranked Karna inferior as a warrior. Seven warriors who confronted Abhimanyu didn't include Jayadratha. (Jayadratha was outside.) The illustrator got it wrong because the author got it wrong. Do these discrepancies matter? After all, this is a retelling and one can take liberties with the text. While that's true, I don't think these discrepancies were necessary. They jar, and mar, an otherwise beautifully told story. The average reader isn't likely to read John Smith or van Buitenen, but more likely to read Shiv Kumar. I SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

70

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

NEW

