UP FRONT

SOM MITTAL

OUTSOURCING THE FUTURE
he outsourcing issue is back in focus. US President home tuitions. This market has grown not only by adding Barack Obama, in his State of the Union address, more in existing businesses but innovation that has conemphatically spoke on creating jobs in the US, pro- tinuously expanded the market. The story is not yet over. Quicker time to market products for emerging posing incentives for job creators and taxing others. While the focus this time was centred on manufacturing markets, mobility applications, 24/7 support and social jobs and China, the potential impact of any such pro- media integration are opportunities that businesses are leveraging using their centres in India or through a posed move on India was again in the spotlight. News reports on Philippines emerging as the pre- service provider. Products being built for India have ferred location for voice-based BPO activity has raised a the potential to be leveraged across many emerging debate on whether business will move away from India. geographies and they are creating new revenue lines for It is time to step back and reflect on how the funda- businesses. In this inter-connected world, there is realmental premise of outsourcing has evolved from just ac- isation that not everything can be done from a single cess to lower cost talent to becoming a vibrant global country. Language, skills, proximity to customer, busisupply chain. Years ago, companies built large in-house ness continuity, and local market opportunities have created a network of global delivery centres across the IT teams, and as the workload increased, this was outsourced to domestic companies. After the Y2K era, com- world. Indian companies are building a hub of centres panies started outsourcing work to firms abroad as across 70 countries that create a seamless solution for confidence in the offshore model was built and India the clients. Globalisation by Indian companies is being emerged as a reliable destination. The offshore model witnessed through this expansion, mergers and acquievolved with global companies setting up development sitions, as well as local hiring. Within India, companies centres inside Indian companies which were completely are leveraging the rural BPO model to lower costs, while dedicated to them. Contracts were based on headcount Tier 2 cities deliver the next level and the centres in and effort hours. This enabled customers to monitor metro cities focus on value addition. their projects and ensure quality and security. Business models of the outsourcing sector have However, outsourcing is today driven by demograph- also changed. From contracts that were based on per ics, economics, rapidly changing technological infrastruc- hour pricing, the measurement is now business outture, connected consumers and the rise of emerging come. Pricing in many cases is moving towards a utility economies. Changes in technology and the new inter- model wherein customers pay per use. Convergence of connected consumer have moved the focus from the buyer technologies is creating opportunities for young compajust being the chief information officer. Business units are nies and start-ups. 2011 was the year of mobile adopnow deciding what applications they need; business im- tion, where tablets and smart phones sales growth, by volume and by percentage, outpaced pact is determined by the CFO and many SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com technology related decisions are now the shipment of the desktop and laptop taken at the board level as the impact is market. This mobile revolution witacross the organisation. nessed spending by companies in develSpecialisation is the priority. Busioping both consumer applications and nesses want to focus on their core enterprise applications. strengths, leveraging partners to creIndia will retain and enhance its ate products, solutions that can create leadership in this sector. A huge pool of transformational value to their busitalent that is young, educated and ness. A recent survey by Duke UniverEnglish-speaking is quick to respond to sity has demonstrated that outsourcing changing business demands. So much has increased organisational flexibility so that India continues to drive leaderfor businesses. Outsourcing companies ship in the global sourcing market with have enhanced their service delivery a 58 per cent share. capability, focusing on customer doOutsourcing is a good example of main and platforms to add value. having created a whole new global inOutsourcing has also expanded in dustry where one did not exist, changIndian companies are scope, adding new opportunities. From building a hub of centres ing the aspirations of the youth in India and of many countries that wish to IT services, BPO, engineering services, product design, the sector includes le- across 70 countries that emulate the Indian model. create a seamless gal services, architecture design, medsolution for the clients. ical diagnostics, and more recently, Som Mittal is president of Nasscom

T

12

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

