BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

WHEN JOINTS CREAK IN JOINT FAMILY
hen a joint family begins to creak at the joints, the sense of humour, but if this is a joke, it is brittle. The voter neighbourhood wakes up. Gossip time. Domestic wants the Akhilesh who refused to give strongman quarrels seep through porous walls and become the D.P. Yadav a ticket, rather than the one who smiled while stuff of public speculation in the teashop. Question of the felons took the oath of office. To be fair, Akhilesh has time. Day: How long will brothers survive under the same roof? He will be judged by his second Cabinet rather than his first. Don't get fooled by looks. The spectator is polite before the He has to make adjustments for his inheritance. But he patriarch as he pretends to convey, in muted tones, that all does not have too much time, for Indian democracy has entered its most volatile phase. is well. Behind his back the mockery is brutal. Weak governance is being punished all over the counA political patriarch can survive the people's anger, however virulent it might become. But no one in power can sur- try. The difference between weak and strong government is vive ridicule. Watch out for the knife, but beware the uncomplicated. One instance will serve. When DMK blackcartoon. The mortal danger before the second UPA mailed the Prime Minister over India's position on the Government is not collapse, but acid erosion by caricature. American resolution in the United Nations on atrocities Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, a national hero three against civilians during the closing stages of the war against summers ago, is being taunted in SMS space as winner of this LTTE, Dr Singh had a clear choice between reason and cayear's Oscar for best acting PM. pitulation. He could have sympathised with the DMK's conEvery image is a reflection of his reputation. A buffoon cerns, and offered to discuss options with his partners in who suddenly sounds normal wins surprised admiration. Government, but asserted unambiguously that India's Conversely, a hero who slips is judged by the peaks he foreign policy could not be held hostage to coalition compulonce conquered. The voter who elected Dr Singh in 2009 sions. Instead, he became "inclined" towards the DMK view. because he had scaled Kanchenjunga expected him to In a ruminative afterthought later, Dr Singh suggested that reach Everest by 2012. Instead he has been told that plans his allies in UPA are a headache. But Dr Singh's ills are not have been altered, and let's all settle down to enjoy the the work of allies; he has been humiliated by his own swamp because the telecommunications chap ran off with party, Congress. During the UP election campaign Cabinet the money and is on holiday in Tihar Jail. ministers bragged that Dr Singh was a dispensable occuThe voter is puzzled by more than one inconsistency. He pant of Rahul Gandhi's throne. The Prime Minister said has delivered, more often than not, a decisive mandate, fool- nothing. Mrs Sonia Gandhi did nothing. How long would ing pundits and surprising politicians. He wants, in ex- they have survived if they had demanded that Dr Singh change, a strong government. Instead, victors behave as if should replace Mrs Gandhi as Congress president? If a serpent with a forked tongue they have been weakened by victory SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com stars in the first Bible story, then parriinstead of being strengthened by it. This cide is the theme of the second. Cain vacillating disease extends beyond the killed his brother Abel: Not a persuasive Congress. In Karnataka, the BJP has insulted a historic mandate with a argument for joint families. Conflict is a pathetic display of petty-minded, bigger temptation than cooperation. A vicious squabbling. In Andhra, the coalition does not disappear after a sudCongress destroyed its opposition, and den explosion, but weakens through a then destroyed itself: P. Chidambaram series of flare-ups searching for conflaflipped and then flopped over gration. Political parties, whether Telangana; Rajasekhara Reddy died in Congress in Delhi or BJP in Karnataka, a tragic crash; and the party imposed persuade themselves that time and an ageing successor who could not largesse of office will stave off disaster. retire too soon, followed by a younger Delusion is the last refuge of the addict. man who has just given himself a 400 The mortal danger before the If those in power do not go to the peoper cent pay hike. Governance died ple once they have lost their moral auGovernment is not collapse, with Rajasekhara Reddy. Congress has thority, the people will come for them. but acid erosion by caricafumbled so ineptly that voters are No need to check which is more fatal. ture. Manmohan Singh, a laughing through their tears. A foreign friend asked, over lunch What did Akhilesh Yadav do with the other day, about the Indian national hero three summers his magnificent endorsement? Little Government. I assured him that there ago, is being taunted in SMS could be more symbolic of compromise was an India, but I could not be space as winner of this year's equally certain that there was an than putting a jailbird in charge of Oscar for best acting PM. jails. It is possible that Akhilesh has a Indian Government. I

W

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

70

