Cover Story MAMATABANERJEE

HURRICANE IN AHURRY
SUVASHIS MULLICK/www.indiatodayimages.com

The feisty Chief Minister of Bengal holds a ramshackle UPA Government to ransom at a time when the Congress is most vulnerable to aggressive allies
By Partha Dasgupta and Priya Sahgal

n March 19, Mamata Banerjee in a television interview offered a curious explanation for the sacking of Dinesh Trivedi. He had removed her peon. "Hamara chaprasi ko nikaal diya," she said. The peon was apparently a mole planted by Didi in Trivedi's office at Rail Bhavan. Trivedi didn't know that there was a reporter in the pack as he inherited most of his political boss' staff in July 2011 when he succeeded Mamata as railway minister. He came to know about the power of the peon only when he shifted him from the minister's office for being rude to a woman visitor. The peon's story is symptomatic of the relationship between Trivedi and his political leader. Mamata always suspected that the heart of the man who won on her ticket was with the Congress. In this summer of resentment in Lutyens' Delhi, a Cabinet minister can be sacked for offering a plan for Railways' modernisation. As the heat turns up on the badly scalded UPA Government, it is left with no

O

MAMATA BANERJEE
MARCH 19 JANUARY 30

MAMATA BANERJEE ADDRESSES TRINAMOOL SUPPORTERS IN KOLKATA

NOVEMBER 4, 2011

"Although I do not wish to withdraw support, nobody can be humiliated. I am disappointed with UPA 2."
NEW

"When I was on a hunger strike for 26 days, the Prime Minister was in the city. But he didn't enquire about me."
NEW

"If it goes on like this, we don't want to stay in Government. We aren't willing to accept this burden of a fuel price hike."
APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

18

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

19

Cover Story MAMATABANERJEE
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

PASTTENSE
UN RESOLUTION AGAINST SRI LANKA MARCH 19 DMK forces the
Government to do a U-turn, forces it to censure Sri Lanka for alleged war crimes.

TATKALTICKET
With Roy at the helm, the Railways remote control is back with Mamata
hen Mukul Roy's name came up as a replacement for Dinesh Trivedi, a seasoned bureaucrat mocked: "Perfect choice. Who knows Railways better?" It was an allusion to Roy's days as a smalltime railway contractor in the 1980s and 1990s. Roy was wellversed in the railway scrap business and was known to have a strong control over the Belur scrap depot and the Kanchrapara Railway Workshop. Roy, 58, was the first choice of Mamata Banerjee as railway minister when she vacated the post last year, giving him charge as a junior minister. His elevation was expected during the reshuffle in July 2011 but Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who held the portfolio in the interim, put his foot down on Mamata's choice. Trivedi was a compromise. The contrast between Trivedi and Roy could not have been starker. While Trivedi earned Mamata's ire for defying her and

RAILWAY BUDGET MARCH 14
Mamata demands a rollback of fare hike and sacking of pro-reforms minister Dinesh Trivedi. He resigns and is replaced by populist Mukul Roy.

W

LOKAYUKTA BILL DECEMBER 2011
SP, TMC and DMK vote against the UPA's Lokayukta Bill.

PENSION REFORMS BILL
DECEMBER 2011 The Government is unable to bring in pension reforms in the last session as Mamata insists it needs to be more pro-people.

FDI IN RETAIL NOVEMBER 2011
Both Mamata and SP oppose 51 per cent FDI in retail.

TEESTA ACCORD SEPTEMBER
2011 Mamata scotches Manmohan's plans of signing the Teesta water-sharing accord with Bangladesh.

FUTURE SHOCK
BUDGET SESSION If the Finance Bill doesn't get passed, the Government loses its moral authority to continue. ANNA HAZARE He is going on a
nationwide tour against corruption, read Congress. The challenge will be the public momentum whipped up by him.
ROY

increasing passenger fares, one of the first things Roy did was order his staff at Rail Bhavan to place the furniture in his office exactly the way it was during Didi's stint as minister. Roy is seen as high on arrogance and low on credibility. On the eve of the reshuffle, he had refused Manmohan's request to visit a train derailment site in Assam, in which over 100 passengers were injured. However, the indefatigable Mamata got her way this time, virtually bulldozing UPA into accepting her confidant as railway minister. No other Trinamool Congress (TMC) leader enjoys Mamata's trust as totally as Roy. Others in the party, many of them disgruntled, describe Roy as the TMC CEO. He executes jobs Mamata assigns him implicitly and precisely even as others bear the brunt of his highhandedness. He even controls access to her. Roy is now reaping the reward for his unflinching support and loyalty to Mamara. Roy's 28 year-old-son Subhranshu, first-time MLA

from Bijpur, was accused of assaulting an Election Commission official on duty in the run-up to the 2011 Assembly elections. He was arrested and later released on bail. Roy himself is no stranger to controversy. His stint as minister of state in the shipping ministry had provoked a complaint from his own party colleague. Late last year, senior MP Somen Mitra alleged that Roy was guilty of financial irregularities and granting the lease for a piece of Port Trust land at low rates. He demanded a CBI probe. But with Didi's support, Roy rode out the storm. Ironically, Roy had made his rather late entry into politics in the mid-'90s through Mitra, then West Bengal Congress chief. Roy joined Mamata when she formed TMC in 1998, and made himself indispensable to her. Elected to the Rajya Sabha in 2006, Roy's strength lies in the fact that despite the power he wields in the party he always knows where to draw the line when dealing with Didi.
by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION Due in July. Congress may not be able to push its own candidate, perhaps not even one from UPA. ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2013
It's a Congress vs BJP fight in Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka. Post Uttar Pradesh, Congress needs a win.

shelter but the mercy of its mercurial allies. One ally, the powerful but volatile leader of the Trinamool Congress (TMC), has the Prime Minister dancing to her difficult tunes, his every unsteady step an indication of how far he will go to keep his job. When she demanded the head of the audacious Dinesh Trivedi, who defied his party's populism in his maiden railway budget, Manmohan Singh, once upon a time a reformer himself, obliged with expected meekness. For Trivedi, martyrdom may be a form of a personal liberation but for his leader it is another move in a complex power game. Mamata's politics is gov-

erned by her base in Bengal. She must rule from the left in order to blunt any potential counter-offensive from the Marxists, forcing her to be consistently populist. But she also has to ensure, that Congress does not occupy Opposition space in Bengal. Her objective is simple: a Congress weakened in Delhi, and marginalised in Bengal. She will do what she can to wound Congress, but not to demolish UPA, which she still needs. Hurricane Mamta has been wreaking havoc in Delhi ever since she conquered Bengal. She commands 19 MPs whose support is essential to the survival of the ramshackle

UPA. When she wants the Land Acquisition Bill modified, the

bill will certainly be modified. When she wants to embarrass the Prime Minister over her disagreement with the sharing of the Teesta waters with Bangladesh, Manmohan will go to Dhaka without her company. When she doesn't want to attend the National Integration Council meeting, she won't. When she opposes, along with like-minded others, foreign investment in retail, the Centre will put the idea in deep freeze. When she wants a crass populist like Mukul Roy as a replacement for Trivedi, she will have it. So now it's official: Didi has the full freedom to mess with the UPA Government. Delhi is impotent before her, not vice versa. She is aware of her power as one of India's most successful regional leaders with a mass base. She is at her peak when UPA is at its nadir. If she embodies the supreme power of a reckless mass leader, UPA resembles a house on the verge

20

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

NEW

NEW

Cover Story MAMATABANERJEE
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

LIFE BEYOND DIDI
Trivedi is basking in the glow of popular adulation
ah re naseeb, tuney aisi sazaa di ki mujhe azaadi mil gayi (Oh Fate! Such was your punishment that I got freedom)." Lines Dinesh Trivedi penned after being forced to resign as railway minister by Mamata Banerjee. Sitting in his tastefully done-up bungalow at 4, Lodhi Estate, he describes his state of mind as being "in bliss". Trivedi, by all accounts, is now all set to free himself from the shackles of Banerjee and the Trinamool Congress (TMC). He is feeling stifled in the party he has been a part of since it was formed in 1998. It is not just about the railway budget and the hike in passenger fares. "That was only an excuse. She had lost trust in me much before that," says Trivedi, though he cannot pinpoint the reason why it happened. He tries to second-guess his temperamental party

TRIVEDI

W

chief. "She believes in the culture of cult, a status that she believes she has acquired. Somewhere, she felt that I had become more popular than her as railway minister," says Trivedi. Also, he was "not convenient" for her anymore. "There were files coming to me as minister for railways and I could see corruption staring at me, and I refused to let it pass," he adds. He is not planning to quit TMC for now since political motives are already being attributed to his actions. Trivedi is not worried about his future. He has a successful travel business and his net worth, according to his affidavit for Lok Sabha elections, is Rs 2.7 crore. "I will take it as it comes, listen to my inner voice. I was sick and tired of the negativity. I want to carry on with dignity," he says, with liberating strains of Abida Parveen playing in the background.
by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

of disintegration. She is the most visible representative of the resurgent allies who are all set to strike but not to kill. A fallen UPA won't serve their interest now, but a bleeding, tottering--and hence all the more vulnerable-- Government in Delhi will. They can exact the price they wish, and without much of a bargain. Their outrage over the Planning Commission's decision on March 19 to reduce the poverty line to Rs 28 per capita per day in urban areas (from Rs 32 in 2011) and Rs 22 per capita per day in rural areas (from Rs 26 in 2011) is a perfect example of a cause with political purpose. The new benchmark shows that poverty has reduced from 37 per cent

of the population in 2004-05 to just under 30 per cent in 2009-10. Said Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Mulayam Singh Yadav outside Parliament on March 21: "Prime Minister Manmohan Singh is responsible as he is the chairman of the Commission. He should remove the deputy chairman of the Planning Commission from the post." He was referring to the PM's favourite appointee Montek Singh Ahluwalia. "It is totally wrong. They do not have any idea of village or rural life. They live in air-conditioned rooms and make their report on the basis of reading some papers," Mulayam added. The new belligerence of partners comes at a time when India is in an

anti-Establishment mood. The definitive verdict in Uttar Pradesh earlier this month and the by-election results on March 21 by and large are an indication of the popular resentment against parties in power. The UPA is vulnerable and its allies will not let Congress forget this. Mamata is not alone, though she is the most vociferous. DMK has already forced the Government to rethink its stand on a USsponsored resolution against Sri Lanka in the UN Human Rights Council for alleged human rights abuses. Congress managers had barely placated DMK and TMC when a third ally made its displeasure known. Soon after Manmohan's please-all reply to

22

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

NEW

Cover Story MAMATABANERJEE
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

MULAYAM SINGH YADAV
MARCH 19

"What's the point in joining UPA for a year? We're supporting it from outside to keep the communal forces out."
NOVEMBER 28, 2011

"We will not allow FDI in retail. Our stand is that we will burn any such shop in the state."
SAMAJWADI PARTY CHIEF MULAYAM SINGH YADAV

the President's address in the Lok Sabha on March 19, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) President Sharad Pawar said he was pained by some of Manmohan's remarks. What the Prime Minister said was: "I am sure that the honorable members also realise that the difficult decisions that we have to take are made more difficult by the fact that we are a coalition Government and we have to evolve policy keeping in mind the need to maintain a consensus." Not exactly a sweeping censure against the allies, it still managed to anguish the normally sanguine Maratha leader. A day later, Sharad Pawar told the media that some members of his party had pointed this out to him and complained that NCP was being unfairly castigated along with the other allies when it is the least troublesome partner. Pawar said: "NCP has been with the Congress for the last seven-eight years. There is not a single instance when NCP has behaved irresponsibly. We have never staged a walkout from Parliament or Cabinet

meetings. When we sit for discussions on policy issues, there have been differences of opinions. But once the Cabinet takes a decision, we have never opposed it in public. The Prime Minister's sweeping statement has caused anguish and unease for us." This is the first time in eight years of supporting UPA that Pawar has expressed this sense of anguish.

awar has been a staunch supporter of the Government on almost all policies. Yet he feels that the Government has ignored his views on many issues crucial to him as the country's agriculture minister--such as the Food Security Bill, decision to ban export of cotton and onion and permission for Bt-brinjal. The commerce ministry decided to impose a ban on the export of cotton without consulting Pawar. An angry Pawar protested and the Government rolled back this decision because it did not want to anger yet another ally. "Pawar saheb was of the view

P

that this decision should have been taken by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs or Prices as was done in the case of rice and wheat," says an NCP MLA. The news from Lucknow is not reassuring either. SP, with its 22 MPs, gives outside support to the Congress. Privately, some Congress leaders had been hoping to replace an unpredictable Mayawati with Mulayam. Their hopes soared when Mulayam (and Mayawati) bailed the Government out on the vote on the President's Address on March 19. TMC walked out on the issue of the National Counter Terrorism Centre but Mayawati and Mulayam supported the Government. But Congress hopes were dashed that very afternoon when Mulayam stated that he was not interested in stepping in as Mamata's replacement. "What is the use of joining the Government for one year?" he asked. Was this a Freudian slip? For the UPA Government has two years left in its term. Does Mulayam believe that it cannot last beyond the spring of 2013?

24

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

NEW

Cover Story MAMATABANERJEE
He, however, made it clear that his would be an issue-based support from outside for the sole purpose of keeping BJP at bay. Says an SP leader: "Look at the way they treated us after we rushed to bail them out on the nuclear deal vote. After that we wanted an alliance for the Lok Sabha polls but they were not interested." Mulayam's refusal has an important subliminal message: UPA 2 is no longer a Government in power, but just an office, and on its way out. Another factor that adds to the allies' discomfiture is Rahul Gandhi. With an ailing Sonia in retreat, the Congress is slipping on its allies management. Whether it is M. Karunanidhi or Mamata, Sonia was good at maintaining personal ties. One of the first people Mamata called on when she visited Delhi after her victory in 2011 was Sonia. When reporters asked her about the warm hug she got from Sonia, Mamata had said: "I have a very good equation with Rajiv Gandhi's family." But there is no rapport between her and Rahul. He has made no move to build a personal relationship with any regional leader apart from Omar Abdullah. After the Congress success in Karnataka and Gujarat by-elections, the joke has revived: Congress wins wherever Rahul Gandhi does not campaign. The allies' power parade also coincides with the diminishing electability of the Congress. An alliance with the Congress at the state level is no longer a winning move. Some sections in Rashtriya Lok Dal (RLD) feel that it could have won a few more Assembly seats in Uttar Pradesh if it had not formed an alliance with the Congress. NCP feels that it was a target of the anti-incumbency wave against the Congress chief minister in Goa. "The NCP-Congress coalition lost because of the Congress in Goa," says an NCP MLA from Maharashtra. Some Cabinet ministers from the Congress felt hurt when Mamata sent only a junior MP to the Prime Minister's dinner for UPA allies recently. But its own track record on coalition niceties is worse. RLD, despite having a Cabinet minister in the Government, is still sitting on the Opposition benches. During the vote on the President's Address, Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh had to rush to his assigned seat among the Opposition benches and vote from there. Parliamentary Affairs Minister

T.R. BAALU, DMK MP
NOVEMBER 4, 2011

V.ARUMUGAM, DMK LEADER
JULY 23, 2011

"We'll take up the petrol price hike issue in Parliament. Mamata is correct."
HK RAJASHEKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

"What is the use of supporting the Congress when it is not doing anything to help DMK?"

(FROM RIGHT) KARUNANIDHI, BAALU AND KANIMOZHI

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

25

NEW

Cover Story MAMATABANERJEE
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

BROKEN RECORD
A beleaguered Prime Minister deploys the same spiel on stability even as allies keep his Government on tenterhooks
BEFORE BUDGET SESSION MARCH 12

SHARAD PAWAR
MARCH 20

"The Prime Minister's sweeping statement on allies has caused anguish and unease for us."
OCTOBER 19, 2011

"I am confident we have all the numbers that are needed."
ABOUTTRINAMOOL CONGRESS JANUARY 7

"We have our problems but I am confident that if we have the will and determination, we will overcome these temporary problems."
IN REFERENCE TO THE 2G CRISIS SEPTEMBER 27, 2011

"During crises, it is important to have a strong Central Government. But that does not seem to be the case."
NCP CHIEF SHARAD PAWAR

"THIS GOVERNMENT HAS THE MANDATE FOR FIVE YEARS. IT WILL STAY ITS COURSE."
TO THE MEDIA JUNE 29, 2011

"I AM NOT A `LAME DUCK' PRIME MINISTER."
ABOUTTHE ALLIANCE WITH DMK JANUARY 3, 2011

"Well, the alliance remains as strong as ever."

Pawan Bansal has been talking of conducting coordination meetings with the allies at least thrice a week. First, he needs to get his seating chart in Parliament in order. "The Congress has to stop treating the Government as its personal jagir. This is why Mamata is angry. A coalition means proportionate sharing of power. They think they have done us a favour by appointing us ministers. Name one recommendation of the alliance partners who has been made governor, an ambassador, or the head of a commission. The Congress has kept all for itself," says an NCP MP. Now the party can keep itself in office only by giving in to the diktats of its partners, especially the Hurricane from the East, and she is in a hurry. The velocity of her rage is not determined by the pressure in Delhi but Bengal. She may have defeated one of the world's longest-serving communist regimes last year, but the shrewd politician that she is, Mamata is aware that she won't have the luxury of another three decades in power.
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

And as Our Lady of Deliverance in sub-rural Bengal, she rules from the left side of politics, the space vacated by the communists. Even in style, she, always in trademark crumpled cotton saris and rubber flip-flops, is the ascetic socialist who can put your average comrade to shame. So when Trivedi was presenting his "anti-poor" railway budget in Parliament, Didi was elsewhere, far away in Nandigram, her strongest fief, renewing her covenant with the people. It was at a public rally there that she announced the sacking of Trivedi. Mamata also knows that she needs to be on permanent vigil. She can anticipate the moves of her traditional enemy, the Marxists. The Congress, the uneasy partner, is what she is wary of. Its game plan, she is aware, is to capture the anti-communist space and form its own government, no matter how ambitious an idea that is. Mamata Banerjee won't let herself be outplayed. She wants the Congress to dance to her tunes. Such unfamiliar contortions could break the Congress bones.
with Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Kiran Tare and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

26

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

NEW

