Nation GUJARAT

MODI DURING HIS FAST IN AHMEDABAD IN 2011
SHAILESH RAVAL /www.indiatodayimages.com

TRIUMPHANT MODI HAS A BIGGER CHALLENGE
A legal reprieve and impressive local bypoll results are great. But Modi can't sit smugly.
By Uday Mahurkar

pril began badly, but two developments on the same day turned it into the happiest month for Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi. On April 10, BJP won 23 of the 33 seats in the district and municipal by-elections to Congress's nine. A few hours later, the Supreme Court-appointed Special Investigation Team gave a clean chit to Modi, top bureaucrats and police officers in the 2002 Gulberg Society massacre, in which Congress MP Ehsan Jafri was among the 69 killed. The Ahmedabad metropolitan magistrate recommended closure of the investigation. Questions were being raised about the Modi magic when BJP surrendered its Mansa Assembly seat to the Congress in the by-election in March. Vindicated

A

by the court, Modi has bounced back. In an election year, Modi cannot afford to be swayed by these sporadic victories. Was there a larger message in the Mansa humiliation, that he was outgrowing Gujarat, much to the disappointment of some of his base? It is Gujarat that has made him a cult figure in the politics of development, winning endorsements from leaders of industry and even a place on the cover of Time magazine. Even as he aspires for a larger national role, he has not nurtured a successor who can live up to the gold standard he set for governance. There is not a second Modi in

Gujarat as Modi himself dreams of a bigger role beyond. For ardent Modi supporters, he is infallible. Still, Modi was modest enough to reprimand the Amreli district BJP chief Bharat Kanabar for issuing a newspaper advertisement depicting the Chief Minister as Krishna riding the chariot, with the state BJP chief R.C. Faldu shown as Arjun. A section of party workers question the Chief Minister's style despite his achievements. Even as his third term comes to a close by the end of the year, Modi has not reshuffled his Cabinet, though some of his ministers are seen

EVEN AS MODI ASPIRES FOR A LARGER NATIONAL ROLE, HE HAS NOT NURTURED A SUCCESSOR WHO CAN LIVE UP TO THE GOLD STANDARD HE SET FOR GOVERNANCE.

as high-handed. He has not dropped a single minister. Even the portfolios of his key ministers have remained the same ever since the ministry was first formed in December 2007. Some workers feel he has ignored quite a few senior and capable MLAs like Mahendra Mashru (Junagadh) and Kanu Kalsaria (Mahuva), both known for their social service. Modi irked Kalsaria in 2008 when he refused to listen to his justifiable plea that the government shouldn't allow Nirma Group's cement plant in Mahuva area of Bhavnagar district as it would destroy the local agriculture which had greatly improved after the construction of new dams. Today, Kalsaria, estranged from Modi and BJP, has become the focal point of a Congress-supported public agitation in parts of Saurashtra. It seeks to depict the Gujarat government as too pro-industrialist. In a bid to give a clean image to the party, Modi mooted the proposal of party workers collecting funds in a transparent manner from common people and small businessmen by giving receipts. Some businessmen think taking receipts against funds they donate exposes them in various ways. Many of them also feel BJP has no right to collect funds in such a manner. Says political analyst Vidyut Thakar, "The Mansa defeat is a timely warning for Modi. It has left him enough time to put into effect whatever repair work is necessary." One of the dangers Modi is facing is from a section of Leuva Patel community of Saurashtra which is turning against his government, instigated by disgruntled BJP leaders secretly ranged against the Chief Minister. Though Modi enacted India's strongest anti-cow slaughter law in Gujarat, a campaign is being run by a small section of sadhus, allegedly backed by the Congress, to project him as anti-cow. Within BJP, Modi's achievements are neutralised by his arrogance, even though he is one of the few leaders with a mass base--and a performance sheet to match. The latest victory should make him humble--and reach out as a reconciler. I

CPI (M)

We Won't Leave You
Buddhadeb Bhattacharya skips CPI(M) party congress but gets elected to the politburo against his wishes
a row. But this could be Karat's last term. Amendments in the party constitution restrict the secretary's tenure to three terms. Biman Bose, CPI(M) West Bengal secretary, however, admitted that Bhattacharya had requested exclusion from both the central committee and politburo. But Karat denies this. "We are in regular communication with him. He was keen to attend the congress," says Karat. Although no party leader is willing to confirm, Bhattacharya's distancing from the party was due to his differences with the CPI(M)'s review of the Left Front's performance in West Bengal in the 2011 Assembly polls. He and other West Bengal leaders are said to be miffed at the party stance C SHANKAR that the state government's s former West Bengal chief minis- land acquisition in Nandigram and ter Buddhadeb Bhattacharya on Singur and the off-hand ways of its his way out? This question fre- leaders had caused the debacle. quently surfaced during the CPI(M)'s There were rumours that delegates 20th Party Congress held in from West Bengal would demand Kozhikode from April 4 to 10. Bhatta- Karat's resignation at the congress charya was conspicuous by his ab- for the marginalisation of the party. sence from the extravaganza that "Karat was responsible for the Left's cost Rs 10 crore. The veteran leader withdrawal of support from the UPA has not attended central committee government in 2008 over the Indiaor politburo meetings since his gov- US nuclear deal," says one of the ernment was ousted. Ironically, de- detractors. "All decisions were taken spite Bhattacharya's request for by the party and not by me personally. exclusion, he was elected to the 15- As the secretary, my job was to member politburo at the congress implement the party's collective decithat was attended by more than 800 sion," says Karat. delegates from across the country. Former Kerala chief minister "Buddha sent me a letter request- V.S. Achuthanandan, 89, was not so ing leave from attending the meet due lucky. He couldn't make it to the politto his ill-health. He has no differences buro from which he was suspended in with the party," explained Prakash 2009 for "indiscipline". The party Karat, 64, who was re-elected as the says he was kept out due to his "adgeneral secretary for the third time in vanced age". by M.G. Radhakrishnan
KARAT ADDRESSES THE CPI(M) CONGRESS

I

38

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

39

