So ciety KANNADAACTORS

AFRESH FUTURE IN THEIR STARS
Young, beautiful and idealistic. But will they survive the harsh demands of political compromise?

KPN

By Sowmya Aji

hey are young, glamorous and privileged. They speak urbane English, ooze selfconfidence and intelligence. They get preferential treatment wherever they go. And yet, they choose to mix with the multitudes and rub shoulders with that hated class, the politicians. Four top actors of the Kannada film industry have turned politicians. Two are still at the peak of their careers: Ramya, 29, and Pooja Gandhi, 28, have joined the Congress and Janata Dal-Secular (JD-S) respectively. Rakshita, 27, who `retired' early, turned film producer and has joined mine lord and former Karna-

T

taka minister B. Sriramulu's to-belaunched party BSR Congress. Actor Bhavana, who hasn't been on screen lately, joined the Congress in early March. They aren't the first. Jayanthi, Bharathi, Aarathi, Saroja Devi and Jayamala from the earlier generation of Kannada actors, all from fairly humble backgrounds, went on to support political parties and were rewarded with Legislative Council seats and government posts. Among the current crop, Radhika, 25, has not joined a political party per se; she `married' JD(S) state President H.D. Kumaraswamy and turned film producer. But others have taken to genuine political causes and speak

Meerut-born Pooja goofed up in one of her initial Kannada speeches, saying Kumaraswamy had given her a house. What she actually meant was that he had welcomed her into the party.

"I don't even do corporate shows. Why would I join politics for money?"
with authority on the philosophy of the parties they have joined. They want to work for the society and represent the youth. "I paid for my air tickets and rooms and campaigned for my party's candidate in the Udupi-Chikmagalur Lok Sabha bypoll. As I predicted, our party won," says the confident

NEW

M M M M

POOJA (SECOND FROM LEFT) DURING THE UDUPI-CHIKMAGALUR BYPOLL CAMPAIGN

POOJA GANDHI 2 8
JANATADAL(SECULAR)

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

57

Society KANNADAACTORS
BK RAMESH

RAMYA 2 9
CONGRESS

RAMYA AT A POLL CAMPAIGN

M M M M

MONEYON THE MIND?
The story doing the rounds in Karnataka is that heroines have joined politics to raise money for making movies. Industry sources point to Radhika, who recently produced the big-budget Lucky with the help of H.D. Kumaraswamy. "Radhika raised money from political sources. Other heroines are also trying that path. They are doing it by joining the parties rather than on a personal level," an observer says. The actors deny it. "I produced the big-budget Jogaiah in 2011," says Rakshita. "I can raise the money from the market," adds Ramya. However, industry sources claim she is set to produce a film with exminister D.K. Shivakumar. Pooja, too, says there was no involvement of money in her joining JD(s).

Like a true pro, Ramya began her speech in Tulu, the local language of Udupi, during her campaign for the Udupi-Chikmagalur Lok Sabha bypoll.

"I am looking to do more films with original scripts and unusual treatment. I don't need to charge for political appearances."
Ramya, top heroine of Sandalwood, the Kannada film industry. The diva, whose father R.T. Narayan is a close associate of External Affairs Minister S.M. Krishna, started off small by trying to make a difference to her locality: She stood all night outside her apartment to ensure that the city corporation fixed a leaking drain. "I do not put on the airs of a film heroine, I am a common citizen," Ramya told INDIA TODAY. Having joined the Congress in 2011, she later contested and won the post of booth-level president in her ward, Shantinagar. Pooja does not have Ramya's pedigree, but her forte is the popularity she gained after her 2006 blockbuster Mungaru Male. She is propelled, she says, by a burning desire to work for the uplift of socially oppressed women, particularly sex workers. For the past three years, she has been the brand ambassador for Karnataka's anti-AIDS society. "Before meeting sex workers, I did not know
KPN

SRIRAMULU (LEFT) WITH RAKSHITA IN BANGALORE

such things happened in real life. I want to help,'' says Pooja, reeling out statistics about sex workers and explaining their issues. She also insists politics helps such social work. "I spent 18 months running around the state secretariat Vidhana Soudha, just to get files moving. I was trying to get a stipend for trainers who do vocational training for the sex workers. Now I have the party organisation behind me, and believe me, things move much faster," she says. If Ramya and Pooja are balancing politics between film shoots, actorturned-producer Rakshita just completed a two-day fast on March 13 and 14 to highlight the needs of north Karnataka, a region she says faces severe hardships. "I will do everything I can to help JD(S) grow. Do you

RAKSHITA 2 7 BSR CONGRESS

The day she joined politics, she said her party will be No. 1 within six months.

"If all I needed was money, I would just make friends with politicians and ask them for it. Why should I join a political party?"

even know the kind of problems people face in north Karnataka?'' she asks. Asked about her mentor, the colourful Sriramulu, she says she firmly believes in his integrity and his commitment to the poor. "Accusations against him are yet to be proved in court. I think that actresses joining politics is very encouraging for the youth," she says. All, however, are not impressed. Karnataka Film Academy Chairperson and national award-winning actor Tara, 45, who joined BJP a few years ago, says, "I am happy these girls have come into politics, but I do not know how serious they are. Can top heroines go to slums and sit with the women there? Can they mix with the ordinary party workers and help build a party? I was and am ready for it, but I am not sure if these girls are." Newbie heroines like Aindrita Ray, 22, are also shaky. "I am glad more women, particularly heroines, have joined politics. I was also approached by a party, but I didn't join as I am not inclined. I don't know why others have joined, whether it is for the money or out of interest. Only time will tell,'' she says. I

M M M M

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

59

