The Big Story CRIME
By Damayanti Datta and Shuriah Niazi

RAPE AND MURDER IN BETUL
A local goon rapes a teenaged Gond girl. Her intrepid mother demands justice and gets shot in cold blood. Authorities wake up only after a nation-wide uproar.

WHEN THE CRIMINALS ISSUED A DEATH THREATAND IMARTI LODGED COMPLAINTS BEGGING PROTECTION,THE POLICE ASKED THEM TO BOLTTHEIR DOORS AND WINDOWS."WE DON'T EVEN HAVE DOORS AND WINDOWS," SAYS THE GIRL.
Photographs by PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

his is where they killed Ma." The 17-yearold points to a charpoy, the only furniture in a one-room mud hut in Hamlapur colony, Betul, Madhya Pradesh. "She was tying the mosquito net that night. They barged in and said, `Kaki, idhar dekho (look this way)' and shot her." `They' denotes the men who raped the Class VIII girl on February 10. Her voice is matter-of-fact, as if she is narrating someone else's story. But tell her that her news has reached every corner of the nation and her eyes well up. Until that night of March 23, few had heard of Betul. Nothing exceptional ever happened at this sleepy little place that is the geographical centre of India. But that Friday night, at around 9, three shotgun blasts changed everything. They ripped through the rumble of highway trucks, the wail of train whistles and the grunting of nilgais, pulling Betul from obscurity to national glare. Imarti Bai Uike, 45, mother of five and chief breadwinner of a Gond family, was savagely murdered by a shotgun held a few inches from her face. The motive was clear: Punishment for refusing to withdraw a police complaint against five men who had raped her daughter. But the trail of clues left behind hinted darkly at criminals unafraid of getting caught. Two weeks later, there is nothing reassuring on the 200-km-long road from Bhopal to Betul. The defunct Union Carbide factory looms large, a silent reminder of the 1984 gas tragedy. Golden wheat fields give way to rocky volcanic slopes beyond the Narmada river. Trucks lie overturned on the treacherous road up the Satpura range. Tall Sagun trees close in on all sides. Faded roadside graffiti send out a warning, "Beware of tigers." Up the hilly slopes, ash flies high into the sky as trees burn in a simmering forest fire, turning the sky orange. On the main road of the town, Kala Patha, young men vroom about on motorbikes in gangs, hair slicked back and shirts flapping in the wind. Few women are out on the streets. "That's because male to female ratio is 1,000:962 here," says local journalist Ajit Pawar. "But Betul is generally safe." According to the National Crime Records Bureau, however, Betul is the rape capital of India. In this tiger territory, Rajesh Harode is the twolegged king of jungle. He's just 32, but has developed a formidable reputation and clout. Though he has nine cases of rape, immoral trafficking, violence and land-grabbing lodged against his name, the law has not been able to touch him. With his trusted lieutenant, Mantu Yadav, and his wife Rani, he lords over a pack of aspiring goons. Under his

T

IMARTI'S 17-YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER STANDS AT THE HOME CRIMINALS BARGED INTO ON MARCH 23

The Big Story CRIME
leadership, they mob nearby villages with tractors, guns, axes and swords, destroy crops, beat up men, women and children, kill if necessary, and grab their land. Land also comes to him from tribals he lends money to. With the state's largest betting den at Multai in Betul, he has a finger in every pie. But what the natty dresser likes the most is zipping around town on his motorbike with his pack, feasting on and selling female flesh, preferably poverty-stricken tribal girls. Lean and lissome, with masses of cascading hair, the 17-year-old caught Harode's fancy. He chased her with predatory single-mindedness for the past one year. Every day on her way to school, Shashkiya Madhyamik Shala, he and his cronies harassed her: From suggestive laughter, whistles and cat calls, dirty propositions to molestation. Alerted, Imarti sent her to her aunt's home in Hamlapur. But on February 10, on her way to school, Harode, with Rani as an accomplice, forced her onto his bike and took her to a shanty. A crowd of people watched but no one protested. "Go run and fetch Ma," she screamed to her 10-year-old brother. By the time Imarti arrived, it was too late. The mother decided to fight back and took the girl to the police. A case was registered under sections 376 (rape), 342 (wrongful confinement) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of Indian Penal Code. This was not the first time Imarti had been provoked to lodge an official complaint. It started with her eldest daughter, Pramila. She had allowed her to accompany Rani on a so-called trip to the Vaishno Devi temple. Rani came back to Betul in a week, without the daughter. --"Where is my daughter?" --"Oh, I got her wedded to a very nice man." --"How dare you!" "Woh himmatwali thhi (she was courageous)," says the 17-year-old, recalling the huge fuss her mother had kicked up to rescue Pramila. That first FIR in 2006 was followed by another in 2009, when the family realised that instead of matrimony,
HUSBAND SHEORAM (LEFT) AND HIS FAMILY WITH IMARTI'S PHOTO

THERE WAS NEVER ANYDOUBTABOUTWHO WORE THE PANTS.IMARTI WAS THE POWERHOUSE AROUND WHOM ALLTHEIR LIVES REVOLVED.
Pramila had in fact been sold by Rani for Rs 50,000 to a man in distant Rajasthan. With a son born out of cohabitation, Pramila finally went back to the man she was sold to. That history made Imarti desperate for justice and retribution this time around. There was never any doubt about who wore the pants in the family. Imarti made the rules, and husband Sheoram, 55, an asthmatic, was happy to follow. She looked after him, never forced him to work, picked up the challenging job of roof-layering, earning Rs 120 a day about three days a week, and put her children through school. She was the powerhouse around whom their lives revolved. As her younger daughter says, "She was my all. She was the mother as well as father for me." It was her tough-talking boldness that also made her a bit of a rebel in her community. "Gonds are very foolish people," says her daughter. "That's why others take advantage of us. Nobody could do that to my mother." But as the Uike family went through its deepest crisis, neighbours flip-flopped, and Imarti was forced to turn to law enforcers, not always the poor man's best friend. Right after the rape in February, her complaint had lodged Rani in jail for several weeks. Neighbours watched with fear and apprehension as the Harode-Yadav gang came every night, yelling, shouting, abusing. At the dead of night "woh angar laga diya, danamit dala (they set our home on fire, threw grenades)", says the girl. Imarti probably got her first taste of fear when the police stopped coming on call and neighbours started distancing themselves. "Ma got scared. Nobody stands up for anyone here, she said. We moved in with our uncle," says the girl. On March 19, when the criminals issued a death threat and Imarti lodged a series of complaints begging protection, the police asked the Uikes to bolt their doors and windows. "But we don't even have doors and windows," says the girl. Now the buzz in Betul police circles is: Was she really raped? "About 60-70 per cent of these cases of rape are not really rape," says Betul's Additional Superintendent of Police M.L. Solanki. He lists his reasons: Young tribal girls go out to work, enter into live-in relationships and then suddenly claim rape; or they elope with men, come back and claim rape. Solanki was not investigating the case, but he claims that Imarti's daughter has had "consensual" relation with four of her rapists. How about the medical investigation report? "Oh, you know what they are

32

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

ARMED CONSTABLES ON DUTY 24X7 AFTER THE TRAGEDY

BETUL MP JYOTI DHURVE DROPPED BY NINE DAYS AFTER THE TRAGEDY IN HER LOCALITYAND ASKED THE GRIEF-STRICKEN 17-YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER OF IMARTI,"WHERE IS YOUR MOTHER?"
like," guffaws the man. "Those are always vague on rape cases." Really? Solanki looks amused. "What is rape, tell me? People watch rape on TV and think that is rape." That makes Upma Rai, the first and most strident voice for justice for the Uikes, furious. "He is out of his mind. She is a minor. Anyone having a sexual relation with her is a criminal. It's as simple as that," says the chairperson of the State Women's Commission at Bhopal. On March 23, she learnt about Imarti's murder from a TV channel asking for sound bites. She rescued the distraught girl from a swarm of journalists, brought her to the district circuit house, heard her story, arranged for the first compensation, Rs 10,000 in cash. "This was a crime that could have been stopped easily, but for lethargy and insensitivity on the part of the police." Let's concede, insensitivity is endemic. Why else did Betul MP Jyoti Dhurve drop by, not quite clued in, nine days after the tragedy in her locality hit national headlines, and ask the grief-stricken girl, "Where is your mother?" When Dhurve visited the family, their new home in Hamlapur colony, set up a few weeks before Imarti died in a last-ditch effort to save the girl, did not have a roof. "We couldn't afford one, nor doors and windows," says Sheoram. "The criminals could barge in anytime, threaten us, break bulbs, set fire to whatever they could lay their hands on." With Rai's candid comments hitting the national headlines, the case is drawing high-level attention. A war of words has broken out between the warring Congress and BJP on the floor of the Vidhan Sabha. On March 27, the Betul superintendent of police was removed. On March 28, eight of the criminals were arrested. By March 29, Rs 1,75,000 was issued to the Uikes as compensation. Imarti would have been happy at the speed with which justice is being kicked into high gear. At Hamlapur, a mason is busy fixing a tin roof on the Uike home, Imarti's last gift to her family. But hot wind blows in through the unframed doors and window. A mess of pots and pans covers the floor. Not a trace of food anywhere, the chullah lies unlit. Outside, her father goes into a coughing fit. Her brothers run around the two constables, on duty 24x7 after the tragedy. The 17-year-old wanders aimlessly around the room, brushing dust from her books. After dusk, the undulating road from Betul to Bhopal turns mean. Trucks whizz by at breakneck speed. Flaming trees glow in darkness. Small animals lurch out of the jungle and freeze in headlights. Questions crowd in: Will her case stand in court? Or will Harode's claim, that she slapped rape charge to extort Rs 2 lakh, carry weight? Will the criminals seek revenge? Will she manage to take care of all the hungry mouths at home? Will she get married ever? Will she be happy one day? I

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

35

