BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

LIE DOWN IN THE SHADE
t is reassuring that India has a Right to Information Act macy. Sometimes, this is no more than a notional exercise, but not a Right to Truth law. Information assembles sifted meant as a survival tool in a complex jungle. Take a relafacts; truth demands the strength of confession in pub- tively harmless recent instance, drawn from the celestial lic. Priests extol truth as a moral virtue; politicians under- heights of world affairs. India's ambassador to the United stand its limitations. The full truth is often deeply Nations, the excellent and estimable Hardeep Puri, said in unsettling. The shaded lie, on the other hand, nestles in a a formal speech that reform was essential in the Security comfort zone, whether the subject be critical or trivial. A Council, and it must expand from five to 25 or 26 members. lie can be socially useful, and the key to civilised behaviour. Ambassadors do not make off-the-cuff remarks on such auYou don't go to a deathbed to announce the time of the gust occasions. They read from prepared texts, either sent funeral. Suppressed truth is continually essential for from or checked by Delhi. So Delhi has a list, then, of napeaceful coexistence. A well thought-through lie can cre- tions it wants to see in the new Security Council. The intriguate a misty fragrance around facts which makes truth a lit- ing question lies in the tail. Delhi is certain about 25 nations. tle more palatable. It also helps us fool ourselves, which is Which, do you think, is the 26th, the iffy one? Could it be Iran? Too toxic. South Africa? By any reasonable measure pretty much the starting point of any communication. Oscar Wilde is not the best advertisement for morality, South Africa should be high on the list of contenders, not at but I am sure he would be delighted to learn that his famil- the end. It is a good lunchtime guessing game, in any case. iar adage from The Importance of Being Earnest ("The Probably has them rolling over the aisles in the UN canteen. Alas, space for humour has been squeezed out of Indiatruth is rarely pure, and never simple") was extremely useful in dissecting an airline menu. High philosophy comes Pakistan diplomacy, except, regrettably, in post-mortem on more naturally when you are airborne, and I was encour- SMS by sharpies. We would be shocked if Pak President Asif aged during a recent flight into a Socratic mood by this de- Zardari wandered anywhere close to the truth on what he scription of the entrée during a late-ish lunch: "Tender can possibly do about Hafiz Saeed, since the answer is pieces of lamb cooked in an aromatic and delicate `nothing'. Such an admission would end the goodwill in any Kashmiri red chilli gravy." If, through some epiphany, the goodwill trip pretty rapidly. Both establishments, in scriptwriter had been honest, this is what he would have Islamabad and Delhi, are content with atmospherics as a written: "Tough pieces of lamb cooked on an assembly line substitute for substance, on the reasonably valid assumpwhich trainees have tried to soften as much as they could, tion that something is better than nothing. Moreover, dumped in the same gravy used for a dozen different atmospherics photograph well, which appeases the media: SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Not a bad side-effect. It is not that the preparations." But this would have rutruth is a terribly secretive secret. ined the passenger's need for suspenSaeed has warned India that his sion of disbelief and hurt airline shadow armies will concentrate on revenues. It served neither passenger Kashmir once the Americans leave nor airline to face the truth. Afghanistan. He means 2014, by which The shaded lie, or the protected time there could possibly be new truth--use whichever phrase you find governments in both Delhi and more comforting--is necessary in all Islamabad, so why bother. In the short forms of public life, whether comterm, Zardari has provided the perfect merce, media, governance or politics. rationale for a Dr Manmohan Singh There should be just enough veracity visit to Pakistan. in the proposition to justify elliptical If Zardari can come to India, exaggeration. The red chilli must ostensibly to pray at Ajmer Sharif, Dr have actually come from Kashmir, but Singh has an even better reason: A quite possibly only because it was the pilgrimage to Guru Nanak's birthplace cheapest chilli in the market. A little and gurdwara. trick of prosody turned that economic If Zardari can come to One hyperactive wit circulated an compulsion into subliminal visions India, ostensibly to pray SMS after the visit: `Zardari told Dr of peaks glistening in Himalayan at Ajmer Sharif, Dr Singh Singh over lunch that he was as sincere sunshine and a scented evening breeze about curbing terrorism as his host wafting across Dal Lake, even though has an even better reason: was about ending corruption.' chillies grow neither on hillside nor A pilgrimage to Guru That is neither information nor under a lake. Nanak's birthplace The gap between information and fact. But who knows, it just might be truth is quintessential to the art of diplothe truth. I and gurdwara.

I

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

50

