Leisure
FA S H I O N CINEMA T R AV E L BOOKS REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S FA S H I O N CINEMA T R AV E L BOOKS REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S
CORBIS CORBIS

Fellowship of Fathers
As Pico Iyer plays out his literary obsession, it becomes a meditation on his own life as a son
By S. Prasannarajan

E X C E R P T
I was never much interested in Greene the man of politics or Greene the Catholic, Greene the rumored spy, in part because I didn't think he was much interested in them, at the deepest level; all were mere symptoms of some more fundamental trembling. No one can be defined by the roles he plays onstage. I watched my neighbors in California embark on lifelong excursions into the self, while seeming baffled by the world; I saw my friends in Britain more or less take over the world, but only by never looking too closely within.Greene,I felt,was always in his books hoping to give us a sense of responsibility--of conscience--in part by bringing himself before an unsparing tribunal.

THE MAN WITHIN MY HEAD
byPico Iyer Hamish Hamilton Price: RS 499 Pages: 242

BETWEEN THE COVERS Travel writer,novelist and essayist,Iyer in his newbookshows how his journeys lead him to the manypassions of Graham Greene,the man within his head.The book on his literaryfather figure tells the storyof his relationship with his real father as well.

n a midsummer afternoon in Bolivia's largest metropolis, La Paz, Pico Iyer is standing by the window in the Plaza Hotel. Ten stories below, "everything seemed small, distinctly fragile in this elemental landscape." He draws the curtain and walks to his bed. When he emerges from an erratic sleep and "dreams of many chambered intensity", he makes his way to the desk and begins to write. Words come out of him with a manic urgency. "A boy is standing by a window at his school--this is what I began to transcribe--as the last parental car disappears down the driveway. He goes back to his bed and tries to prepare himself for the next twelve weeks of what can seem like hand-to-hand combat in some medieval campaign..." When he stops writing, he is surprised by what he has composed. The setting is not unfamiliar, for Iyer himself is an Old Boy. Iyer asks himself: "But why was the main character in the sketch called Greene, as if he had something to do with the long-dead English novelist? Graham Greene had written, near the end of his life, about how he lay in bed at school and tried to face down the `twelve endless weeks till the holidays'...". Still, "why couldn't I have used the name `Brown'--or `Black' or `White' or `Grey'?" This book is about why he could not have. Graham Greene, whom Iyer had never met, has already taken residence in his head. The book, the title of which is inspired by a Greene novel, is a journey within a journey, a palimpsestic narrative that reveals and astonishes as the traveller crisscrosses the globe. "Greene never wanted to be seen as fortuneteller or prophet, but I had found him leading as much as shadowing me across the globe," he writes, "if only because he listened to the world as closely

O

as he knew what it would do next, as any of us might do with an old friend or love." So one autumn in Saigon, when he checks into the Hotel Majestic, Iyer doesn't realise that it was the same hotel where once the great novelist stayed. And more eerily, in an Internet café in Saigon, he finds the young woman Phuong stepping out of the pages of The Quiet American, in flesh and blood, immersed in her own love story. When he visits the Hotel Oloffson in Portau-Prince, the government informer, "a slippery charmer" who drifts into the lobby at cocktail hour, proudly announces his pedigree as a character in Greene's The Comedians, written thirty-six years before Iyer's visit to Cuba. Still, the man within Iyer's head is more than a semaphore. When the journeys of Iyer are accentuated by the pages of Greene, we discover that the Englishman is in permanent conversation with the

traveller, in ways more intimate than the latter realises. When the epiphanies on the road are in perfect harmony with secrecies buried between the lines in Greeneland, the rewards are two-fold. We get to know a Greene even his most dutiful Boswell can't capture; we also get a self-portrait of the traveller as a son caught between the father who created him and the father he creates ( who is "much harder to escape from"). All Greene's books are, Iyer writes, "about the shaking of heart". It is a compassionate heart, and it even spills out of the pages. He not only found a publisher for R.K. Narayan, an unknown, rejected writer, but he would become a good friend of the Indian and, for the next fifty-six years, correct the English of his manuscripts. On Greene's pages, "unreliable gospels for those who can't be sure of a thing", the entire notion of the "enemy" is dismantled. If there is one, it is "a

PICO IYER (LEFT) AND GRAHAM GREENE

version of himself". A Catholic agnostic, he believed only in what Iyer calls the church of humanity. What makes Iyer's "counterbiography" of the unquiet Englishman, the father he was destined to create from the whirl of words he read and re-read, a memoir of the traveller as well is the parallel portrait of his real father, a formidable professor of philosophy. In his world of Kant and Kierkegaard, Greene could not have made much of a stir. Then, after an essay by Iyer on Greene appears in Time, he gets a message on his answering machine in his flat in rural Japan. The voice of his father, a scholar legendary for his fluency, stops midway, and he begins to sob. The essay, titled "Sleeping with the Enemy", was about how Greene saw "the folly and frailty of everyone around him". A few weeks later his father would be dead. Iyer's conversation with his father would remain, forever, incomplete. "But with Greene there'd be no need of words at all. He knew me better than I did myself. I knew him better than I knew...my father..." He always saw his father in bright colours: "the yellow shirt he wore, the house he'd painted the saffron of a Buddhist monk's robes, the mustard-yellow Alfa-Romeo he drove fast around our mountain curves (in California)..." The Greene he carries within his head is " drab-coloured and loved to be invisible". In The Man Within My Head, the starkness of memory is pitted against the fluidity of literary inheritance. In the luminous prose of Pico Iyer, life is an open road. Travel with him and you will know better the spirits that haunt us from within. Few travel companions can make the way ahead brighter--and enchantingly uncertain. I

68

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

69

