I

one are the days when educatioriips seen as a mean to open gateways for limited options of careers. Most parents yesteryears adhered to the aspirations of seeing th up to be either engineers or doctors. The scenarios cl the education sector has undergone a whole lot of percep well as a revolution in ternis of courses, degrees and most i career opportunities that are available in the market. The private educational sector sees this as a great opportunity to establish institutions that offer good quality professional education that shall open doors to a whole host of interesting and well paying career options. India has seen a sea change in its educational sector with some of the best private players offering high quality professional education, on campus placements, hostel facilities, extra curricular activities, guest faculties, state of the art laboratories, foreign trips, international university tie ups et al. The absolute rule over the job market of the academically bright is over with more and more career opportunities available for those that choose to pursue a hobby which later develops into a vocation. Career options are now not restricted to a mundane few, a wide array of career options unfold as private institutions make professional and vocational courses easily accessible for those that are willing to take the plunge. The sky rocketing cut offs make it really hard for a lot of average and well scoring students to avail the benefits of a government institution's education. The private players on the other hand have more relaxed cut offs and a wide variety of courses. Whether its jewellery designing, shoe designing, visual merchandising, culinary art etc; private institutions provide specialized courses for a wide range of up and coming career options. Being a management graduate is the mantra when it comes to securing a great career and the coveted seats of IIMs are but very hard to acquire. Thankfully, an MBA or BBA is not that far fetched and with quality education provided by these private players; it is now accessible to those that have a lesser score in their CAT than the ones that make it to the IIMs; this however does not mean that their placement is put under question with some of the best placed CEOs of our country being not necessarily IIM products. Institutions like Galgotias University are a great example of this phenomenon. As a world-class University, Galgotias has a truly multicultural, multi-dimensional, multi-national and multi-disciplinary set up. These rich reservoirs of talent, expertise and industry insight are sharing their thoughts, ideas and knowledge with academicians from IITs, thus

G

offering the students best of both the worlds. Keeping up with international standards of infrastructural requirements, Galgotias University has smart, hi-tech classrooms, well-equipped labs, activity centres etc. designed by Arcop International, a Montreal-based company. Inspired and guided by the global fraternity of teachers here, everything is technologically brilliant and most advanced. With the firstclass faculty and facilities, students admitted here can't be anything short of 90 percent holders in their Xllth class. They have to be exceptional, extremely diligent to make full use of the resources available here. With the best offered to them, they need not think of going abroad for further studies. In fact, meritorious foreign students seeking highest quality education are seeing Galgotias University as the world-class centre of learning. All faculty members are Ph.D in their respective fields of specialization. Their knowledge, prowess, innovativeness and of course valuable industry experience will go a long way in grooming tomorrow's super achievers. Galgotias University, an initiative of the illustrious Galgotia Group, has an impressive legacy of eight decades in the field of education. It's got a lineage of visionaries who dream big and achieve bigger. Suneel Galgotia, Chancellor, Galgotia University says "The idea behind creating a worldclass university is the fact that students need global exposure, not just during placements, but during the entire training tenure. They need to interact with global students and teachers throughout their learning years, so that their mindset is truly global."

mi

AnimPACTFeature
What are the courses offered at Galgotias University: degree and professional? GALGOTIAS University offers a very wide variety of courses, both at the graduate and post graduate level. At the graduate level we offer B.Tech. programmes in Computer Science, Mechanical, Civil, Electrical & Electronics & Communications Engineering. In addition we have BCA, BBA & also BA (Hons.) in Applied Psychology, Library Science and Economic (Hons.). We also offer BA (Hons) in Journalism & Mass Communication, B.Com. (Hons) and B.Sc. (Hons) in Forensic Sciences. In post graduation we cover M.Tech Programmes in Computer Science, CAD/CAM, Structural Engineering, Power Electronics & Communication Engineering. In addition we offer MCA & M.Sc. in Bio Informatics. We also offer MBA & MBA (Health Care), MA in Applied Psychology and Library Science. Other programs are MA in Journalism & Mass Communication, M.Com, LLM & LLD and M.Phil in Philosophy. And to top it all we also offer facility for students to pursue their Ph.D. Are private universities considered as prestigious as government colleges when students step out in the job market? The answer is yes. Against the backdrop of that the higher education has been very recently opened to the private sector; the private has done extraordinarily well. On the first count there aren't enough government institutions to meet the demands of ever increasing number of students. Secondly, we have experienced in India that wherever the private sector has stepped in the standard of product quality has been enhanced exponentially, for example telecom, health, etc. What are the placement and employment statistics of your institute? Year after year we have achieved 100% placement for our students. We have attempted to establish a world-class institution with facilities that meet the highest international standards. And there is always a need for quality manpower. The process is very simple, get the best students, educate and train them to globally benchmarked practices, and you would achieve 100% placement It is also dedicated to providing its students with an education that combines rigorous. The programs here are known for their emphasis on critical thinking, taking into consideration the real world scenario and the openness of the learning environment and teaching learning culture. The discussions and interactions in classrooms are so intense that students often move out of the classrooms to the canteens, hostels and other areas of the campus and into the society. From the more broad categories of education and well known career options to the more unique and interesting courses; the private players have everything that a student wishes to pursue. At Pearl Academy of Fashion; the passion for style is nurtured and what a student gets is a wholesome course in what he or she is inclined towards. Since its inception nineteen years ago, Pearl Academy of Fashion has evolved into a globally renowned institution of higher learning with a focus on Internationalism, entrepreneurship and employability; catering to the needs of the design, fashion, business and retail industry. Pearl Academy of Fashion is a strategic partner of the Laureate International Universities network, which is the leading network of private post-secondary institutions worldwide. The Laureate International Universities network is spread over 29 countries and comprises more than sixty institutions. With a strong focus on creating global professionals for the world of fashion and design, Pearl Academy of Fashion stresses on providing its students with international exposure and industry interactions. The Indian Fashion Industry is currently valued at Rs. 2,94,000 Crores and is projected to grow rapidly in the coming years. The courses offered by Pearl academy of Fashion span over various sectors like merchandising, designing, production, brand management, styling and so on, giving rise to thousands of new jobs each year. At Pearl Academy of Fashion, we provide you with holistic education that shapes your creative and technical skills such that you can fill the gaps in the industry with expertise to achieve global success. Over the last nineteen years, Pearl Academy of Fashion has evolved considerably from a vocational training institution into a globally renowned institution of higher learning that caters to the Design, Fashion, Business and Retail Industry, which is focused on addressing lifestyle demands. It has augmented into an institution, which has developed and continues to develop courses to ensure that the industries that it caters to are equipped with people who have the requisite technical, leadership and creative skills to spearhead growth, innovation and social development. A broad overview of the industries we cater to gives an insight into our focus on the current programmes as well as the evolution of new programmes. With over 1,900 students studying currently at the academy and four wellequipped campuses in Delhi, Noida, Jaipur and Chennai, Pearl Academy is progressing fast on the road to fulfill its vision of introducing India to the best in design and education.

SUNEEL GALGOTIA Chancellor, Galgotias University

The state of Haryana is now a lucrative hub for some of the most sought after private institutions that offer quality education to its students. Being a part of the NCR makes it a great location for students who seek to get an education with exposure and on field experience. The O.R Jindal Global University (JGU) is a non-profit global university established by the Haryana Private Universities (Second Amendment) Act, 2009. The vision of JGU is to promote global courses, global programmes, global curriculum, global research, global collaborations, and global interaction through a global faculty. JGU is situated on a 60-acre state of the art residential campus in the National Capital Region of Delhi. JGU is one of the few universities in Asia that maintains a 1:15 facultystudent ratio and appoints faculty members from different parts of the world with outstanding academic qualifications and experience. JGU has established four schools: Jindal Global Law School (JGLS), Jindal Global Business School (JGBS), Jindal School of International Affairs (JSIA) and Jindal School of Government and Public Policy (JSGP). The vision of the university is to promote global education across different disciplines. In the last few years, the University has witnessed remarkable developments relating to teaching, research and institution building. The University has forged a number of international collaborations and has played a leadership role in organizing seminars, lectures and conferences on major issues relating to law, business, international affairs and public policy. JGU has established international collaborations with Harvard University, Yale University, Columbia University, Cornell University, University of Michigan, University of Cambridge, United Nations University and many other institutions around the world. I am determined that India needs to radically transform the landscape of heigher education and should work towards establishing knowledge based society with focus on research. O.R Jindal Global University has recognise this and we have brought a numb of new initiative and reforms to address this issue. PROF. C. RAJKUMAR Vice Chancellor O.R Jindal Global University

Another important institute of North India offering a whole host of educational opportunities for aspiring studebts is IIMT Group of Colleges, Meerut. Established in the year 1994 share the same vision of imbibing this spirit in every youth who becomes a part of this institute. It has changed from just being a centre of teaching to a respected centre of learning, in fact, a citadel where knowledge is imparted to its students with a focus on the development of their complete self. At IIMT, with a wide range of programs to choose from, students have an opportunity to specialize in the areas of their choice. The ultimate objective is not only to prepare the students to accelerate in this fiercely competitive world but to create their own niche in this tough world with tough competition. IIMT do boast of fully charged brigade of 1333 faculties with excellent academic record actively involved in teaching, training and research. IIMT is also backed up with large number of committed visiting faculty from the industry too. Students here, are imparted the best of knowledge and the meritorious students garner much acclaim for their academic performance through the hefty amount of scholarship worth Rs. 2.5 crores awarded to them annually. To impart best of the know-how, digital library accommodates more than 3 lacs books along with reference material, journals & magazines accounting to more than 70,000 in number. DELNET, EDUSET, SINET are a part of the library program. The lecture halls are well equipped with latest technology and multimedia aids designed to achieve optimal convergence of stimulating pedagogy. Guest lectures made by ambassadors from different countries & specialists from corporate sector help IIMTians to develop skills which are essential in the corporate world. Students here are empowered not only through guest lecturers but seminars, industrial tours, corporate talks & interactive session with the corporate head. We, at IIMT very strongly emphasize on excellent industry interface and placement which is very much reflected from the fact that more than 40,000 of our alumni are placed well in reputed companies and best brains are recruited in the same way every year. Few of the good companies where IIMTians have been placed are Infosys Technologies, IBM, Wipro Technologies Ltd., Tata Consultancy Services and many more.... We are committed to navigate the young minds, joining IIMT for academic excellence and sustainable corporate recognition. We untiringly work in absolute team spirit to deliver individual excellence. IIMT success can be gauged from the fact that today it has 20,000 + students and 40,000 + alumnus in India and abroad.

