Soc iety

LANGUAGE

OMG,hve u heard dwayppl tlk? )
With too much information around, and too little space and time, Queen's English gets a royal snip. Lyk it or nt, the acronymised, abbreviated world is here 2 stay.
Enuf suttufying*. Gurls, r v meetin up 4 d EPL match? M out ov here in 5.

By Aditi Pai

I

f Facebook had a Language Status, many would say: "It's Complicated." We think in one language, speak another, pepper it with borrowed slang and pack all of it, on Twitter, into 140 characters. Call it the language revolution, if you will, but get ready to say byebye to vowels. It's hello acronyms and welcome textese. As Jadavpur University engineering student Arijit Ghosh, 18, says: "Who has the time anyway?" Sample this: "c hw dey :-* & cort! Signor Lucentio, hEr iz my h&, & hEr I frmly vow. At your wit's end? It's a line from Shakespeare's Taming of the Shrew. Even the great bard would have barely recognised the textese version of his "See how they kiss and court! Signor Lucentio, here is my hand and here I firmly vow." TBH (`To be honest',
for the uninitiated), ATM (at the moment) it is a case of TMI (too much information) and TLT (too little time) for GenNext. They, fo sho (for sure), will TTYL (talk to you later), tell u 2 KISS (keep it simple, silly!), meet 2moro (tomorrow) and sign off with XOXO. That's `hugs and kisses', even if they've never met you. With only 140 characters to pack it all in, oh-solong sentences are making way for a new lexicon. "We are the jaldi generation and don't have time for anything long-drawn which can be shortened," says Bangalore-based writer, standup comedian and RJ Danish Sait, 24. He's ryte (right) whether u lyk (like) it or nt. English is being mangled and how. The Queen's language has long taken a hit--literally and not just in Internet lingo; prepositions are deleted, hashtags are the new prefixes, and punctuation, what is that anyway? But den it's f9 (fine), v live in da (the) I-age (Internet age). Blame it on our rapidfire lives where everything from coffee to conversation needs to be instant. The invasion of the Internet has changed the way the FB (Facebook) generation thinks and talks. The Twitter-bred think in characters rather than words, express with emoticons and communicate in a mishmash of languages. Everything can be `Googled' and `I facebooked him' is conclusive that the recipient has been intimated. And how does it matter whether we speak in Hinglish and Tanglish with choppy syntax and sloppy spellings? At least we are getting the message across, rnt v? In times of glued-to-the-gadget lives, emoticons are the new mirror to our minds. Our faces can be deadpan; the fingers convey smiles, tears, kisses, frowns and envy. The friendly emoticon is an indispensable mood communicator and time-saver. There's a graphic face for every little emotion. Disgusted or indifferent? Flash the face-palm. The side smiley is the easiest way to tell your buddy: "Dude, I am feeling sad/bad for you but I don't know what to do about it." "We alter our moods to fit into the limited emoticons that are available. If it's something we are feeling and don't find a corresponding emoticon, we'd rather not feel that something," says Sait. Shobit Arya, 40, founder-publisher of Wisdom Tree Publishing House, Delhi, says "being correct is out of fashion". And it's pretty evident if you look around. Exam answer sheets vouch for it and a look at official mails confirms his contention. Peppered with shd, wld, ur, cryng, the ans jst dnt luk dat gd ne more! After many trying moments, Bangalore University evaluators have demanded a ban on SMS language and Mumbai's teachers have vowed to crack the whip on slang by slashing

20 WORDS YOU'LL FIND ONLYONLINE
o_O Symbol to depict wideeyed amazement. Bot Software that's designed to run an automatic task. DM Direct Message, a tool for Twitter users to keep interactions private. Epic Fail Major failure. FTW For The Win, an expression of delight or happiness. # Symbol used to mark a popular theme on Twitter. I<3U I love you. Lulz A variation of LOL or Laugh Out Loud. Mash-up Application created by combining two others. N00b Newbie or novice. Pwned Used when someone has been defeated. OMG Oh My God TL Timeline, place where user gets updates on Facebook and Twitter. Troll A user who makes abusive posts. WTF What The F***, used to show shock. TIME Tears in my eyes. IMHO In my honest opinion. KISS Keep it simple, silly. TTYL Talk to you later. TLT Too little time.
by Pierre Mario Fitter

Know wat? I'm with this freshasaurus* on d coll lawns. Need ideas...Kwik! :D

Photographs by REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com; Photo imaging by MADHU BHASKAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

60

*Suttufying: Gallivanting; Freshasaurus: Clueless fresher
APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

61

NEW

NEW

Soc iety LANGUAGE
marks. "Students should learn what language is acceptable," says Madonna Francis, teacher at The International School, Bangalore. After all, u can't b chillofying wen it cums 2 marks! In times when Emotional Atyachaar and Kolaveri Di become anthems for heartbroken boys, language is no longer the homogenous entity you once thought it was. A mélange of words, slang and dialects is the new tongue of the youth--Hinglish, Pinglish, Tanglish, Kanglish or any other khichdi you like. "Tropicalised words have a better connect. `Funda' works better than saying `a thought' and `whatte a ton Sachin... jhakaas' will bring a flood of comments on Facebook. People relate to colloquial languages; it is catchy and stays with you," says Mumbai-based branding professional Komal Lath, 26. No wonder then that the nation chose Pepsi when it went to town with its `Youngistan Ka Wow' campaign in 2010. And Airtel's immensely hummable `Har Ek Friend Zaroori Hota Hai' is almost addictive. Bollywood, too, is ditching the shuddh Hindi for a cool, urban smattering of Hinglish. Gone are the days of Urdu-inspired poetry; flippant numbers like Mein karu toh saala charac-

STARS OF SLANG
AMITABH BHATTACHARYA

If mixed-language lyrics have caught the youth's fancy, blame it on them
AVADHOOT GUPTE
Composer, songwriter, singer, filmmaker and TV host all rolled into one, Avadhoot Gupte, 36, has made Marathi music cool, so much so that the Shiv Sena roped him in to compose and sing their campaign song. If Aika Dajiba made it to every party playlist, Jai Jai Maharashtra Mazha roused patriotic passions in every Marathi manoos. He also infused a generous dash of Hindi in songs like Meri Madhubala: Tujhe dekh ke meri Madhubala mera mann ye paagal jhaala... Tume mann ka dwaar jo khola mann kamaatunach gela bai bai man moracha kasa pisara phulla. A judge on reality shows like Sa Re Ga Ma on Zee Marathi, Gupte has also directed Jhenda, a political satire.
by Aditi Pai

For d mak NOO b*, in s it e say nse of 's tuf . Go w at YO f YO igure. v *. L OL* !

BLAAZE
BlaaZe, born Lakshmi Narasimha Vijaya Rajagopala Sheshadri Sharma Rajesh Raman, 36, has rapped for everyone from Rajinikanth to Siddarth in Kollywood. Bred in Zambia, he started rapping in Tamil after a meeting with A.R. Rahman. With Bunty Aur Babli, Yuva and Slumdog Millionaire, he has entered Bollywood and Hollywood as well. His Tanglish lyrics can give Dhanush a run for his money. Sample this: "Friendship enbadhu RAC, love confirm panna nee yosi (Friendship means RAC, think and confirm your love)." It only gets better: Oru koodai moonlight... ondraaga saertha colour thaaney en white (A bag of sunlight, a bag of moonlight, when both meld, the colour is white)."
by Lakshmi Kumaraswami

YO YO HONEY SINGH
This newest `bad boy' of bhangra pop has emerged as the rage of the Asian music circuit all the way from Toronto through Birmingham to Sydney and Auckland. He has managed to rile almost everyone with his lewd and sometimes inyour-face abusive lyrics. It's easy to see why: "Vaise taan mitran da bahut vadda score but white chicks na /I don't like them anymore, bann mitran di w****/I mean mitran di ho."Yet he has a growing legion of admirers. His idols include rapper Dr Dre, Bob Marley and Punjabi greats like Chamkila, Kuldeep Manak, Malkeet Singh, and Apache Indian. His I.V. (International Villager), released on 11.11.11, was last year's most awaited Punjabi album.
by Asit Jolly

*NOOb: Newbie; YOYO: You are on your own; LOL: Laugh out loud

The hero of Hinglish in Bollywood, Amitabh Bhattacharya, 35, has made slang sizzle on screen. He wrote the fun lyrics for Dev.D, including the heart-break anthem . Be it the `Emotional Atyachaar' peppy Ainvayi ainvayi of Band Bajaa Baarat, the innuendo-laden Bhaag D.K. Bose of Delhi Belly or the quirky Pyaar ki pungi of Agent Vinod, he has the youth grooving to his lyrics. Bhattacharya gets downright wicked at times, as when he penned Kya karu o ladies, mein hoon aadat se majboor in Ladies Vs Ricky Bahl. An aspiring singer when he moved to Mumbai from Lucknow, he is now a National Award winner for I Am. The hit factory rolls on with his latest jingle for Airtel,`Har Ek Friend Zaroori Hota Hai'.
by Aditi Pai

*BBM: BlackBerry Messenger; SWYP: So, what's your problem?; TIME: Tears in my eyes

I live BBM*, eat BBM, drink BBM. SWYP*? Chillax, get a life!

C TI wat ME ig o aw ! eso * Ap t! p m le Re spe e saa is la. ct :-)

ter dheela hai and Dil dance maare echo the lingo of the youth. "It's fun as long as these creations are able to communicate and convey something. Dillogical and Anything Karega are absolutely brilliant examples that caught on with the youth immediately," says Nitesh Tiwari, 38, national creative resource, Leo Burnett, Mumbai and codirector of the movie, Chillar Party. When film lyricist Amitabh Bhattacharya, 35, the king of slang and hybrid, made Dev.D cry Emotional Atyachaar, an entire generation of heart-break victims echoed it. Similar creations like Delhi Belly's Bhaag D.K. Bose and Agent Vinod's Pyaar ki pungi may have riled some but went on to become popular youth catch-phrases. "Cinema and society draw from each other. We use situations, slang and phrases from our daily lives to flesh out the character. When the characters become popular,

it becomes the new catch-phrase that everyone uses," says Mumbai-based film writer Devika Bhagat, 32. Language is no bar while stirring this cultural cocktail. It didn't matter that over three quarters of India didn't know what Kolaveri Di meant when Dhanush recorded his impromptu `soup song'. The peppy number became the new anthem recording over 50 million hits online. "The tendency is not new, the trend of using a mix of English and some other language is more apparent because there is legitimacy in breaking the sacrosanct walls of English. We don't feel the need to abide by all its rules. Some amount of bending and breaking is inevitable, as part of its democratisation, and it's also playful," says Rita Kothari, 42, professor of language and literature, IIT Gandhinagar, and co-author of the book Chutnefying English.

Moving beyond borders, GenNext walks and talks the gangsta slang with funky coinage from American and British shows. So, a clever prank on buddies is Bazinga (from the CBS show The Big Bang Theory), and youngsters won't think twice before telling you not to "burn" them, slang for insult, inspired by That 70's Show. If the kidnext-door announces "let's bounce", don't be alarmed; he is simply leaving. `Stop being a douche bag' might leave you scrambling for an explanation but look West and you'll know it just means `don't be an idiot'. "It's most ridiculous that youngsters in India are using ghetto slang. In the long run, it'll dumb down the inherent sense of grammar or sentence construction that people derive from day-to-day conversations," says Ahmedabad-based writer-poetmusician Vineet Kaul, 25. "I am amazed at how someone you've met five minutes ago can become buddy or bro," says Saad Khan, 27, a Bangalore-based filmmaker and theatre professional. Writers, too, are jumping onto the Hinglish bandwagon to grab eyeballs. A Dilli-Mumbai Love Story written by Abhimanyu Jha, 32, a Bangalorebased author, is liberally peppered with what he calls "cool and youthful SMS lingo" and lots of Hinglish, Punjabi words and creations like `marofied'. "I wanted to connect better with readers in the age group of 15 and 30 who speak in Hinglish and are the Facebook generation. This is how we speak among friends, informally," says Jha. When Ahmed Faiyaz, 30, author and founder of Grey Oak Publishers in Bangalore, receives manuscripts in SMS lingo, he directs most to the trash can. "Sometimes it is used to make the characters seem `cool' or `with it', a forced effort that doesn't work especially with a well-read and articulate audience. When we talk, we don't express emotions as LOL (laugh out loud) or ROFL (rolling on the floor laughing) or WTF

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

63

NEW

Soc iety LANGUAGE
SHORT AND SWEET
Q The Kala Ghoda Arts Festival, Mumbai,held an SMS poetry competition in 2005. Q Out of the Fortress, Chinese writer Qian Fuchang's 2004 novel on forbidden love, was the first to be written in SMS language and circulated on text messages. Every day,a part of a chapter was messaged to subscribers to read. Q The same year, Cloak Room emerged as India's first SMS novel and used text message lingo. Written by Ro Gue, it was the story of a woman who carried information vital to the "future of India" .In this interactive story,the author would lead the protagonist to challenging situations and the readers could send in suggestions to save her. Q In 2007, Finnish author Hannu Luntiala wrote Viimeiset viestit (Last Messages), said to be the first novel entirely in text messages.It is about a business executive who travels throughout Europe and India. Q Baljinder Mahal, a Derby-based primary school teacher,has compiled a dictionary of the hybrid language called The Queen's Hinglish--How to Speak Pukka, listing words from Hindi, Urdu and Punjabi that have entered popular lexicon. Q PSSMS, the online Poet Society of Social Media & SMS, encourages people to write creatively in a small amount of text space. It will host its first micro-poetry contest this year. Participants have to write micro-poems of less than 160 characters based on the 2012 London Olympics. Q Chutnefying English, a book by Rita Kothari and Rupert Snell, examines this new language as it evolves with influences from regional cultures.
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

(what the f***), so trying to use them in passages is deeply flawed. It's almost like trashing literature," he says. Young readers, however, are lapping up books with a youthful tone. A Calmer You, with liberal doses of Hindi, continues to sell well in Wisdom Tree's stable. "Adding a sentence in a regional language, at times, communicates intimacy and breaks the barrier of formality," says Shobit Arya. Call it the literary equivalent of a `paneer tikka pizza' with a fusion of languages and reference points. This lexicon is `twittered' all around, much to the horror of puritans. "The fabric and feel of communication have changed considerably. The English language seems to be undergoing assaults and mutations at different levels. Facebook helps stay in touch, but has one noticed how regimented one's communication becomes in using it? Now you can `like' or `unlike', but not dislike. The Indian youth is speaking not just garbled English, but unrefined Hindi or other vernaculars too," says Namrata Chaturvedi, 29, assistant professor in English at Zakir Husain College, Delhi University. Mumbai corporate grooming expert Suneeta Sodhi Kanga, 43, makes it her business to "clean up language" during her workshops. "SMS language and abbreviations in formal communication portray a person who puts no thought into work," she says. The acronyms have found an unlikely supporter in the Oxford English Dictionary. In 2011, it took `initialisms' like OMG (oh my god), IMHO (in my humble opinion), FYI (for your information)

Stop style maroing. I'm dun vt my coffee. We've gt a movie 2 catch. Let's bounce.

and LOL to its hallowed pages, lending them instant legitimacy. Words like cyberbullying, retweeting, sexting, inspired by the digital world, have joined ranks with other real words in the Oxford English Dictionary. "Oxford dictionaries look at all usage as potentially valid usage of the language wherever it emanates," says Judy Pearsall, 54, editorial director at Oxford University Press. Call it desification or corruption, but the current hybrid is a product of evolution of language. Greater contact with a multitude of cultures and dialects influences the way we think, speak and write. "Languages gradually change due to transmission and the Internet has fuelled this transmission," says David J. Peterson, 31, president of Language Creation Society, US, who created the Dothraki language that is used in the popular TV series Game of Thrones. The meeting of cultures has thrown up fun catch-phrases like `Swalpa adjust maadi' (Kanglish for kindly adjust a bit) and `Awesome saala', young Bengal's way to saying wow. "Combinations like Tanglish or Hinglish are a result of shifts in power equations. English continues to be the dominant component in the mix, but it can now be `used' and indigenised," says Rita Kothari. Will that change the future of communication? Kothari says it will. Will our future generations speak an entirely different hybrid? Let's w8 n watch. BFN (bye for now).
with Ayesha Aleem, Devika Chaturvedi, Tithi Sarkar, Mona Ramavat, Insiyah Vahanvaty and Abdus Salam

64

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

NEW

