UP FRONT

JUG SURAIYA

DIDI AND LOONEYTOONS
amata Banerjee is sitting in the Blue Office in fellows invented cartoons. So that they could do conspirWriters' Buildings. The Blue Office is called the acy against me. That's why I want all cartoons banned Blue Office because, like everything else in and all cartoonists put in jail. Starting with that fellow Walter Dijney. Arrest him at once! Kolkata, it is painted blue. Chamcha-in-Chief: But, Mamatadi, we can't arrest Mamata: Oy, Chamcha-in-Chief! Where are you? That's the trouble with these chamchas. They're always Walter Disney, sorry, Dijney. Mamata: Can't arrest him? Why can't you arrest him? getting misplaced and you can never find them when Chamcha-in-Chief: We can't arrest him because he's you want them. Chamcha-in-Chief: I'm right here, Mamatadi. already dead, Mamatadi. Mamata: Dead? Death is no excuse to evade arrest! Standing in the corner like you told me to. Mamata: Oh, there you are. I mistook you for a filing Arrest his ghost then. And while you're at it arrest that cabinet. With everything painted blue, you can't tell the fat haas, that fat duck, Dohnahld. Chamcha-in-Chief: Arrest Donald Duck, sorry, flunkeys from the furniture. Only yesterday I sat down on my favourite blue sofa. Imagine my surprise when it Dohnahld Duck? But how can Dohnahld Duck be part of turned out that the sofa wasn't a sofa but the home sec- a conspiracy against you? Mamata: Oof, oh. Can't you see anything? Are you retary. Come to think of it, he's more comfortable to sit on than the sofa. Better padded. Maybe in future I'll use blind or what? Tell me what do ducks do? Chamcha-in-Chief: I don't know. Lay eggs out of him instead of the sofa. But enough of this baajay kotha, this rubbish talk. The reason I called for you, Chamcha- which you can make haaser deem, duck-eggs, in-Chief, is that I want all toons to be banned in Bengal, omelettes? What do ducks do? Mamata: I'll tell you what ducks do. Ducks quack. So with immediate effect! Chamcha-in-Chief: You want all tunes banned in that Dohnahld Duck cartoon is a conspiracy suggesting Bengal? Does that include the most famous of Bengal's that I'm not a real neta but just a quack neta. And if that's not a conspiracy then I don't know the difference tunes, Amar Sonar Bangla? Mamata: Not tunes, boka, stupid. Toons, as in car- between a duck's egg and a rossogolla. I tell you, that Dohnahld Haas needs a baas, right up his... toons. I want all cartoons banned. Chamcha-in-Chief (hurriedly interjecting): Tail Chamcha-in-Chief: But, Mamatadi, why do you want feathers? to ban all cartoons? Mamata: Tail feathers? I was about to say something Mamata: Because all cartoons are a conspiracy that rhymes with both haas and baas. But never mind. against me! Chamcha-in-Chief: But how can all cartoons be a Tail feathers will do. Just put that duck in jail without bail. And Meekee Mouse too. conspiracy against you? Chamcha-in-Chief: You want us to arrest Mickey Mamata: Boka na ki? Are you stupid or what? Cartoons, all cartoons, are a conspiracy against Mouse, sorry, Meekee Mouse as well? How's he a part of me because everything is a conspiracy against me. the conspiracy against you? Mamata: When someone is trying to make a fool out It's a very special conspiracy. So special that it's even got its own name. It's called paranoia. That NCTC they keep of you don't people say he's taking the meekee out of you? With Meekee safely in jail none can take talking about is also part of it. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com the meekee out of me! Chamcha-in-Chief: The NCTC? The Chamcha-in-Chief: I see what you National Counter Terrorism Centre? mean. With Mickey--sorry, Meekee-- How can that be a part of the conspirin jail, no one can take the Mickey-- acy against you? sorry, meekee--out of you. There's Mamata: Are you a nonsense only one problem. Even after all the or what? NCTC doesn't stand for cartoons are in jail there'll be one National Counter Terrorism Centre. cartoon still at large, perhaps the It stands for National Counter biggest cartoon of them all. Trinamool Conspiracy. Mamata: And who is that? Chamcha-in-Chief: I never knew Chamcha-in-Chief (reciting): cartoons were about a conspiracy. I alMirror, mirror, on the wall/Show Didi ways thought they were about humour. who's the funniest toon of all... Mamata: Humour? Don't you know that humour is the biggest conspiracy against me? That is why all those raskil Jug Suraiya is a columnist and author

M

10

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

