CT PRESENTATION

The Education Hub of India - IX

HIGHER EDUCATION AT PAR WITH INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS

VIT
UNIVERSITY
(Esld. u / s 3 o f U G C A c t 1956)

Vellore-632 014, Tamil Nadu, India. www.vit.ac.in

nation is what it is because of the education it offers to its citizens. Vellore Engineering College (VEC) was started in the year 1984 and it was affiliated to the University of Madras. That was when the Government of Tamil Nadu encouraged private players to set up engineering colleges to meet the demands of industry. VIT began with three branches of engineering and a modest intake of 180 students. Today VIT has 17000 students and offer 17 Undergraduate and 32 Postgraduate programmes in Engineering, Science, Management and humanities. Vellore did not have an engineering college till VEC started. Vellore was not at the forefront of professional higher education since the people had very few options for professional education in their own district.

A

FOSTERING FREEDOM, EMPOWERMENT, CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION

SRM
UNIVERSITY
(Under section 3 of UGC Act 1956)

n its twenty five years of existence the SRM University has initiated numerous SRM centres of learning. The University also prides itself in being awarded the deemed university status to SRM college of Dentistry by the ministry of Human Resources and Development, India. SRM university is now one of India's leading institutes of education with four campuses in Chennai, Trichy and New Delhi. SRM University is one of the few universities in the country with an international network of advisors from varsities and industries worldwide. Alliances with University of London, Queen's University and the Partners International Healthcare (Harvard Teaching Hospitals) give the University an international dimension in terms of knowledge and student exchange programs, as well as joint research. The Students of SRM are seen to be brushing shoulders with foreign students and being taught by foreign faculty from top Universities who teach atSRM University on longtenures.

I

BHARATH UNIVERSITY
- For a Truly Rewarding Academic Odyssey

Think ahead. Stay ahead.

UNIVERSITY
(Declared u/s 3 of JGC Ad, 1956) LJ ET IJ (F) U 6O Si 6ff> 6O &> Si Lp ft LD

international study features of Bharath University are the most noted qualities among its many highlights, which indeed define the institution's academic motto to Think Ahead and Stay Ahead. Beginning with meticulously groomed green pastures of the University's surroundings, passing through the glossy Wi-Fi classrooms, state-of-the-art labs and library, to the world class sports ground in its rear, everything in Bharath University is about maintaining an international quality.

B

harath University was awarded a deemed University status in the year 2003. Under the able management of Dr.J. Lakshmi Narayanan, B.E, M.S (USA), Ph.D, President & Chancellor of Bharath University, it has been a smooth transition for the University to add global academic features to the University's curriculum, as and when required. Not to mention, the

