The Big Story EDUCATION

STATE DUCKS REALISSUE
Instead of improving the quality of government schools, the state is passing the buck by enforcing legislation
By Dhiraj Nayyar

DEVIL IN the Detail
The RTE Act has several flaws which hamper its goal of providing quality education to all children

LIMITED COVERAGE
Only children between the ages of 6 and 14 are covered.The Act is silent on what happens to children after they pass Class VIII. Government says it will ensure that underprivileged children can study beyond Class VIII in private schools. Modalities will be worked out when the time comes.

he Right to Education (RTE) Act, passed by Parliament in 2009, crossed its final hurdle in law on April 12, 2012, when the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of the Act, in particular the controversial clause which requires all unaided private schools to reserve 25 per cent of their seats for children from economically weaker sections. The Supreme Court imprimatur doesn't however mean that it is a good law. The RTE Act is seriously flawed. The Act penalises the minority of schools in the private sector which actually provide quality education, while it does nothing to reform the majority of schools that are run by the Government, those which have singularly failed to provide even basic learning to the children. Justice K.S. Radhakrishnan, the dissenting judge in the 2:1 Supreme Court verdict on RTE Act, admonished this "outsourcing" approach of the Government. "The state cannot free itself from obligations... by offloading or outsourcing its obligation to private state actors... or to coerce them to act on the state's dictate," wrote the judge (see box: Lucid in Dissent). The reality is that 93 per cent of schools are in the Government sector, either directly operated or funded. That Government schools are of poor quality is evident from the fact that 40 per cent of school-going children in India attend private schools, which

T

constitute only seven per cent of the schools. According to the Annual State of Education Report (ASER) for 2011, compiled by the NGO Pratham, in states like Kerala and Manipur private enrolment is as high as 60 per cent. Parents are keeping children out of sub-standard Government schools. India's primary education standards, determined predominantly by Government schools where a majority of the population still studies, are dismal. The RTE Act has not helped until now. The 2011 ASER revealed that less than 50 per cent of Class V students were able to read a Class II textbook, down from 56 per cent in 2010, the year in which the RTE Act first came into effect. Only 30 per cent of students in Class III were able to solve a two-digit subtraction problem, down from 36 per cent in 2010. Also in 2011, a comparative study of learning across 74 regions by the Programme for International Student Assessment revealed that students from the two participating Indians states--Tamil Nadu and Himachal Pradesh, which are high performers within the country--ranked ahead of only Kyrgyzstan in learning outcomes in reading, mathematics and science. Instead of focusing on upgrading the quality of the 93 per cent Government schools, the RTE Act pins its focus on the seven per cent private schools. In its most debated provision, it mandates that all private unaided
CHILDREN AT A GOVERNMENT PRIMARY SCHOOL IN HYDERABAD
AFP

MIDDLE CLASS BURDEN
The Government will not fully subsidise private schools for quota.This may mean higher fee for paying students. Government says its prime motivation in adopting reservations is social integration. Instead of raising fees, private schools can raise funds from other sources like corporates.

NO ACTION PLAN FOR GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS
Reservations for underprivileged children in private schools is a partial solution.Act does not set benchmarks for government schools. Government says it cannot ensure high quality education for all children in Government schools because it lacks financial resources.

FOCUS ON INPUTS, NOT OUTCOMES
The Act sets benchmarks for inputs a school needs such as teachers and buildings,but sets none for quality learning. Government says failing children violates the right to education.

RING-FENCING WITH EXEMPTIONS
The Act exempts boarding schools and schools run by minority institutions. Government says rights of minority-institutions are constitutionally protected. Boarding schools usually only start from Class VI, so it doesn't make sense to apply the Act.
APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

28

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

29

FINAL

FINAL

The Big Story EDUCATION
LUCID IN DISSENT
In his judgment, Justice K.S. Radhakrishnan held that RTE did not conform to Article 21A of the Constitution which guarantees the right to free and compulsory education to children between the ages of 6 and 14. Article 21A requires non-state actors to achieve the socio-economic rights of children in the sense that they shall not destroy or impair those rights and also owe a duty of care. The state, however, cannot free itself from obligations under Article 21A by offloading or outsourcing its obligation to private state actors like unaided private educational institutions or to coerce them to act on the state's dictate. Article 21A,as such,does not cast any obligation on the private unaided educational institutions to provide free and compulsory education to children between the ages of 6 and 14. If the Constitution wanted that obligation to be shared by private unaided educational institutions the same would have been made explicit in Article 21A. Further, unamended Article 45 has used the expression "state shall endeavour.....for"and when Article 21Awas inserted, the expression used therein was that the "state shall provide"and not "provide for"the duty,which was... earlier made mandatory so far as state is concerned.Article 21 read with 21A, therefore, cast an obligation on the state and state alone. Unaided educational institutions enjoy total freedom and they can legitimately claim `unfettered fundamental rights'to choose students subject to its being fair, transparent and non-exploitative. I may endorse the view that the purpose and object of the Act is laudable, that is, social inclusiveness in the field of elementary education but the means adopted to achieve that objective are faulty and constitutionally impermissible.

"What will happen to the kids after Class VIII? The minister has only said that this is an issue to be tackled by a future Government."
M.I. HUSSAIN, Principal, Delhi Public School, Mathura Road, Delhi schools reserve 25 per cent seats for economically weaker sections. The Government says that it will "pay" private schools for this. Human Resource Development Minister Kapil Sibal has said that the Government's subsidy amount per student will vary between Rs 6,000 and Rs 19,000 per year, which by all accounts is insufficient to cover the full costs. For fear of middle-class backlash, Sibal doesn't want schools to raise their fees for paying students. Instead, he suggests that private schools look for other sources of funding, particularly from the corporate social responsibility funds of India Inc. It may yet be possible for elite private schools to manage reservations. It will be much harder for smaller private schools, particularly in rural areas, to meet the requirements set out by the RTE Act to be recognised by the Government. Recognition will only be granted if they fulfil certain criteria, largely on infrastructure, including a 30:1 student-teacher ratio, high level teacher qualifications, a proper building, toilets and playground. Failure to meet the criteria would mean shutdown. The Act fails to recognise that while some private schools lack infrastructure, they still provide better learning than Government schools. Writing in The Indian Express, two leading Indian economists, Abhijit Banerjee of MIT and Raghuram Rajan of University of Chicago criticised these norms. "The law requires all these (non-privileged) private schools meet a certain set of infrastructure and teacher qualification norms. They are unlikely to be able to meet them

"First they said schools will hike their fees. Later, Sibal said that corporates should step in.The ways and means are highly ambiguous."
JOHN BAGUL, Principal, South City International School, Kolkata

"The 25 per cent quota is a drop in the ocean.The Government must improve the quality of its schools. But where is the plan?"
ARUN KAPUR, Executive Director, Vasant Valley School, Delhi

ISHAN TANKHA/www.indiatodayimages.com

SCHOOLED BY GOVERNMENT
Forty per cent of India's school-going children are in private schools

STUDENTS AT THE ACTIVITY CENTRE AT A SCHOOL IN DELHI

USA
Education is compulsory for all children in the 5-18 age group, though it can vary across states. Over 80 per cent of US children attend government-run schools.

CANADA
Education is compulsory for all children until the age of 16 (in some states 18). It is provided free in government-run schools. Only 5-6 per cent of Canadian children attend private schools.

UK
Education is compulsory for all children aged between 5 and 16. Staterun schools provide free education to students between 3 and 18 years. Over 90 per cent of children in the UK study in government schools.

CHINA
A law in 1986 made it compulsory for all children to attend school between the ages of 6 and 16. Schooling is free in governmentrun schools.

without help; which means they will either be shut down or have to pay hefty bribes to stay in business, making them much less affordable." Parents only pay to send their children to private schools with inadequate infrastructure because the `free' local Government schools don't deliver. The logical way to force an upgrade of private schools is to raise the quality of Government schools which can outcompete the private schools that don't have facilities. By forcing private schools to close without improving Government schools, the RTE Act will only worsen access to proper learning. The RTE Act's requirements on teachers are particularly problematic. Says Yamini Aiyar, director of the Accountability Initiative at the Centre for Policy Research in Delhi, "The Act

makes it impossible to hire teachers on a contract basis when experience shows that these are precisely the teachers who deliver." Government school teachers, who are guaranteed lifetime employment and high wages, have no incentives to actually teach, whereas those on contract have every incentive to perform. Aiyar highlights the example of Bihar, which under Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has made a strong push at universalising elementary education. One of its significant initiatives in meeting the goal was the hiring of 2.5 lakh teachers for Government schools on contract basis. Unlike permanent employees, they actually worked. The RTE Act, however, doesn't allow such flexibility. Educationist Vinod Raina, who was a member of the committee that framed the RTE Act, argues that Government school teachers will also have to fol-

low strict norms. What if they don't? "Then parents can approach the National or State Commission for Protection of Child Rights or the courts," says Raina. Given the Indian judicial system, action against an erring teacher could take decades. There are other concerns. Pratap Bhanu Mehta, president of the Centre for Policy Research and a former member of the National Knowledge Commission, is worried about the RTE Act's provision of doing away with the rigours of exam-based assessment. "How can you have a blanket policy to promote every child, irrespective of whether the child has learned anything?" asks Mehta. Such a system doesn't give the right incentives to teachers either, who must eventually be judged on how students perform. If there is any silver lining, it is that state governments can enact their own set of rules to implement the Act, which can help alleviate some of the worst aspects of the Centre's Act. Gujarat has already taken the lead in drafting an innovative set of rules. A committee, chaired by former state chief secretary Sudhir Mankad, has included both output and input criteria in granting recognition to private unaided schools. In a deviation from the Central RTE Act, the Gujarat state rules give 85 per cent weightage to student learning outcomes and only 15 per cent to inputs like facilities and teachers' qualifications while granting recognition to private schools. There are provisions which allow the Government or a third party to take over the running of the school if the incumbent management fails. Parth Shah, president of the Centre for Civil Society in Delhi, which works with state governments to frame rules for the RTE Act, is all praise for Gujarat. "Gujarat is certainly a good role model for other states to follow but it's not the only option," he says. Even if others follow Gujarat, they will at most be trying to make the best of a bad law which does little to give a sensible push to the desirable goal of right to quality education for all.
with Shravya Jain, Tithi Sarkar and Rajesh Sharma

30

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

