THE REVIEW PETITION IS AN EMBARRASSMENT FOR CHIDAMBARAM AND MANMOHAN

Bu siness 2G LICENCES

SHEKHAR YADAV/www.indiatodayimages.com

FOREIGN FIRMS TALK TOUGH
Uninor files review petition on 2G ruling in Supreme Court.Telenor seeks damages.
review petition filed in the Supreme Court in March by telecom company Uninor is a major embarrassment for Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Home Minister P. Chidambaram. The petition has asked the Supreme Court to review its February 2 order cancelling the 122 2G licences issued in January 2008 by then telecom minister A.Raja. Uninor says the court did not consider evidence which proves that Raja did not act in a `unilateral' manner as the court had suggested in its judgment, and that his decision had the concurrence of the then finance minister and Prime Minister. Only two telecom companies aggrieved by the February decision have filed review petitions so far. Significantly, both involve foreign investors as majority partners-- Norwegian company Telenor in Uninor and Russian company Sistema in Sistema Shyam. Member of Parliament Rajeev Chandrasekhar is not surprised at the aggressive stance. "Telenor and others

A

are accountable to their shareholders and their governments. They made investments in good faith," he says. To support its petition, Uninor, in which real estate giant Unitech has a 32.5 per cent stake, has submitted many of the documents that Subramanian Swamy had presented before the apex court in his attempt to make Chidambaram a co-accused in the 2G scam. These include a note of July 4, 2008 in which the Prime Minister and then finance minister had accepted Raja's decision to price spectrum in 2008 at 2001 prices. On February 4, trial court Judge O.P. Saini had acknowledged Chidambaram's role in fixing the price of spectrum but had refused to term it a criminal offence. Chidambaram and Manmohan may yet escape with just minor embarrassment. The Supreme Court only rarely accepts review petitions. "Generally, courts don't look favourably at review petitions and their success rate is low," says Satvik Varma, a corporate counsel. "The court deemed the li-

GOVERNMENT FACES A SERIOUS PROBLEM in the form of lawsuits filed by foreign investors seeking compensation for cancelled licences.
50
INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

cences illegal on points of law. Who all were party to the decision is not relevant for cancellation of licences," says Chandrasekhar. The apex court had deemed first come, first served unconstitutional because it violates Article 14 on the Right to Equality by favouring some firms at the expense of others. The Government may have to pay compensation to aggrieved telcos. Telenor is set to seek compensation under the terms of the India-Singapore Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA), which guarantees protection for foreign investment made in good faith. Confirms Glenn Mandelid, director of communications, Telenor Asia, "We have informed the Government of India of our intent to invoke the provisions of CECA. We intend to seek compensation for all investment, guarantees and damages." Telenor invested Rs 6,100 crore for a 67.5 per cent stake in Uninor in 2008 through a subsidiary in Singapore. It has also fully guaranteed the debt of Uninor for an amount up to Rs 80,000 crore. To win the case, the Government will have to conclusively prove that Telenor and Sistema knew of the illegality in obtaining the licences beforehand. That may be tough. by Dhiraj Nayyar

