Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

PLAY SAFE Using a condom the correct way remains a difficult task.Better late than never. ven after 3,000 years of its first doms without lubrication or Early removal Up to 45% take it E use oil-based lubricants. reported use, the condom reoff before intercourse is over. Incorrect withdrawal Up to 57% mains one of the most complicated
contraptions for humanity. From putting a condom halfway through intercourse to taking it off before it is over, failing to leave space at the tip for semen, to not looking for damage before use, a new research reported in the journal, Sexual Health, and led by the Kinsey Institute at Indiana University, US, has drawn up a list of top condom use errors across 14 countries: Late use Up to 51% people put on a condom after intercourse has already begun. Unrolling a condom Up to 25% completely unroll a condom before putting it on. No space at the tip Up to 46% fail to leave a gap for semen; 45% report sexual encounters in which air was not squeezed out from the tip. Inside out Up to 30% roll a condom inside out and then flip it the other way, exposing their partners to bodily fluids. Sharp edges Up to 11% open condom packets with sharp objects, often damaging the latex. No lubrication Up to 26% use confail to withdraw promptly or properly after ejaculation Wrong storage Up to 19% store condoms against recommendations on the package. Or reuse.

EVERYDAYFOODS THAT CAN MAKE YOU SICK
Check your packet of microwavable popcorns for diacetyl.Inhaling this powder-like compound can cause severe lung problems.It makes sense to avoid breathing in the fumes from freshly popped popcorns. Kidney beans contain the toxin phytohaemagglutinin,which can make you fall extremely sick unless the beans are boiled for 10 minutes before cooking.

BRAIN POWER FOR FRIEND POWER
It's not your scintillating personality but the size of your brain, the orbital prefrontal cortex above your eyes, that decides the number of friends you have. Oxford scientists took MR images of brains and found that those who had more friends also had more neural volume in the cortex, used in high-level thinking. People with bigger cortex have greater ability to `mentalise', or understand other people's thoughts, the core skill behind friendship. Most adults are able to mentalise with five individuals, or friends.

The ubiquitous potato is fine till it turns green or starts sprouting. Potatoes,on exposure to light,especially fluorescent light,start growing a toxic substance called solanine.Eat too many and you will get severe digestive problems.


Apples,cherries, apricots,peaches, plums.What's wrong with these yummy fruits? They contain cyanogenic glycosides that can create cyanide in the pits. Swallowing a pit or two won't harm, but it may be dangerous if you chew a whole lot.

EYE ON ABS
Eat smaller meals, five to six times a day, which are low on carbs, fat and sugar. Avoid canned juices, aerated drinks and alcohol. Drink at least two to three litres of water daily. Don't skip breakfast. Go for cardio exercises like jogging, swimming, aerobics or dancing. An hour a day will burn those difficult fats from the tummy.

Compiled by Damayanti Datta

64

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

