Na tion

PUNJAB
SUKHBIR BADALAT A FUNCTION IN BATHINDA

The MBA Programme for Electoral History
Sukhbir Badal used a brilliant mix of governance, social engineering and populism to deflate Congress in Punjab
By Asit Jolly

Winning Formula
Sukhbir's steps and strategies that worked for the Akali Dal
Welfare steps for poor and Dalits, including free atta, dal. He announced Shagun scheme for marriage of SC girls, as well as bicycles for them. Free electricity to farmers. State spent Rs 10,000 crore in the last five years. He did a constituency-wise data profiling two years ahead of polls along with early shortlisting of candidates. He effected social engineering to include more Hindu candidates. In a first, SAD nominated 12 Hindu candidates, of whom nine won. He inducted fresh faces.There are as many as 24 first-timers among 56 SAD legislators. He initiated several big-ticket infrastructure projects, including highways, bridges, power plants and airports.

KULBIR BEERA

e's a man with a plan. His plan defeated not just the Congress but history when Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) President Sukhbir Badal, 49, navigated Punjab's oldest regional political party to reelection, bucking over four decades of anti-incumbency in electoral behaviour. Here is how he did it. Shortly after being elected the youngest ever SAD chief in January 2008, Sukhbir had proclaimed that the Akali Dal would rule Punjab for the next 25 years. The Congress dismissed this as pompous. Even some supporters were sceptical. Four years later, on March 6, 2012, Sukhbir, using a blistering combination of targeted governance and smart political manoeuvring, won 68 of the 117 seats for the SAD-BJP combine in the January 30 Assembly polls. The Congress, expecting a grand comeback under Captain Amarinder Singh, was left gasping. Sukhbir's father, chief minister Parkash Singh Badal, 84, a veteran of 65

H

years in the game, conceded it "could not have been done without Kakajee". "People misunderstood me then. Twenty-five years was no slogan. It was my plan," Sukhbir says with the confidence of a top corporate boss. The comparison is not artificial. Sukhbir says he applied every lesson learnt in management school to both administration and his poll campaign. An MBA from California State University in the mid1980s, he runs the government like a megacorporation, setting himself priorities and time-bound targets. "My agenda was neither Amarinder Singh nor the Congress party. From my first day as deputy chief minister in January 2009, I firmly resolved that Punjab would be my only focus," he said. Sukhbir was intent on retaking the SAD bastion in the southern Malwa region. The party suffered major reverses in 2007 after the Dera Sacha Sauda, an influential religious sect of the lower castes, directed its followers to support the Congress. He extended SAD's traditional farmer-centric policies to the poor and Dalits. The move paid big

dividends not just in Malwa but in central and northwestern Punjab. Key welfare schemes were launched to provide succour to families battling price rise. The state provided everything from cheap atta, pensions, free electricity to cash grants for daughters' weddings. "The Congress arrogantly assumed that the poor had no choice and would naturally gravitate towards them. They took their support for granted. We, on the other hand, worked hard to win them over and offered them an alternative," says Sukhbir. The response could not have been better. The SAD-BJP alliance took 25 of the 34 reserved seats in the state with the Akalis alone accounting for 21 wins. This smashed the hold that sects like Dera Sacha Sauda were presumed to have on sectarian votes. Even Harminder Singh Jassi, the Congress nominee from the Bathinda Urban constituency and a close relative of Sacha Sauda chief Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh, lost to SAD's Sarup Chand Singla by 6,645 votes. Sukhbir forced a surgical expan-

sion of the Akali Dal's traditionally Sikh face to include other communities. For the first time after entering legislative politics, the party nominated 12 Hindu candidates. Nine won, ramping up its numbers to 56 MLAs. Another three seats and the Akalis could have formed a government on their own. "The Punjab Assembly is an unbelievable place today. There are more Hindus among Akali members than Congress," says Sukhbir, delighting in now heading what he happily describes as "a truly Punjabi party". He is, however, quick to clarify that SAD would never lose sight of its origins rooted in "Sikhism and struggle for justice". "Punjabis have grown younger and so has the party's rank and file," he says, pointing to the 24 Akali firsttimers on the Punjab Assembly's treasury benches. Helped by the fact that

many of the veterans had slunk into oblivion after losing the 2007 polls, he handpicked a crop of fresh faces convincing voters that he was serious about breaking from SAD's archaic past. "Just look at our ranks. There are businessmen, sports personalities even a former high court judge. This would have been impossible in the Akali Dal even 10 years ago," he says. SAD's current flock of legislators include former Indian hockey captain Pargat Singh, who won from Jalandhar Cantonment; N.K. Sharma, a realtor from Dera Bassi; industrialist Deep Malhotra from Faridkot; and former Jammu and Kashmir High Court judge Nirmal Singh, who was elected from Bassi Pathana. Sukhbir demographically mapped out all 117 Assembly constituencies nearly two years ahead of the January 2012 elections. He re-

SUKHBIR, AN MBA FROM CALIFORNIA UNIVERSITY, RUNS THE GOVERNMENT LIKE A MEGACORPORATION, SETTING HIMSELF PRIORITIES AND TIME-BOUND TARGETS.

tained, changed and even switched candidates according to their strengths or weaknesses. "We applied every permutation and combination, but always based it on careful research and an eye on winning," he says. Every success story has its pitfalls. Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal's principal secretary Darbara Singh Guru was rewarded with the SAD ticket from Bhadaur reserved constituency in view of his perceived popularity due to the rescue work he led during the July 2010 floods in the area. But he was defeated by the Congress's Mohammed Sadique, a folk singer. "Contrary to expectations, Guru couldn't shed the image of an IAS officer whereas Sadique looked and felt like one of the people," says Baljit Balli, a veteran Punjabi writer and commentator. Sukhbir says he spent months studying the ground. "Every constituency has at least one key local problem and we spent two years identifying these and trying to make a difference," he says. He pulled out all the stops. Both friends and rivals believe he

40

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

APRIL 9, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

Na tion

PUNJAB

not only bankrolled party nominees but also generously backed Bahujan Samaj Party candidates and Congress rebels to cut into Congress votes. "You have to spend money in elections," he candidly acknowledges, but insists "money alone cannot bring victory". "People must believe you can deliver," he says, and this is where his consistent emphasis on big-ticket infrastructure projects and development did the trick. Besides spending nearly Rs 3,500 crore on targeted welfare schemes and Rs 10,000 crore on power subsidies to the farming sector, the SAD-BJP government initiated scores of mega ventures, including four-lane highways, private and public sector power plants with a projected additional generation capacity of more than 11,000 MW, and three international airports. Undeterred by Punjab's mounting public debt, which is already in excess of Rs 72,000 crore, Sukhbir says he intends to press ahead with his "winning formula" of targeted populism and visible governance. "Today, you don't need money but good, workable ideas to progress rapidly. Money invariably follows big ideas," he says. Promising a power-surplus Punjab within two years, four- and six-lane road connections between all towns by the end of the third year, and three functional international airports by the end of his present term, the deputy chief minister is confident that "major investments will flow to the state despite the disadvantage of Central tax holidays in neighbouring provinces". Sukhbir says he draws much of his inspiration from men like Narendra Modi, N. Chandrababu Naidu and Nitish Kumar. But his father remains his essential mentor: "I did an MBA in the US but I am still graduating in politics under Badal sahib," he says. Ensconced in his palatial private home in Chandigarh's Sector 9 with a team of close advisers who are "outside both government and the party", he has already begun work on how to manage the Lok Sabha elections in 2014. Victory in 2014, he believes, will be the final burial of the Congressled UPA in Delhi. 

HAWKS HANG UP ON EXECUTION
Radical Sikh groups raise heat, force Centre to stay hanging of Beant Singh killer Balwant Singh Rajoana
By Asit Jolly
RAJESH SACHAR

March 28 calling on Sikhs to stall all work, don saffron and offer ardas (prayers) for Rajoana's life. The apex Sikh clergy's unexpected intrusion provoked a potentially explosive situation, making it expedient for the state's leadership to save a convicted assassin from the gallows. Two attempts by the state government to thwart the hanging by returning Rajoana's death warrants, citing legalities, were rejected by the court first on March 20 and for the second

ommunal tensions reminiscent of the 1980s came dangerously close to resurfacing in Punjab as angry demonstrations erupted across the state on March 28. It was provoked by the imminent execution of a Babbar Khalsa International (BKI) militant sentenced to death for the Beant Singh assassination conspiracy. On March 10, Chandigarh's Additional Sessions Judge Shalini Nagpal ordered that Balwant Singh Rajoana, one of the assassins responsible for the bombing that killed former Punjab chief minister and 17 others in August 1995, be hanged at the Patiala Jail on March 31. Radical Sikh groups like the Dal Khalsa and Khalsa Action Committee, which had spearheaded the sectarian clashes over the Dera Sacha Sauda controversy in May 2007 when Sikhs objected violently to the Dera chief's attempts to imitate 10th Guru Gobind Singh, expectedly rallied to campaign against the execution and are demanding clemency for Rajoana. The state government was forced to step in after the head priest of Sikhism's highest religious and temporal seat, the Akal Takht, proclaimed the jailed assassin a "zinda shaheed (living martyr)". Jathedar Gurbachan Singh also indirectly vindicated Beant's assassination by posthumously canonising Dilawar Singh-- the suicide bomber who blew himself up to kill the chief minister, as a "qaumi shaheed (community martyr)". He issued a religious edict on

C

THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT WAS FORCED TO STEP IN AFTER THE HEAD PRIEST OF AKALTAKHT PROCLAIMED RAJOANA A"LIVING MARTYR".

(FROM LEFT) RAJOANA; HOME MINISTRY'S STAY ORDER; BEANT SINGH

time on March 27. Under evident pressure, given the growing public support for clemency, Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal made a statement in the Punjab Assembly, citing pending appeals in the Supreme Court by Jagtar Singh Hawara and Lakhwinder Singh--two other life convicts in the assassination case. Punjab Pradesh Congress Committee chief Captain Amarinder Singh and the late Beant Singh's family too support clemency for Rajoana. On March 28, the chief minister and Deputy Chief Minister Sukhbir Badal met President Pratibha Patil to make a personal appeal for Rajoana's clemency. Recalling the "great social and political turmoil in which thousands of innocent lives were lost", the Chief Minister pleaded for "sagacity and farsightedness" in tackling the situation provoked by Rajoana's death warrants. By the same evening, the President had referred to the Ministry of Home Affairs a mercy petition filed on the assassin's behalf by Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC) chief Avtar Makkar. Following the procedure in such cases, the home ministry immediately issued orders staying the March 31 execution until President Patil disposes SGPC's plea. Meanwhile in Punjab, hardliners had their day in the sun. Piggy-backing on the Akal Takht's saffron call on March 28, they forced a bandh effectively, bringing life in most Punjab towns to a halt. Five years ago, a CBI special court had convicted Rajoana along with top BKI militant Hawara. Arrested soon after the bombing, Rajoana confessed to his role as the back-up suicide bomber in case the first attempt had failed. Hawara's sentence was, however, reduced to a life term after he challenged it in the Punjab High Court in October 2010. Rajoana, a former Punjab Police constable, refused to file an appeal and had instead requested the court to set an early date for his execution. If carried out, the execution would be the first in India since 2004. 

42

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

