Nation MAHARASHTRA

MAHARASHTRA'S OFFICES OFPROFIT
F
ormer Mumbai Congress president Kripashankar Singh is not the only powerful politician to have been accused of corruption. Maharashtra Cabinet ministers Ajit Pawar, Chhagan Bhujbal, Babanrao Pachpute and Gulabrao Devkar have also posed a threat to Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan's promise of delivering a clean administration. Pawar is accused of transferring government land to his own educational institutes but he says that the transfer of the land was within the frame of law. Bhujbal is accused of using land belonging to a public trust for his daughter-in-law's furniture showroom. He insists that the charges against him are politically motivated. Pachpute reportedly supplied inferior quality blankets to tribals at higher
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Mumbai Congress chief, accused of having disproportionate assets, was made to go. But Cabinet ministers accused of corruption remain.

KRIPASHANKAR SINGH

prices. "I have no role in the purchase of the inferior quality blankets," he claims. Devkar is allegedly involved in a Rs 100-crore housing scam in Jalgaon. "I had signed the proposal on the insistence of party bosses," he maintains. BJP's leader of Opposition in the state Assembly Eknath Khadse says, "I raised several matters in the Assembly pertaining to corruption. The government did nothing. We had to go to the High Court." On the orders of the Bombay High Court, the Mumbai Police filed an FIR against Singh on February 6 on charges of amassing disproportionate property worth Rs 300 crore. It led to his resignation from the post. INDIA TODAY looks into the charges against prominent Maharashtra ministers.
by Kiran Tare

Taint by Proxy
Ajit Anantrao Pawar
Finance and Power Minister

Despite a clean image, Chavan finds himself surrounded by tainted colleagues

Chhagan Bhujbal
Public Works Minister

Babanrao Pachpute
Tribal Development Minister

Gulabrao Devkar
Minister of State for Transport

Case Lawyer Shyamsundar Potare filed a public interest litigation (PIL) in 2006 in the Bombay High Court alleging that Ajit Pawar used his influence in transferring lands belonging to Maharashtra Krishna Valley Development Corporation to institutes run by his family, including 32.12 acres in Varasgaon dam area to Lavasa headed by friend Ajit Gulabchand. Status PIL was admitted in the high court in 2011.

Case Sunil Karve, vice-chairman of Mumbai Education Trust (MET), an organisation that runs 15 educational institutes, filed a complaint that Bhujbal, MET chairman, was involved in a scam of Rs 178 crore. Karve claimed Bhujbal's kin used the trust's building as their home and as a furniture showroom for five years without paying any rent. Karve estimated the loss assuming monthly rent as Rs 30 lakh. Status Police is investigating Karve's allegation.

Case Gadchiroli MLA Deepak Atram alleged that the Tribal Development Department distributed substandard blankets in the tribal areas of the district two years ago. He alleged that the blankets were purchased at rates higher than the market price, accusing the department of a scam of Rs 64 crore. Status Acting on a petition from Atram, the court ordered an inquiry in February into accusations made by the Gadchiroli MLA.

Case Devkar was chairman of Jalgaon Municipal Council in 2000 when the civic body allowed private developers, Khandesh Builders, to construct affordable houses for low income groups on its land.The police later found that the land where the houses stand was not owned by the builder but continued to belong to the state. Status The police arrested Shiv Sena MLA Suresh Jain in February. Devkar is likely to be charged in the case.

