Mail

The Booby Trap
APRIL 30, 2012

Women want them perfect. Men want less flab. Breast surgery is the new rage.

From young men to middle-aged women, breast surgery seems to be the newest rage in a nation obsessed with looking good.

A RV I N D K U L K A R N I ,

www.intoday.com

ANIL DAYAL

Size Does Matter
Breast implants have never stood the test of time ("The Booby Trap", April 30). But, apparently, artificial enhancement of the breasts seems to have caught the fancy of the nation, particularly the young generation--a development that can be only seen as dangerous. Nobody seems to want to think what happens when the body gets old and frail. It is imperative we do not get carried away with these modern medical techniques and respect our body to live a long and healthy life.
RAMESH KUMAR, Ahmedabad

Land Deadlock
There is hardly any doubt regarding the Army's claim that Annandale is strategically located for security purposes ("Land War in Himachal", April 30) . The moot point, however, is--Why can't the state government build the proposed sports complex at Ghandal village, which has an area of 25 acres? The country's security is of paramount importance.
V.K. SINGH, Gurgaon

The 21st century women, who do plunge into marriage, and motherhood, have a tendency to care too much about their bodies and physical appear-

Annandale is only a large stretch of plain land available in and around Shimla. All sports activities are conducted here. It won't be correct to restrict entry and utilise the ground solely for Army officers' golf. In fact, in view of the meteoric population growth, the Army should give away all of its surplus land for civilian use.
RANJIT SINGH, Kolkata

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

10

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

``
ance, which often end up overshadowing other important aspects of marital life like responsible motherhood and graceful aging. Like everything else, the rat race seems to have caught up with us here too.These realities were known to our mothers and grandmothers too; but they had never confused them with the things that actually matter in life.
K.V. RAGHURAM, Wayanad

``

Implants of any type should better be avoided since these can prove very harmful for the patient and may cost them their life. Any foreign agent in the body can do irreparable harm. So these techniques call for caution and women should only opt for these procedures under strict supervision.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Mail
Flawed Policy
intention to provide good education to all, including the underprivileged, is noble, but the methodology to implement the programme is flawed ("State Kills The Classroom", April 30). Putting burden on just 7 per cent unaided private schools for accommodating 25 per cent poor children is ridiculous. As the author rightly points out, the Government should instead concentrate on government-run schools which do not have enough teachers.
MANJULA PAL, Delhi
UPA's

35
Scheme must be wound up without further ado.
J. AKSHOBHYA, Bangalore

Mamata Madness
It is irrelevant how streetsmart Mamata Banerjee was as West Bengal's Opposition leader, but now as Chief Minister, she ought to be more levelheaded to be able to deliver on her promises ("Queen of Democrazy", April 30). While Didi shows no gift of oratory in her impassioned speeches in Parliament, she is adept at the art of communicating with the aam aadmi on the ground. Lately, however, she has been whimsically arbitrary on several issues such as arresting a professor who `dared' to circulate a derogatory cartoon about her, banning the use of English dailies from public libraries and proscribing lessons on Marxism from the school syllabus!
KANGAYAM R. NARASIMHAN, Chennai

high time that the nexus is taken cognisance of and the guilty punished according to the laws of the nation, for any further delay could prove highly detrimental to the security of the nation.
MEENAL JHA, Ranchi

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J U N E 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

The Plus Two Pain
Is it going to be plus 2 plus 3, or 10 plus 2 plus 2, or even 1 1 plus 3? In this new game of numbers called the restructuring of education, what is in danger of being forgotten is the crux of the problem. What is important is not how many years a child spends at school and college in one or two or three stages, but what and how he learns during that time. Everyone seems to agree that the education system needs to be overhauled. Unfortunately, the great debate in the restructuring of education seems to be centring around irrelevancies like whether a child should spend 10, 11 or 12 years at school, whether this should be in one or two stages and finally whether at college the average student should spend two or three years getting his bachelor's degree. Few seem to be worried about modernising curricula or introducing a new approach to education, an approach in which the teacher should learn to draw out the student instead of pumping him with information. Discussions on curricula also tend to centre around the width and breadth of the subject to be `covered' instead of worrying about how a subject is to be taught. In the last few weeks, thousands of children all over the country have appeared for the first time for the Class X examination which was introduced under the new pattern of education by the previous government. by Neena Vyas
IS THE CLASSROOM A WORTHWHILE VOCATION?

Raring to Go
It is indeed a very good trend that educated youths from affluent families are participating in politics these days and even managing ministerial berths ("Private India Goes Public", April 30). Undoubtedly, this trend is a long sought one and will surely deliver positive results. The country has long suffered because of its perennial problem of politicians being too old or not educated enough. Young blood will invariably infuse new energy into the system.
S.K. CHATURVEDI, Jhansi

The story misses the actual point. Education, as a subject, comes under the Concurrent list and so state finances are needed. Unfortunately, all our states and the Central Government, too, are bankrupt. Where will the money to pay teacher salaries come from? We have made a mess of the 5th and 6th Pay Commission reports.
AROONAVA, Kolkata

The D-Connection
It is baffling how Dawood's family has been expanding its crime empire in Mumbai with impunity right under the nose of the city police ("Mumbai's First Family of Crime", April 30). All of this, of course, points towards a very evident police-criminal nexus which has, unfortunately, almost become the order of the day in the country. It is

If India is serious about universal education, the Government must frame the necessary outline for the education sector. Funds can be found immediately by scrapping the proposed food subsidy which is proving to be redundant. The corruptionridden National Rural Employment Guarantee

The young MLAs from Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Goa and Manipur seem to be quite enterprising. One notable fact is that barring two, all of them are welleducated and come from quality institutions. Some have chalked out their plans too, and if they stick to their agenda, they will emerge victorious not only for their own good, but also for their respective constituencies. I wish them all the best.
PRAKASH F. MADHWANI, www.intoday.com

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

11

