The Big Story

SHEHLAMASOOD

An ambitious RTI activist. A flirtatious and powerful politician. An obsessive lover. A deadly triangle cost one woman her life.

The victim

PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Rohit Parihar and Bhavna Vij-Aurora

The lover

PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

n February 29, 2012, Keshav Kumar, joint director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), led a search team to the first floor office of Zahida Parvez, 35. Zahida, who ran an architecture firm in the upmarket MP Nagar area of Bhopal, had been arrested a day earlier as the prime suspect in the murder of Shehla Masood, 38, an ambitious RTI activist with friends in high places. Kumar's prize find was Zahida's personal diary. "She is shoot (sic) dead in front of her house," said the entry for August 16, 2011, the day of the murder. It added: "I was very depressed since from the early morning... all of sudden Ali (Saquib Ali `Danger', the man who allegedly hired the hitmen) called up around 11:15 that Mubarak ho sahib (Congratulations), now we did it in front of her house." Zahida noted that she confirmed the murder by sending an employee to Shehla's house to double-check. "Then I became so relaxed." Kumar immediately called up his colleague in Delhi, CBI Deputy Inspector General Arun Bothra. His message was simple: "We have nailed her." During their two-hour-long search, the team uncovered evidence of a dramatic and, as it turned out, deadly love triangle. Zahida had a passionate relationship with powerful BJP MLA Dhruv Narayan Singh, 53, who had a second paramour in Shehla. She was obsessed with eliminating Shehla. CBI found a hardbound diary exposing explicit de-

O

tails of Zahida's sexual encounters with Singh, a graphic CD recording, used condoms carefully preserved in small plastic packets with the date when they were used, and a lock of hair, also in a plastic packet. There were also the confessions during interrogation in the CBI office in the tree-lined Char Imli area of Bhopal, all of which will be used as information to draft a chargesheet by May-end. This unlikely triangle involved a besotted Zahida, married into one of Bhopal's richest Bohra families; a flirtatious Singh, son of for-

SHEHLA MASOOD'S BODY LYING IN HER CAR OUTSIDE HER HOME IN BHOPAL ON AUGUST 16, 2011

The other woman

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

The Big Story SHEHLAMASOOD
mer Madhya Pradesh chief minister and Bihar governor Govind Narayan Singh; and an aggressive Shehla, an event management professional who had transformed herself into a persistent RTI activist. On the day of her murder, Shehla was scheduled to attend an Anna Hazare rally. The murder startled and shocked sleepy Bhopal, caused Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan to order a CBI inquiry within three days and forced Singh's resignation as state BJP vice-president. The triangle also expanded into a square, when Rajya Sabha MP and BJP national spokesperson Tarun Vijay's name surfaced. Vijay, 56, and Shehla had become extremely close over the past two years. CBI found evidence of over 400 phone calls between them in July and August 2011 and intimate photographs from a trip to Switzerland in 2010. Shehla's mobile records show that Vijay had two long phone conversations with the activist on the night of August 15, 2011, and again the next morning just before she was shot dead. CBI ruled out Vijay's involvement in the murder but is still investigating Singh's place in the drama. On March 24, Singh was given a polygraph test, where he bragged about his relationships with Shehla and Zahida, as well as other women. What emerges is this: Singh was playing a dangerous game with Zahida, stoking her jealousy by pretending that he was still in a relationship with Shehla. This fuelled Zahida's obsession with Shehla, whom she repeatedly mentioned in her diary, so much so that she was paying Shehla's domestic help, Irshad, to keep tabs on her. CBI interrogators decided to exploit obvious cracks in the Singh-Zahida relationship. They confronted Singh with the explicit CD they had recovered from her office. Singh was devastated as he had no inkling that Zahida had recorded their encounters. He begged them not to disclose the existence of the CD, and had nasty things to say about Zahida. The CBI officials secretly recorded Singh's response and showed it to Zahida, who then knew it was all over with him. Realising that she was alone in the fight, Zahida included him in the conspiracy to kill Shehla. She blamed Singh for instigating her to kill Shehla, and claimed that he introduced Saquib Ali `Danger' to her. Ali is a local goon who allegedly hired hitmen Irfan and Tabish Khan to kill Shehla. However, Zahida could not back her claim with evidence. But CBI is probing Singh's call to Shehla on August 15, 2011. There was another call on her landline, this time from Singh's wife Vandana, at 10.50 a.m. on August 16, 25 minutes before Shehla was shot dead. Vandana did not say anything and disconnected after eight seconds. Immediately thereafter, Vandana called up Vijay's number in Delhi, wanting to warn his wife, also called Vandana. "I wanted to tell her that
ZAHIDA'S PHOTO, FROM HER FACEBOOK PROFILE; (BELOW) ZAHIDA BEING TAKEN TO THE SPECIAL CBI COURT IN INDORE

"She is shoot dead in front of her house"
Zahida Parvez's tell-all diary entries expose her paranoid behaviour
ahida Parvez's 2011 diary is the single biggest piece of evidence against her. Her record of her relationship with BJP MLA Dhruv Narayan Singh was explicit and graphic. No detail was spared in describing her encounters with him. Zahida made entries daily, even on the days she did not meet him. She even recorded some of their sexual encounters, apparently for "sweet memories", in a CD.  The first page of the diary has her name, written as "Zahida Dhruv Narayan Singh". She usually wrote her name as Ar Zahida Parvez, Ar standing for Architect. On the next page, she writes: "Everlasting memories dedicated to our togetherness."  On August 16, 2011, she writes in her untidy scrawl: "She is shoot dead in front of her house... I was very depressed since from the early morning... all of sudden Ali called up around 11:15 that Mubarak ho sahib, now

Z

Singh was playing a dangerous game with Zahida,stoking her jealousy by pretending that he was still in a relationship with Shehla.This fuelled Zahida's obsession with Shehla.

THE FIRST PAGE OF THE DIARY. ZAHIDA'S OBSESSIVE LOVE FOR DHRUV NARAYAN SINGH IS REVEALED IN HER JOTTINGS.

PAWAN BHAWAR

we did it in front of her house." (This was the day Shehla Masood was shot dead in front of her house in Bhopal.) Zahida writes that she got the murder confirmed by sending an employee to Shehla's house. "Then I became so relaxed", but as night falls, she asks her employee and confidante Saba Farooqui to stay with her. Describing their mental state, she writes: "Darr se hum dono ki hi fatt rahi thi... raat

bhar TV dekhte rahe, aankohn se neend koson door thee...saare newspaper, saare channel, sab uski murder story se bhare hue the. (We were very scared...We kept watching TV the entire night, sleep was miles away... All newspapers, new channels were filled with her murder story). Then she writes: "I love you Mr Dhruv Narayan Singh and I mean it."  On April 30, she writes: "He is in Amsterdom (Amsterdam)."  On May 5, she writes: "Dhruv aaj Dubai mein hein."  On June 22, she writes: "We had blasting sex today for one 1/2 hour."  On June 18, she writes: "We met at 7 at office, Unhone jabardast sex bhi kiya." There were several vitriolic references to Shehla. Once, after Dhruv visited Shehla, she writes about Shehla: "K.... ko maar dalungi mein (I will kill her)."  On June 2, she writes: "Voh Shehla ko bhul nahin pate ya koi aur mil gayi hogi???? Mein aapki diwani hoon thodi si jagah de do dil mein (Either he hasn't forgotten Shehla or there is someone else. I am mad about you, give me some space in your heart)." Investigators noticed that by this time, some friction had appeared in her relationship with Singh. She makes an entry: "We had little bit sex today. We fight like anything."  On July 26, she writes: "At 7:45 pm, meine unki aise ki tesi kar di. Khoob royi mein." It was Singh's 52nd birthday. He went to Shehla's house. Zahida found out and threatened him that she would tell Shehla about their relationship.  On July 28, she writes: "Safaian de rahe the. Mera kisi se na sambandh hai, na tha (He was giving clarifications...I don't have a relationship with anyone nor do I intend to)." Then she visits a fortune-teller and writes what he told her: "15 November tak Dhruv tumhare pass aa jayega. (Dhruv will be with you by November 15)"  On August 6, she writes: "We met in evening-one hour together. Had blasting sex. We had sex in the office." There are as many as 60 entries describing their passion in detail. She recorded some on her CCTV without Singh's knowledge.

30

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

NEW

The Big Story SHEHLAMASOOD
THE CASE TRAIL
Investigations by CBI went handin-hand with arrests of hitmen in Uttar Pradesh
 AUGUST16,2011

Shehla Masood is shot in Bhopal.Police suspect suicide.
 August 19,2011

The case is handed over to CBI.
 September 3,2011
CBI registers a case.It

Saquib `Danger'in Delhi.Special Task Force (STF) of Uttar Pradesh Police arrests shooter Irfan in Kanpur.
 February 29,2012
CBI gets diaries and video recordings confirming Zahida's relationship with BJP MLA Dhruv Narayan Singh.

Farooqui,an associate of Zahida,as co-conspirator.
 March 13,2012

the shooting.
 April 11, 2012

Singh resigns as vice-president of the Madhya Pradesh BJP unit.
 March 18,2012

In Indore,Zahida answers in the affirmative to media queries whether BJP leaders Tarun Vijay and Singh were involved.
 April 23-30,2012
CBI decides to not make public or submit in court intimate photographs and videos unless com-

rejects suicide,works on murder angle.
 February 28,2012
CBI arrests Zahida Parvez in Bhopal and

 March 2,2012
CBI arrests Saba

Uttar Pradesh Police STF arrests Tabish, who drove the motorcycle Irfan rode pillion on before and after

pelled.It exonerates Vijay of murder and admits no evidence against Singh.  May,2012 CBI takes notice of Shehla's father's suspicion of Singh's hand in the murder,will make another attempt to find evidence against him before they file a chargesheet by month-end.

Shehla was ruining our families," Vandana told CBI. CBI also investigated her possible role in the murder but ruled this option out. Singh and Vandana have two sons, the older one studying at National Law Institute in Bhopal and the younger at Campion School, also in Bhopal. When INDIA TODAY called Dhruv Narayan Singh in Bhopal, he declined to be interviewed. Even if he is cleared of any role in Shehla's murder, he still has to answer for contracts he awarded to both women as chairman of the Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation, a post he held till May 2011. Shehla was given contracts for event management and

Zahida for interior decoration after she was empanelled as an architect. His relationship with Shehla went back to 2000 when she had returned from Delhi to Bhopal to start the first events company, Miracles, in the city. She had gained experience in event management during her stint with Amitabh Bachchan Corporation Limited in Delhi after a course in mass communication from Jamia Millia Islamia. As chairman of Bhopal Develop-

ment Authority between 2003 and 2007, Singh is said to have helped Shehla in business. She also worked with Uday Cultural Society, of which Singh was patron, to jointly organise Mud Challenge car rallies in Bhopal. Mutual friends talk about a virtual makeover Singh had at her behest, losing weight and sprucing up his wardrobe. Singh was clearly in love. Zahida is from Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, where she did a course in in-

Mutual friends talk about a virtual makeover Dhruv Narayan Singh had at Shehla Masood's behest,losing weight and sprucing up his wardrobe.Singh was clearly in love with Shehla.
terior designing before marrying Asad Parvez, 42, a qualified engineer and MBA from US, in 1997. Asad helped her start an architecture firm in Bhopal, which got a lucrative contract for highway kiosks thanks to Singh, who used his influence as a legislator and chairman of the Madhya Pradesh Tourism Corporation. The Parvez family is well off. It owns Saifiya College, two petrol pumps, and several plots of land on Old Saifiya Road and in the Noor Mahal area of Bhopal. Zahida and Asad have two school-going daughters aged 13 and 6. Zahida is now lodged in Indore jail, her husband is in hiding and her
DHRUV NARAYAN SINGH AT HIS BHOPAL HOME
PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

32

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

The Big Story SHEHLAMASOOD
PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

says Sultan, adding that Vijay distanced himself from Shehla to protect himself. If Vijay's reaction saddened him, Singh's left him shell-shocked. "I called up Dhruvji immediately after the incident thinking he would help us with things. I told him Shehla is no more. Somebody has killed her. There was absolutely no response from him. Just silence; and then the phone line went dead. I was taken aback by his reaction, or rather the lack of it," recalls Sultan. Shehla had distanced herself from Singh as her friendship with Vijay grew. Vijay told INDIA TODAY that Shehla

daughters are with their uncle. Zahida's mother-in-law Fatima Parvez says that they were not surprised when Zahida was arrested for Shehla's murder. "She has always been short-tempered and stubborn. She has troubled us right from the beginning, staking claim to everything valuable. My son is completely under her thumb and cannot open his mouth in front of her," she added, when INDIA TODAY met her at her home in the Noor Mahal area. CBI has also arrested Zahida's assistant Saba Farooqui, 25, on suspicion of being an accomplice. Extremely close to Zahida, she told CBI that she had tried to warn `Appi' several times about the consequences of what she was doing. She paid no attention. Zahida had become so obsessed that she recently purchased a bungalow in Koh-e-Fiza, an upper-class Muslim locality, barely 100 metres from Shehla's house. This was the bungalow used by Zahida's henchman Irfan and his associates to keep tabs on Shehla's movements before

(ABOVE) IRFAN BEING TAKEN TO AN INDORE COURT BYA CBI TEAM; (RIGHT) CBI DIG ARUN BOTHRA WITH CBI DIRECTOR A.P. SINGH (FAR RIGHT)

shooting her at pointblank range. Shehla was the convener of the Madhya Pradesh chapter of Anna Hazare's India Against Corruption. She had a well-deserved reputation as a woman of all causes, the latest being tiger conservation. "Brave, honest and upright," is how her father Masood Sultan, 70, described her. Shehla went to Bhopal's prestigious St Joseph's Convent Girls' School and graduated from Bhopal BSS College before moving to Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia. Her friends say she was a girl in a great hurry. Her father knew about her relationship with Singh and Vijay. "I know Shehla was very close to Tarunji. I felt very bad when he did not turn up after her death. He called up soon after she was shot dead on August 16, 2011, but only to confirm if the news was true,"

Shehla had distanced herself from Dhruv Narayan Singh as her friendship with Tarun Vijay grew.Vijay says Shehla was a "very close friend"and he shared an "intellectual relationship"with her.

was a "very close friend" and he shared an "intellectual relationship" with her. He admitted that he had worked on many projects with her in Srinagar, Kolkata and Delhi, where she managed events mainly for Syama Prasad Mookerjee Research Foundation of which he is the director. The programmes were organised to mark the birth and death anniversaries of the BJP ideologue. Shehla's father told INDIA TODAY that the two of them were planning to launch a magazine on Indo-China relations, for which they had to meet some people in Delhi, including at the Ministry of External Affairs. Sultan did not know the exact details of the project, which he said was in its final stages. Vijay had earlier edited the RSS mouthpiece Panchjanya. Shehla wanted to fly high. She soared too fast and too quickly, says her father, adding, "If it had not been cut short mid-air, nobody could have stopped her flight." Something did. Death, brutal, quick and inescapable.

34

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

