Nation

PARLIAMENT
INDIAN EXPRESS PHOTO

Cyrus Broacha
RAHUL GANDHI WITH MEENAKSHI NATRAJAN

By Shafi Rahman

n the case of Meenakshi Natrajan and the Private Member's Bill, the messenger is as important as the message. First-time MP Natrajan is not naïve. She is a key member of Rahul Gandhi's team. So when she drafted the Print and Electronic Media Standards and Regulation Bill that contained a series of draconian measures to gag the media, her own colleagues were left wondering if this was her own initiative or a command performance. The language of the draft displayed a seasoned legal hand and Natrajan is no constitutional lawyer. Natrajan was scheduled to introduce this legislation on April 30 but she failed to show up and the bill could not be tabled. According to the draft copy of the legislation, it proposes the setting up of a media regulatory authority which has the power to ban or suspend coverage of an event or incident that "may pose a threat to national security from foreign or internal sources". This three-member authority would be selected by the information and broadcasting ministry and other Government nominees, giving the Government complete control and censorship. Offenders would be slapped a fine of Rs 50 lakh. It can also suspend a media organisation's operations for up to 11 months and even take the drastic measure of cancelling its licence. The bill even guillotines the finest achievement of the UPA Government, the Right to Information Act, by exempting the authority from the purview of the Act. The Congress is now confused as to how to react. Due to her proximity to Rahul, Congress leaders are not quite sure as to whether this was a trial balloon floated at his behest. Says a Congress MP, "Her boss's aversion to the media is well-known. To earn brownie points with him, she has probably jumped the gun." He doesn't rule out the possibility that Natrajan had the help of a Congress lawyer-MP. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) didn't mince words or waste time in attacking the messenger. "Since she is close to Rahul Gandhi, it would be better if he himself clears the air on

I

THE SWORD OF THE CENSOR
Rahul Gandhi aide Meenakshi Natrajan's proposed bill seeks to gag the media. Congress distances itself from it.
the issue," said Rajiv Pratap Rudy, the BJP spokesperson. Once Rahul's name was dragged into the controversy, the Congress had no choice but to distance itself from Natrajan and her legislation. "These are not the views of Rahul Gandhi, neither has she got his consent for the bill," said Janardan Dwivedi, general secretary and chairman of the media cell of the Congress. The fact that the Congress reaction came first from Dwivedi is significant. He was setting the line for party reaction. Rajeev Shukla, minister of state for parliamentary affairs, also stepped in for damage control. "This was her own initiative. Every private member has a right to move a bill. This is not a Government bill," he said. After two days of silence, Natrajan finally spoke to the media on the evening of May 2. She denied that Rahul had anything to do with the bill and added, "The bill has not been introduced, so there is no point talking about it. These are my personal views." Despite repeated attempts by INDIA TODAY, Natrajan, 38, was unavailable for further comment. A Congress secretary attached to Rahul's office, Natrajan's rise within the party has been phenomenonal. Although she is a Tamil, she won her current seat from Mandsaur in Madhya Pradesh. "She showcases what Rahul has been preaching at all the Youth Congress camps. That it's not patronage or dynasty but hard work that makes you win. He always cites Natrajan as an example when he says this," points out a young Congress leader. Natrajan's earnest bespectacled look and her penchant for arriving flustered at party meetings and muttering about "auto drivers" has further

endeared her to her mentor Rahul as a grassroots worker. Natrajan's own constituents in Mandsaur don't share this view. The local leadership is angry with her for not spending time in her constituency. When Rahul visited Bhopal in 2011, a Congress leader from Mandsaur approached him and handed him a dossier on Natrajan, curtly telling him: "You have 15 minutes while you travel to next rally venue in your car. Please read this and understand more about our MP." During the Congress session in Burari in 2010, both Rahul and Sonia Gandhi listened patiently when Natrajan took the dais. Apart from sycophantic praise of the Gandhi leadership, she had little else to say. Despite her apparent inability to think outside the box, there is little doubt that she is a Gandhi family favourite. "The Government had been trying to muzzle the media through many ways. UPA 2 had planned a guideline to check the broadcast media but changed tack after protests erupted. This is an attempt to gauge the public mood," says Venkatesh Naik of NGO Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative. There have been earlier attempts to place restrictions on the media. In 1988, the Rajiv Gandhi government tried to bring in the infamous Defamation Bill in the Lok Sabha. But the protest against the proposed legislation snowballed into a nationwide agitation and it delivered Rajiv one of his most embarrassing setbacks in his 46 months in office. He was forced not only to announce that the legislation would not be introduced in the Rajya Sabha, but also to issue a face-saving statement that he was committed to media freedom. Ironically, it is the present home minister and the head of the Group of Ministers on Media who initiated the debate on the Defamation Bill in 1988. "Those who take up the sword must be prepared to die by the sword," P. Chidambaram had then said. There is a lesson here for Natrajan and her mentors. Making legislation can be tricky business. 

GUEST COLUMN

WHYNOTME?
Cyrus Broacha on why he, not Sachin Tendulkar and Rekha, deserves to be in the Rajya Sabha

T

o the best of my knowledge, the Rajya Sabha is known as the Upper House. Another name, of course, being the second floor. It mirrors our society. Just as the upper classes suffer at the hands of the lower classes, so does the Upper House or the second floor suffer from the bullying, dominant nature of the Lower House, also known as the ground floor. This bullying can be seen from the way bills and papers are not relayed to the Upper House and, more importantly, how cold drinks and snacks never make their way from the Lower to the Upper House even when it is somebody's birthday in the Upper House. Yet to be nominated to the Upper House is no laughing matter. Sachin Tendulkar and Rekha--technically, they both live in bungalows, so would they be able to relate to an Upper House? Second, Sachin is still actively playing cricket, albeit without a couple of body parts (wear and tear, you see), and Rekha threatens to make a cinematic comeback every 15 years or so. My point here is on concentration and focus. Sorry, I lost concentration for a second there. My point here is on focus. Could either of these legends actually focus on their job? The answer is no. An emphatic no. And I have verified this same answer through three other people. Both my children and their friend Anya (today everybody has a friend named Anya) were clear that they weren't right for the job. So, who then? Well, after considering all the various options, all combinations and permutations, after consulting with the stars themselves, I've come to the answer: "Me". You, you ask. I say no, not you, me. I have the right credentials to be nominated to the Rajya Sabha.

1. I am short. 2. I am overweight. 3. I will happily smuggle in cold drinks. 4. I have a great desire to serve humanity without ever actually getting off my chair. 5. I can reintroduce the English language to the second floor. 6. I'm familiar with New Delhi. 7. For 16 years, I have very successfully pretended to work. 8. I will immediately target the areas that need to be targeted for the

Photo illustration by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

country's uplift, such as increasing the LTA allowance in the Upper House or getting the elevator upgraded to world-class standards. 9. I will bunk Parliament during certain emergencies such as a world hunger crisis or when Sachin is batting. For my part, thank you, and I accept the impending nomination with grace and as much poise as 92 kilos will allow. In the words of that great poet Aamir Khan, Satyameva Jayate.
Cyrus Broacha is a media personality

44

INDIA TODAY  MAY 14, 2012

NEW

NEW

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

