SIMPLY DELHI Buzz

In the City
RESTAURANT
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatoday/images.com

Grin, gorge and beer it
Tucked away inside DLF Star Mall, the Lemp Brewpub and Kitchen boasts of opulent interiors with an island bar creatively made from used beer bottles and big beer barrels lined up on the upper level. Spread across an 11,000 square feet area, Lemp has ample space for live gigs, casual dining or simply enjoying their freshly brewed beer. The franchise which derives from a

rich tradition, being one of the first American breweries to be established as early as 1840, Lemp Brewing Company boasts of six original beers. Try their Ultra Pale Ale which has citrus flavours with a subtle hint of malt, and is tart yet easy to drink. Their wheat beers--such as Wit Wheat which is a refreshing concoction flavoured with orange peel and coriander that is light and slightly spicy--are the perfect

antidote to the summer. Lemp's food menu is comprehensive, featuring a mix of Lemp's signature dishes and North Indian delicacies. Pair your drinks with their near perfect wood-fired oven pizza, which make for a great evening out. Average meal for two Rs 2,000 (including alcohol) plus taxes At DLF Star Mall, 2nd Floor, 201-204, Sector 30, Gurgaon Tel 0124 4617801 I by Shilpa Mehta

NEW MENU

American desi
It is the first time that Hard Rock Café has ever regionalised their menu, so don't be surprised if your starters include chicken pakoda topped with chaat masala instead of hickory chicken wings. The portions haven't been compromised on, and we suggest you either skip a meal before indulging in this feast or have a will of iron to resist the delicacies. Take your pick from the Keralian fish curry, tandoori spiced chicken burger, frito misto and more.We recommend the saag paneer, which unlike the traditional version, is a Tunisian, Indian fusion of marinated cottage cheese topped with a heap of spinach served on a sizzling skillet with charmoula yogurt dip and toasted pita. Enjoy! Average meal for two Rs 2,000 (including alcohol) plus taxes At M 110, Multiplex Building, 1st Floor, DLF Place, Saket District Complex I by Ekta Marwaha Tel 47158888

STUFF Accessory alert
Check out Da Milano's recently launched collection of accessories. They are elegant and stylish--perfect for the fashion conscious. Price Rs 1,500 onwards At E-14, South Extension Part II Tel 26252606

Gift to remember
This Mothers' Day, gift your mom a wrist watch from Espirit's new collection of timewear. Price Rs 4,500 onward At F-12, 1st Floor, Select City Walk Mall, A-3, District Centre, Saket Tel 40575095

s-22

SIMPLY DELHI N MAY 2012

NEW

