Cover Story

PRESIDENTIALELECTION

STATE OF THE SYMBOL
The office of the President has been devalued over the years by governments that placed political loyalty above national interest, culminating in the ignoble record of the outgoing occupant of Rashtrapati Bhavan. It is time to restore the stat ure and dignity of the Republic's supreme constitutional authority.
By M. J. Akbar

wo women almost became president of India, one in 1977 and the other in 1982. One will be familiar only to dedicated political pedants. The second remains a household name, even 28 years after her martyrdom. By 1982, Mrs Gandhi felt exhausted: The punishing drama of power had been compounded by the despair of personal tragedy. A "syndicate" of party heavyweights made her prime minister in 1966 after Lal Bahadur Shastri's sudden death, on the assumption that she would be a palliative for an increasingly disillusioned electorate and compliant to their commands. The steel that kept her nerve steady was visible only in 1969, when Mrs Gandhi used an election for President of India to split the Congress

T

and propel her rebel, V.V. Giri, to Rashtrapati Bhavan. In 1971, she lifted her Congress to a magic pinnacle with a stunning victory; four years later, she drove it into unprecedented depths by declaring an unwarranted Emergency. Congress was erased from the electoral map of north, west and east India in 1977. That turned out to be only the middle of the story. She was back in office in January 1980. The euphoria of this political miracle vanished when in 1980 her young heir Sanjay Gandhi died in an air crash over Delhi. No burden is heavier for a mother than a son's bier. It sapped her once indomitable spirit to the point where she began to consider a form of semi-retirement. In 1982, as another election for president neared, she turned to her young finance INDIA'S LAST GOVERNORminister and close confidant Pranab Mukherjee GENERAL C. with a strange thought. RAJAGOPALACHARI She wanted to become president. Mukherjee (RIGHT) LOOKS ON was stunned. Why would a woman with unchalAS CHIEF JUSTICE M.H. KANIA (LEFT) lenged power seek the damp ceremonies of ADMINISTERS THE Rashtrapati Bhavan? Mukherjee's genius, howOATH OF OFFICE TO ever, lies not in asking questions, but in finding anRAJENDRA PRASAD swers. As instructed he checked with two seniors, AS THE FIRST R. Venkataraman and P.V. Narasimha Rao. They PRESIDENT

PIB/PHOTO DIVISION

18

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

MAY 21, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

19

NEW

NEW

RAJIV GANDHI (RIGHT) WITH GIANI ZAIL SINGH IN NEW DELHI

(LEFT) PRESIDENT FAKHRUDDIN ALI AHMED WITH PRIME MINISTER INDIRA GANDHI; PRIME MINISTER JAWAHARLAL NEHRU WITH PRESIDENT RAJENDRA PRASAD
RAGHU RAI/www.indiatodayimages.com

was redressed: "If the relevant Article (53) did not have important catchwords, the president of India would have been more powerful than any hereditary and absolute King. Both parts of the Article however employ words which render the vesting of these enormous powers nothing more than formal and ceremonial." Article 56(b) reaffirms the supremacy of Parliament, as "the President may, for violation of the Constitution, be removed from office by impeachment (by Parliament) in the manner provided in Article 61". Jawaharlal Nehru held, in essence, that the president was akin to the British monarch, whose limits were defined by convention rather than statute. It was not merely a matter of blindly imitating the British template; the written clause, particularly in the grant of rights, can be more amenable to exploitation than an unwritten one. India's presidents, so far, have respected the division of responsibility; even Zail Singh did not dare go beyond the private innuendo. In any case, Article 74 binds the president to act only on the advice of the Council of Ministers, the directly elected heart of government. Conflict arose even when India was governed by giants nurtured in the freedom movement.

squashed the suggestion. Their motives were not totally altruistic. They were apprehensive that Mrs Gandhi would nominate Mukherjee as her replacement. Mrs Gandhi stayed on. The multi-lingual intellectual Rao became frontrunner, but Mrs Gandhi had other ideas. Much to the nation's surprise, and the horror of his peers, she made home minister Giani Zail Singh president. In public perception, Zail Singh's principal claim to fame lay in his offer to sweep Mrs Gandhi's room with a broom if asked. Since subservience is not the best argument for upward mobility, a political camouflage was trotted out. "First" is always a handy category. His nomination was rationalised as a gesture towards Punjab, since Sikhs were already in ferment. Zail Singh's real USP was a promise to be an obedient, trouble-free occupant of the palace. Loyalty can be a fragile asset. Zail Singh was president on the morning Mrs Gandhi was assassinated by her Sikh bodyguards in 1984; by nightfall, Rajiv Gandhi had become prime minister. Before dawn, Delhi, the capital of rumour, was whispering that Zail Singh had been less than cooperative. In a more concrete demonstration of suspicion, Rajiv Gandhi dropped his mother's favourite minister, Pranab Mukherjee, from his Cabinet after the general elections of December. The conflict between Rajiv Gandhi and Zail Singh strained their relationship beyond constitutional elasticity. Zail Singh was soon telling anyone

who would listen, and many who would not, that he had the legal authority to dismiss Rajiv Gandhi. He would take selected guests on a walk in the Mughal Gardens because he was afraid his drawing room conversations were being taped by the Intelligence Bureau. Rajiv Gandhi's aides responded with threats of impeachment. The rhetoric on both sides possibly exceeded practical capability, but the tension was palpable and dangerous. Zail Singh slid into the larger script of confrontation over pay-offs in the Bofors gun deal. Mrs Sonia Gandhi, as wife of the young prime minister, took away a lesson from that searing experience which she has not forgotten: That trust is a scaleable commodity in politics. In theory a president is above politics; in practice, he is what he chooses to be.

T

here shall be a President of India." Seven simple words define the highest office in the Republic of India. Nothing more; the Constitution is silent on the executive penumbra of the position. The next Article, 53, of the Constitution, shifts to the executive power of the Union. As symbol of the state, the president is vested with supreme command of the armed forces, but with the qualification that "the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law". The eminent constitutional expert, Ram Jethmalani, pins the anomaly that
HT Photo AFP

20

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

Cover Story

PRESIDENTIALELECTION

Dr Rajendra Prasad, Gandhiji's host at Patna en route to Champaran in 1916, became India's first president after we shook off our Dominion status and became a Republic in 1950. Prasad was an enthusiastic supporter of a controversial public-private project to rebuild the Somnath temple, famously destroyed by Mahmud of Ghazni in 1026 AD. Prime Minister Nehru took a classic view of the secular state, and wrote to chief ministers on May 2, 1951: "Government of India as such has nothing to do with it. While it is easy to understand a certain measure of public support to this venture we have to remember that we must not do anything which comes in the way of our State being secular. That is the basis of our Constitution..." Prasad, and stalwarts like Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, thought that the best way to lance emotive issues, residuals of a complicated history, was to address majority demands early, when reactions could be either absorbed or brushed aside, or they would inflate into huge communal crises later, as indeed the dispute over Babri mosque did. Prasad presided over the opening ceremony of Somnath in 1951, and Nehru did nothing. The difference was not worth a confrontation. Their second dispute arose over what Nehru described, in an interview to Taya Zinkin, correspondent of the Manchester Guardian in 1962, as the greatest achievement of his life, the Hindu Code Bill, passed in 1956, which amended and codified Hindu law to ensure gender equality. Polygamy, for instance, was permissible for Hindus till then. Prasad resisted reform, but he

THE PEOPLE'S PRESID ENT
All Caricatures by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Former President Kalam tops the poll followed by Mukherjee and Ansari

Pratibha Patil retires on July 24. The INDIA TODAY-Ipsos poll asks urban Indians who should be the next president.
1
APJ ABDUL KALAM

13.97 *

2

PRANAB MUKHERJEE

10.24

3

ANNA HAZARE

10.02

4

HAMID ANSARI

9.68

5

MANMOHAN SINGH

9.50

METHODOLOGY
A quantitative survey using a structured questionnaire was administered randomly to 5,639 men and women from SEC A and B households, in the age group 18-60 via telephone and face-to-face interviews in 28 state capitals.Sixteen names of prospective candidates (put together by the INDIATODAY editorial team) were shared with the respondents and they were asked to rank the candidates from 1 to 16. Each of the 16 candidates was given a rank somewhere between 1 and 16 by all respondents. For each of the 16 candidates, we totalled the number of votes he or she got in each of the 16 ranks. These were then weighted for each candidate, with rank 1 getting the highest weightage of 16, rank 2 getting 15, rank 3 getting 14 and so on to rank 16 getting the lowest weightage of 1. The number of votes in each rank was multiplied by its respective weight. All of them were then added for each of the 16 candidates and then divided by the total number of respondents, 5,639. Such a method reflects the entire preference list of respondents and not simply their first choice. The fieldwork was conducted between April 26 and May 6.

6

A.K.ANTONYY

9.05

7

SHIVRAJ PATIL

8.50

8

N.R. NARAYANA MURTHY

8.34

9

AMARTYA SEN

7.96

10

S.H. KAPADIA

7.85

11

RATAN TATA

7.82

respon52% dents think a UPA candidatewill win the presidential election ahead of NDA'schoice.
12
PARKASH SINGH BADAL

7.61

13

MEIRA KUMAR

7.24

14

AMITABH BACHCHAN

7.24

15

E. SREEDHARAN

6.73

16

KARAN SINGH

6.36

* The figures are scores (not per cent) and have been calculated by weighing second and other preferences of respondents.

22

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

MAY 21, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

23

Cover Story

PRESIDENTIALELECTION
Indians want a president, not a puppet. There were two models for president for the first 19 years, personified in Rajendra Prasad and Dr Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, who became president in 1960: Statesman-politician and public intellectual, with high talent and integrity in common. The three names being tossed about so far for this year's polls meet such standards: Pranab Mukherjee is admired across party lines, as was evident in the current session of Parliament, and in the country; Abdul Kalam and Hamid Ansari are widely respected intellectual-professionals. In 1969, a third option entered the frame. Mrs Gandhi won a spectacular political victory but by choosing Giri, she began a process of depreciation that inevitably led to devaluation.

OUTGOING J PRESIDENT AP ABDUL KALAM (RIGHT) GREETS SONIA GANDHI DURING A FORMAL RECEPTION AT RASHTRAPATI BHAVAN

could do nothing against Nehru and the will of Parliament. But these were differences over parallel visions of India, not petty and acrimonious tussles for control. Ironically, collusion between prime minister and president can be as dangerous as conflict. A president's power lies in moral authority, which demands the independence of a judge and sagacity of a wide-awake nationalist. He is guardian of the most precious asset in a democracy, the people's rights, as inscribed in the Constitution. Any lapse is never forgiven by the voter or by history. A perfectly decent president like Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed (August 1974 to February 1977), therefore, is not remembered for civility, but for the crass subservience he displayed when, in June 1975, he signed without question Mrs Gandhi's authoritarian proclamation that condemned India to 19 months of Emergency. The brilliant satirist Abu Abraham, who had been nominated to the Rajya Sabha by Mrs Gandhi, stepped out of his grace-and-favour persona and drew a withering cartoon of the president selling away the Constitution from his bathtub. This memory is indelible in the national consciousness, and explains the hostile reaction to the prospect of a dummy or a dwarf in Rashtrapati Bhavan.

The last overlap president was APJ Abdul Kalam. In 2004, Sonia Gandhi went to him to claim the prime ministership; there is controversy about what exactly transpired.

AP Photo

24

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

Cover Story

PRESIDENTIALELECTION
AP Photo

SONIA GANDHI (LEFT) WITH PRANAB MUKHERJEE AT THE RELEASE OF THE PARTY MANIFESTO AHEAD OF THE 2009 GENERAL ELECTIONS

When Giri departed in 1974 there was talk that he had taken the curtains along with him. The last five years have seen the symbol of state descend to a caricature. In 2007, Mrs Sonia Gandhi set aside Pranab Mukherjee's name and pushed Mrs Pratibha Patil's name through perplexed allies and a helpless nation. Ironically, these five desultory years of Mrs Patil have sharpened the demand for a person of stature like Mukherjee as the 13th president. Congress allies Sharad Pawar and M. Karunanidhi refuse to be hustled this time around; they are trying to pre-empt Sonia Gandhi's individual will through collective applause. They have voiced support for Mukherjee even before Congress has. Their UPA colleague Mamata Banerjee is more wary, but she cannot afford to vote against a fellow Bengali. Mulayam Singh Yadav is happy to go with the flow if the flow is in this

direction. Sentiment for Mukherjee has spread to sections of the BJP as well. Curiously, the only person who could deny Mukherjee what is widely acknowledged as his due is his own leader, Mrs Sonia Gandhi. There is only one plausible reason for Mrs Gandhi's hesitation. She cannot be certain about what Mukherjee will do during his `overlap' moment.

T

In 2007, Sonia Gandhi set aside Pranab Mukherjee's name and pushed Pratibha Patil's name through perplexed allies and a helpless nation.

he first `Overlap President' would have been a well-regarded Bharatanatyam dancer called Rukmini Devi. We shall never know what prompted the Janata Prime Minister Morarji Desai to float this 71-yearold's name in 1977; he was not famous for patronage of the arts. Perhaps he had some personal peeve against Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy, whose claim lay in the fact that Mrs Gandhi stopped him from becoming president in 1969, setting off a chain of events that had come full circle in less than a decade. Desai was overruled; Reddy became president. But this circle had an extra twist. In 1980, Reddy had to swear in Mrs Gandhi as prime minister. He thus became an overlap president, splitting his term between governments that were politically hos-

26

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

Cover Story

PRESIDENTIALELECTION
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

tile to each other. The last overlap president was Abdul Kalam. In 2004, Mrs Sonia Gandhi went to him to claim the prime ministership; there is controversy about what exactly transpired. A day later, Sonia Gandhi chose Dr Manmohan Singh. Every Congress MP lauded her for a unique sacrifice, all speeches broadcast to the nation by an obliging Doordarshan. "The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister." Article 75 leaves no room for confusion. The president is within his rights to name who he will as prime minister, for there is no Cabinet whose advice he can seek. The prime minister must prove his majority in the Lok Sabha, but anyone can become prime minister for that period. In 1996, Congress lost the elections but no one won them. President Shankar Dayal Sharma set an admirable precedent by calling upon the leader of the largest single party, BJP, to form a government even though both he and the BJP knew that it would not win a vote in the House. Atal Bihari Vajpayee became prime minister for 16 days. But a precedent is not a law. As the Lok Sabha gets increasingly fractured, the president's leeway expands. The dangers are obvious if neither major party gets sufficient seats to command the dominant centre of an alliance, and smaller parties feel free to offer support in return for political or financial rewards. This has happened often enough at the state level. The role of the president will be critical after the next general elections. Rahul Gandhi's future could depend on the decision the president will take. Mrs Sonia Gandhi is clearly hesitant about both the popular favourites, Kalam and Mukherjee; she may even wonder whether Hamid Ansari would tweak the rules just a little at crunch time. There is therefore much talk of a last-minute surprise candidate, who will probably pop up in the last week of May, or even in June around the time of the notification. Since "first" is a preferred alibi, speculation is narrowing to a tribal candidate, for three Muslims and a Dalit have already lived in Rashtrapati Bhavan. Or the Congress might choose to trip Mukherjee by opting for anyone else around whom a consensus can be created. There is a difference though: Mrs Sonia Gandhi was in command in 2007. This year, the allies needed to ensure victory have stopped being stenographers in the service of a politically weakened Congress. They are not ready for dictation. To bid for the future, you must first insure the present. At the moment of writing the insurance policy is in the name of Pranab Mukherjee.
To pick your president, log on to www.indiatoday.in/prez

THE LAST RACE HORSE
Allies upset Sonia's gameplan by propping up Political Pranab
By Priya Sahgal

or SMS prez A for APJ Kalam, prez B for Pranab Mukherjee, prez C for Anna Hazare, prez D for Hamid Ansari, prez E for Manmohan Singh to 52424

h my goodness!" exclaimed Pranab Mukherjee when asked by reporters whether he was the Congress candidate for the next president of India. He was quick to add a note of caution: "Do not indulge in speculation." This was on April 30. With key UPA allies supporting Mukherjee, his candidature has suddenly become much more than media speculation. It is not the Congress but UPA allies who are propping up Mukherjee. Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar was the first to throw his weight behind the finance minister's candidature when he said that the next president should not be an "apolitical candidate". He later added, "Whether it is Pranab Mukherjee or (Vice-President) Hamid Ansari, there should be a consensus on the name." It was clear that he preferred political Mukherjee to the apolitical Ansari. Soon, political became the code word for Mukherjee as Samajwadi Party (SP) chief Mulayam Singh Yadav, too, declared that the next president should be a "political" candidate. With DMK, Rashtriya Lok Dal and even the Left stating that they would support either Mukherjee or Ansari, the Congress is caught in a bind. The party needs not just the UPA constituents but also Mulayam's numbers to get its candidate through. If it fails to get its candidate elected, then the Manmohan Singh Government will have to resign. The only political candidate the allies agree upon is Mukherjee. Sonia Gandhi is aware of these compulsions. She invited

O

28

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

NEW

Cover Story

PRESIDENTIALELECTION

her bete noire Pawar to 10 Janpath on April 25 to initiate consultations. This was the first time in the tenure of UPA 2 that the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief had been invited to her home. While no names were discussed, Pawar pointed out that given the numbers, UPA's candidate would have to be one all the parties agreed upon. Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee's apathy to both Ansari and Mukherjee is an open secret. But both Pawar and Sonia know that while Mamata has the luxury of saying no to Ansari, she cannot antagonise the West Bengal voter by blocking a fellow Bengali's elevation to Rashtrapati Bhavan. Mamata has told the Congress to decide upon one candidate as she does not want to be seen rejecting anyone.

COALITION CHORUS
Congress is silent while allies root for Mukherjee
APRIL23 Sharad Pawar (NCP) "The (presidential) candidate should not be non-political . Whether it is Pranab Mukherjee or (Vice-President) Hamid Ansari, there should be a consensus on the name." MAY3 Mulayam Singh Yadav (SP) "The next president should be political." MAY5 M.Karunanidhi (DMK) "If he (Pranab) is the candidate of the UPA coalition, DMK will not hesitate to back his candidature." MAY7 Ajit Singh (RLD) "The fact is that Mukherjee deserves this post. There are no two ways about it. Everyone is in favour of it."

he problem is that Sonia does not trust Mukherjee. Congress folklore has it that in 1984, soon after Indira Gandhi's assassination, he dared to suggest that the most senior minister should be installed as Indira's successor. In other words, the prime ministership should go to him. Rajiv's coterie played this up as an act of dissidence and Mukherjee was sidelined. Subsequently, he won back Rajiv's trust. But Sonia is still to trust the one man she depends upon to run this Government. In 2007 when the Left proposed Mukherjee's name, she was quick to shoot it down saying he "was too valuable to be spared". A lot has changed in the past five years. For one, UPA does not have the outright majority to elect its own candidate as it did in 2007. Second, in the current unstable political environment with an activist judiciary taking on the executive, the need of the hour is a political president. If Sonia still goes ahead with Ansari, she will expose her own political insecurity. Anticipating Sonia's discomfort, her coterie swung into action. Congress spokesperson Renuka Chowdhury claimed that Mukherjee is too "valuable" to lose. Cabinet minister Salman Khurshid played the same "valuable" card, saying, "He (Mukherjee) is our Rahul Dravid--The Wall." But the allies are not buying this line anymore. There is a reason why they are propping up Mukherjee's name: He would be no rubber stamp. Also, there are few in Government today who can rival Mukherjee's grasp of the Constitution. Although he has not lobbied for the post, to deny him this would be a snub he will not ignore. Those who know Mukherjee well say that he would immediately resign as finance minister and Sonia would anyway lose the "valuable" minister she claims she cannot do without. There is a certain glee among the allies at the Congress's discomfiture. Pawar has a self-confessed "love-hate" relationship with Congress. DMK chief M. Karunanidhi blames Congress for sending daughter Kanimozhi to Tihar. An energised Mulayam is angry about CBI's plea to investigate the disproportionate assets case against him. This is payback time. Sonia could still come up with a wild card--another political name instead of Mukherjee. Anticipating that she might nominate the Gandhi family loyalist A.K. Antony, both the Opposition and UPA's allies attacked the defence minister in the Rajya Sabha on May 7. The CPI's M.P. Achuthan said in

T

Sitaram Yechury (CPI-M) "The Left had proposed Ansari's
name in 2007. Mukherjee's name had also come up that time. If a consensus is built, we will have no objection to both these names. It is to be seen on which names there is more consensus."

MAMATA CALLS ON MULAYAM ON MAY 3

PTI

the Rajya Sabha, "It's unfortunate that the clean image of Shri A.K. Antony is being used to cover up many scams." In Lok Sabha on the same day, BJP leader Yashwant Sinha praised Mukherjee's leadership skills. He also added, "Soon, you will be moving to a bigger house in the Capital." There is also a view within the Congress that the minorities have been adequately represented in positions of power. Congress sources say Sonia could play the tribal card and nominate the mild-mannered K.C. Deo or some such bland but politically correct candidate. But given the fact that the allies have already expressed their preference, and considering the Congress's current credibility deficit, it will be a risky gamble even for Sonia. I

30

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

NEW

