NET FLUX

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

tumblr tales

Word Play
Editor Real Talk, a Tumblr blog created in April, is becoming popular with media professionals.The blog documents situations that could happen in any newsroom with GIFs (Graphics Interchange Format) or mini video clips, along with pithy captions. What makes the page hilarious is the contrast between the captions and the GIFS, many of which are movie clips or news videos. For example,"When I catch an error in the magazine after it goes to print"has been paired with Jack Nicholson smashing utensils in a clip from The Shining.Another one has a news clip of Michelle Obama showing off her muscles with the caption "When I edit WHEN I EDIT 20,000 20,000 words in WORDS IN A SINGLE DAY a day" .Ann Friedman, executive editor of GOOD magazine, is the creator of the blog.

Racist Chips Anyone?
Ashton Kutcher's recent role in an advertisement for Popchips as Raj, a Bollywood producer, has been swamped by criticism. Dressed in a shiny blue sherwani, with a brown Indian accent and brown face makeup, Kutcher, as Raj, describes his perfect woman (Kim Kardashian, he says in his accent).The ad has drawn criticism from South Asian celebrities such as actor Aziz Ansari and rap group Das Racist. Blogs have called Kutcher and the company racist.Anil Dash, an entrepreneur based in the US, wrote a scathing blog: "I think they made a racist ad because they are so steeped in our (US) culture's racism that they didn't even realise they were doing it." American comedian Hasan Minhaj made an expletive-riddled video in response to the ad--"Asians and Indians are the new clownable minority... just people that have accents and fix computers." Popchips has since apologised and taken off the ad.

KUTCHER

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for the movie buff, the super saver and the frequent flyer. For those who own smartphones, these apps could be a cool addition: SnipSnap Coupon App converts paper coupons into a digital format, complete with bar codes. iFly Pro App gives information on over 700 airports worldwide, flight status and terminals. Pocket Films lets filmmakers and fans stream Indian short-films and documentaries.

web wow

Marvel at Marbles

Surprisingly, the most popular woman on YouTube is not a singer or a vacuous reality TV star, but a comedian. Jenna Marbles, 25, has almost three million subscribers to her webcam-style videos ranging from sarcastic pieces of advice on looking good, dating and even discussing flatulence with her dogs. A GEM FROM THE SEA OF THE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet

Pursuit of Unhappiness
Author Augusten Burroughs wrote about the upside of being downbeat in the article How to Live Unhappily Ever After in The Wall Street Journal. The writer mentioned that because one is not happy all the time doesn't mean that there is something wrong with one's life.He wrote that the word `heal'is a television word."...you don't need to heal to be whole.And by whole,I mean damaged,missing pieces of who you were,your heart-- missing what feels like some of your most important parts.And yet,not missing any part of you at all.Being,in truth,larger than you were before."

BURROUGHS

buzz feed

viral video

Laughter Riot

iPhone Upgrade
The new iPhone, rumoured to be released in September, might get even better.Apple's news site iLounge says that the next version of Apple's phone will have a fourinch screen (bigger than the current iPhone 4S's 3.5 inch display). The device is supposedly thinner and taller than the current phone.

OBAMA

It looks like if US President Barack Obama isn't reelected, he could have an alternate career. Obama had the crowd in splits at the White House Correspondents' Dinner in Washington on April 28. Hosted by comedian Jimmy Kimmel, Obama took potshots at rival Republican candidate Mitt Romney, politician Sarah Palin and US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. Referring to the Secret Service sex scandal in Colombia, Obama said he could have had time for more jokes, but "I have to get Secret Service home in time for their curfew".

MAY 21, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

61

NEW

