The Big Story AIR INDIASTRIKE

CAPTAINS OF CRASH-LANDING
A union holds the national carrier to ransom even as the civil aviation minister refuses to negotiate until the striking pilots return to work
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora and

FLIGHTINTO TROUBLE
Unresolved HR issues and petty demands have led to the impasse

May 7, 2012 Pilots of erstwhile
Air India go on strike demanding assured career progression. The primary reason, however, is that they do not want the pilots of erstwhile Indian Airlines to undergo training for and fly Boeing 787 Dreamliner aircraft, to be inducted into the fleet soon. The civil aviation ministry has adopted a tough stance, de-recognising the union of striking pilots, the Indian Pilots' Guild, and refusing to talk to them till pilots resume duty. The cash-strapped airline has already lost Rs 150 crore with their international operations ground to a standstill.

Dhiraj Nayyar he local office of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) in the Panchpakhadi area of Thane, 30 km outside Mumbai, is an unlikely headquarters for the striking pilots of Air India. Outside, in the driveway and courtyard, are several cages filled with exotic birds. Jitendra Awhad, 47, an MLA from Thane, says he loves birds, particularly their chirping. The birds are well-fed, but locked in Awhad's cages, they will never fly. As president of the striking Indian Pilots' Guild (IPG), a union which represents the pilots of the pre-merger Air India, Awhad has caged the national airline. Prior to this, pilots of the erstwhile Indian Airlines (IA) led by the Indian Commercial Pilots' Association (ICPA) organised two major strikes in September 2009 and April-May 2011. The three strikes have cost a loss of over Rs 500 crore and disruption of flights for nearly a month in total. Air India's international flights are

T

JITENDRA AWHAD
President, Indian Pilots' Guild training. The ICPA claims that the Government reneged on its promise of a pay hike for the pre-merger Indian Airlines pilots. Both the unions also frequently complain that the pilots are not paid on time, sometimes for as long as six months. There are regular demands for parity in terms of pay scales and career progression, but the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Air India management have completely failed in addressing the issues, allowing the unions to run amok with their demands. The Government had set up a four-member Justice D.M.

AIR INDIA IS LOSING RS 12 CRORE EVERYDAY SINCE THE STRIKE STARTED

AP

30

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

``

grounded, leaving thousands of passengers and holiday-makers stranded. The airline, being generously fed with taxpayers' money, will never fly high as long as it remains in the clutches of its unions, which encourage their members to play truant time and again. This time, 341 of the total 450 Air India pilots, all members of IPG, have reported sick. The strike began less than a month after the Government announced a new Rs 30,000-crore bailout over a 10-year period to Air India. The airline is losing Rs 12 crore every day since the strike started on May 7. It already had cumulative losses of Rs 22,000 crore and an outstanding debt burden of Rs 46,000 crore. The problem for the domestic carrier started soon after the merger of Air India and Indian Airlines in 2007, with pilots of both carriers following different pay structures and work rules. The IPG feels that the rival union extracted its pound of flesh from the Government, forcing an agreement, granting a salary hike up to Rs 1 lakh per month per pilot, and parity for Boeing 787 Dreamliner

``

It's difficult for the common man to understand, but what seems petty to you will determine the career prospects of many of our pilots.

Dharmadhikari Committee in April 2011 to look into the human resource (HR) issues emanating from the merger. The report was submitted in February 2012 but the Government is yet to take any action. Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh says the Government is studying the recommendations of the committee and will soon act on them. In the meantime, he insists that the pilots have to resume work and only then will the Government talk to them. They cannot hold the Government and passengers to ransom. Singh also blames the ill-conceived merger for the problems, which the wellentrenched pilots' unions have been exploiting to the hilt. The 1,600 Air India pilots draw a salary of Rs 800 crore every year. A commander gets as much as Rs 7 lakh per month, 10 to 15 per cent more than what pilots in private airlines earn. The commanders, around 600 in number, also enjoy considerable perks including free travel six times annually across the country with all

members of the family and to unlimited international destinations. They continue to enjoy these privileges even after they retire. Yet, India's archaic labour laws, backed by court orders, recognise them as "workmen" and permit them to form a union. Their leader, Awhad, a suave and articulate career politician, is not a pilot and has nothing at stake in the strike. His only link to aviation is his wife, Ruta--a niece of the late trade unionist Datta Samant--who has been flying with Air India as an air hostess for 27 years, and is presently on a two-year leave. She is a member of the Air India Cabin Crew Association (AICCA), which is patronised by Awhad's Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) colleague and friend Kiran Pawaskar, an MLC in the Maharashtra Assembly. Pawaskar fully supports the IPG-led strike, claiming the management pays no attention to pilots unless they stop flying. Pawaskar is also the president of All India Jet Airways Officers' and Staff Association for the past 15 years and

January 14, 2012 A section of erstwhile Indian Airlines pilots went on strike protesting nonpayment of salaries for five months. The strike threatened to get bigger as other pilots extended support. Not backed by the union, the strike ended the same evening as the management assured them they would meet their demands. April 26, 2011 Pilots of erstwhile
Indian Airlines went on strike led by their union, Indian Commercial Pilots' Association, demanding parity with Air India pilots. They resumed work after 10 days following an agreement with the management promising them a salary hike and training on the Dreamliner. The airline lost Rs 200 crore.

September 26, 2009 The erstwhile Indian Airlines pilots went on strike asking for higher salary and faster career progression. Lasting five days, the strike resulted in cancellation of 300 flights and a loss of Rs 150 crore.

MAY 28, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

The Big Story AIR INDIASTRIKE
claims there is no conflict of interest as "issues concerning both Jet and Air India are different". Awhad says his pilot friends persuaded him to become president of their guild in 2006. The pilots must have had more than friendship in mind. They were eyeing Awhad's influence with his politically powerful friends--his mentor in politics Sharad Pawar and party colleague Praful Patel, who was the minister for civil aviation when the merger of Air India and Indian Airlines happened in 2007. And many murmur that the NCP is looking on quite benignly as Awhad makes life difficult for Patel's successor Ajit Singh. The ostensible reason for the pilots' strike sounds petty. Air India is soon to induct 27 brand new Boeing 787 Dreamliner aircraft at a cost of $200 million (Rs 1,000 crore) each. The management wants an equal number of erstwhile Air India pilots and erstwhile Indian Airlines pilots to train to fly the new aircraft. The IPG wants only their members to fly the new aircraft, something that is being opposed by the ICPA, representing the interests of all 900 erstwhile Indian Airlines pilots. Two Dreamliners are expected by May-end and another two by December but nobody is trained to fly them. ICPA General Secretary Captain Harish Shriyan claims that "Air India pilots are behaving like children, who think the Dreamliner is a toy coming for them which they don't want to share". Shriyan says that it is high time IPG realises that they are all part of the Air India merged entity whether they like it or not. "No doubt the merger was forced and has created a lot of problems and HR issues including career progression. But we have to look ahead," he says. Awhad believes the Dreamliner issue is very serious. "It is difficult for the common man to understand, but what seems petty to you will determine the career prospects of our pilots," he says. Awhad agrees that the merger of Air India and Indian Airlines completely failed to address industrial relations. "There has been

KIRAN PAWASKAR
Patron, Air India Cabin Crew Association

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

no harmonisation of HR policies," he says. So while an erstwhile Indian Airlines pilot gets a promotion from first officer to commander in six years regardless of whether there is a vacancy or not, it takes an erstwhile Air India pilot 10 years to get a similar promotion. Even after completing 10 years, pilots of the erstwhile Air India do not get a promotion if there is no vacancy. "The Indian Airlines pilots fly Airbuses and the Air India pilots fly Boeings. There are many more Airbuses in the fleet, so they get more flying hours and quicker promotion," explains Awhad. The exclusive right to fly the Dreamliner is critical for a quicker promotion. Is that reason enough to hold an airline to ransom? "We apologise to all passengers for the great inconvenience, but the management left us no choice because of its mala fide intent to sideline our members," he says. Awhad says that two days before the strike began, the IPG had concluded successful negotiations on the issue with the executive director (HR) of Air India. "We conceded their demand to have

32

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

``

``

I fully support the Air India strike. The Government wakes up only when pilots stop flying.

an equal number of Air India and IA pilots training on Dreamliners. They agreed to expedite promotions for us. A day later, they went back on the agreement," says an agitated Awhad. He says he is worried about the fate of the 71 pilots who have been sacked by the management. "I have a career in politics, but where will they go? They are youngsters in their 30s," he says. Even Pawaskar has a flourishing political career and is tipped to be the state NCP president. However, he has an equally prosperous practice as a leader of various unions. "They can restore status quo until the Dharmadhikari Report is presented," Awhad suggests. Awhad says the fact that the management did not wait for the report before taking a decision on the Dreamliner is an indication of mala fide intent. This internal battle now threatens to ground Air India altogether. Faced with relentless strikes from different unions, the airline may find it difficult to survive, threatening the jobs off all staff, no matter which union they are affiliated to. 

