BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

LIFE IN THE LAST CENTURY
S
ome very shortsighted cynics with cotton in their brain "Rs 16 per kilometre" as road mileage bonus. Don't bother and dyspepsia in their disposition have been carping to ask what Sachin's daily allowance from IPL is, and what that Sachin Tendulkar and Rekha took their time be- happens to his bank account when he burns a few miles on fore appearing in the Rajya Sabha to be sworn in as nom- the road. I wouldn't know how to calculate IPL remunerainated MPs. Delhi's caste of pundits is so used to drooling tion, with or without the extras you get for being in the comaspirants who rush into democracy's gilded hall even be- pany of lollipops. If Parliament had any sense it would not fore All India Radio has finished pronouncing their names hold its sessions during an IPL season, at least not if it wants that it tends to affix some mysterious theory to perfectly Sachin Tendulkar to take an oath. comprehensible reasons. You will not, most regrettably, get paid for either pleasLook at the situation from Sachin's point of view. ure, but where would you have rather been on Sunday the I am not suggesting we write a condolence letter, but 13th of May, the 60th anniversary of India's Parliament? In sympathy is certainly due to Sachin. Nomination to the the company of Lalu Prasad Yadav as he barrelled through Rajya Sabha is a pretty desultory substitute for someone increasingly tired and tiring jokes; or in the stands as David who has been promised the Bharat Ratna. There are Hussey smashed the ball with a pirate's swagger? There consolation prizes which console, and some which char was live and free coverage of both events. Which did you the soul. Sachin did not ask for this honour. Delhi's choose? If MPs want to find out the answer, they should sell politicians, ever eager to climb a bandwagon, led the advertising on Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha TV. A spot on clamour for Sachin's elevation to jewel of India after he Sachin's bat would cost more than SAIL's exclusive sponsorgot his 99th international hundred. ship of the Prime Minister's speech. Why blame Sachin if he Perhaps Lady Macbeth's insightful law for crisis man- prefers being in Bangalore to check out if Kingfisher can still agement, that if it were done 'twas best 'twere done quickly, fly rather than in Delhi among birds in borrowed feathers. works as much for assassination of Scottish kings as for the Parliamentary fundamentalists are upset that Sachin coronation of Indian icons. If Sachin had got his 100th cen- has not rushed to eat sugared toast and drink semi-sipid tury in a Test innings against England at Lord's or against coffee in Central Hall. But no one has answered a basic Australia at Sydney, with style, and without dropped question: What's the hurry? His nomination did not come catches, the momentum for Bharat Ratna would have be- with a sell-by date. Nor is Sachin in any haste to shake the come irreversible. It is not quite as glamorous when you nation and wake the Government with fiery oratory on the plod along till you finally reach impending collapse of telecom Bangladesh, and then dither so infrastructure. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com much during the century match Svelte, buxom Rekha does not that India loses. The hero did not play cricket. That much is known. arrive on a flashing steed, laden She took three weeks to appear bewith battle honours; he trotted in on fore the decorous Hamid Ansari, a mule, the faint outline of a hidden chairman of the Rajya Sabha, to crutch visible from the baggage. By recite the few simple words that the time Sachin conquered his made her a distinguished member Everest all that was left was grey of India's most august House. I disabove and fog below. You could count totally nasty suggestions that hear a nationwide snigger scrape this delay was prompted by disagainst the applause. comfort about the company she Sachin could also see what the would have to keep. Nor did she rest of us did. The powers that be have any worries about the script squirmed away from Bharat Ratna, for the occasion; an adaab before leaving some sort of a thank you Hamid Ansari is an easy glide for note behind. Membership of anyone who has opened the scene Sachin could also see what the Parliament is a handsome freebie. in Umrao Jaan. Rekha is a big girl rest of us did. The powers that be But joy or depression is often relanow. But do you have any idea how tive; it depends on the starting point. long it takes for a big girl to decide squirmed away from Bharat Sachin also had to consider the what to wear on her big day? Have Ratna, leaving some sort of a practical side. The daily allowance a heart. And if you cannot have a thank you note behind. of an MP is "Rs 2,000 per day durheart for a heartthrob like Rekha, Membership of Parliament is ing any period of residence on then you are utterly heartless.  a handsome freebie. duty", with an exotic entitlement of

MAY 28, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

