GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI
PAUL

IN AND OUT
he Ministry of Finance is likely to see a massive churn of its top officials should Pranab Mukherjee move to Rashtrapati Bhavan. At least three senior officials are tipped to shift to the President's Secretariat. The powerful adviser to the finance minister, Omita Paul will certainly move up the Raisina Hill. Also upwardly mobile are--Bimal Julka, a 1979-batch IAS officer who is additional secretary in the Department of Economic Affairs and Thomas Mathew, an IAS officer of the 1983 batch, joint secretary of the important capital markets desk. Two important slots will also fall vacant around the time of the presidential election--R. Gopalan, secretary, Economic Affairs, will retire on July 31, while Chief Economic Adviser Kaushik Basu returns to Cornell University in August. Should there be a new finance minister, he will have the final say in the succession of Gopalan and Basu.

T

YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

JULKA

MUKHERJEE

MATHEW

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

NEW MEDIATOR
hen she's not destroying the Congress with gaffes, spokesperson Renuka Chowdhury is busy trying to bridge the abyss between Delhi and Telangana. Chowdhury amazed the political crowd when she was nominated for a Rajya Sabha seat from the Telangana quota, especially as she has lost a Lok Sabha election from the region. Now the Telugu Desam Party-export-turnedSonia Gandhi loyalist wants to broker peace between sulking Congress MPs from the area and the party high command. Her strategy is simple: Grab hold of the MPs while in Parliament and hold court in full view of the party leadership.
SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

SHARMA (LEFT); KHAN WITH GEHLOT ON MAY 9

W

WHO'S THE HERO?

O

ne man who is not happy with all the attention Aamir Khan is getting for his TV show is Rajasthan Minister of State for Health Raj Kumar Sharma, 38. After the first episode of Satyamev Jayate forced Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot to invite Khan to Jaipur on

May 9 and promise action on female infanticide rampant in his state, Sharma told people at a rally in Karauli, "For Aamir, female infanticide is a matter of entertainment, he charges Rs 3 crore for an episode and has admitted that he is an entertainer and not an activist." He also said: "I am the real hero because I have been going from village to village to sensitise people about it." Ah. Perhaps a local channel could offer the minister a similar show? Possibly at the rate of Rs 3 an episode.

THE MAMATA WAY
est Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's recent warning that the Trinamool Congress would "take a political call" unless the state is granted a substantial fiscal package has found endorsement from an unlikely quarter. Rural Development Minister Jairam Ramesh told Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal that "Mamata ki safalta mein aapka bhi bhala hai (your salvation lies in Mamata's success)." Ramesh was in Chandigarh

W

BADAL (LEFT) AND RAMESH

on May 10 to address a seminar on rural development policies and programmes. Like West Bengal and Kerala, Punjab too has sought a moratorium on the repayment of Rs 22,000 crore arising from its borrowings on small savings.

16

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE LIBRARY TOUR

JAGANMOHAN

P

ut some pressure and P. Chidambaram gets either religious or literary. Defending son Karti's role in the Aircel-Maxis controversy, he invoked his favourite poet Thiruvalluvar and the Bible on May 10. "Saint Thiruvalluvar said people who cause ill to you, you will return it only with good." He added:"When I was a student, I was taught by my sister nuns, 'God, forgive them for they know not what they do'. I pray that God will forgive the sins of these people." On May 14, he became a tad Shakespearean when he said: "It would be much simpler if somebody took a dagger and plunged it into my heart rather than question my integrity."

TO FATHER'S RESCUE
nother dynasty is A born? Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi's son Gaurav, 30, formally joined the Congress party by becoming a primary member on May 13, exactly a year after his father came back to power for the third consecutive term."It's just coincidence that I took the first step into politics at a time when the media is busy fuelling rumours," said Gaurav, referring to talk of dissidence against his father. The engineering graduate has a degree in public administration from New York University.
GAURAV

KIRAN

HIS MASTER'S VICIOUSNESS
he seemingly mild Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy, 51, has been vicious against his bête noire Y.S. Jaganmohan Reddy. There is a delicate nuance, however, in the bitter use of state power. Jagan is son of the late Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy, the mentor of Congress rebirth in Andhra Pradesh. Congress bosses want the Chief Minister to destroy Jagan without besmirching his father's reputation. The Chief Minister is not squeamish. At an election rally in Tirupati on May 11, he said Jagan would "murder" not only people of the state but the state itself if voted to power. The next day, at meetings in Kadapa, the Chief Minister called Jagan a traitor who runs a sole proprietary party. Jagan's reply is simple: The results of the June 18 by-elections will do the answering.

T

ANIMAL FARM
e don't know what the animals will say, but the politicians are certain. Gorakhpur zoo, named after mentor Kanshi Ram by Mayawati, has been rechristened Ashfaqullah Khan Zoo after the revolutionary who was hanged in 1927. The 212-acre zoo isn't ready yet, but when its inmates come, they might want to name it after Tarzan.

W

CHIDAMBARAM

"Freedom of expression is contextual. In a textbook which can influence impressionable minds, it is not suitable."
KAPIL SIBAL Union Human Resource

OF THE

WEEK
We have cartoon politicians, cartoon cricketers and cartoon movie stars in real life.We don't need textbooks to remind us. Free entertainment.

Development Minister

"If India can grow 7-9 per cent with inadequate governance, what would be our growth potential if the nation was subjected to good governance?"
ARUN JAITLEY BJP Leader
JAITLEY

"Putin is an oligarch seeking Stalinist rule."
GARRY KASPAROV

Former chess champion and political activist
YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

with DHIRAJ NAYYAR, ROHIT PARIHAR, ASIT JOLLY, AMARNATH K. MENON, KAUSHIK DEKA, PRIYA SAHGAL, ASHISH MISRA

18

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

NEW

GITIKA TALUKDAR

