GLOSSARY MR INDIA GOES ABROAD
Actor Anil Kapoor edged out Hollywood actress Demi Moore to win the gold medal at the New York Festival's International TV and Film Awards 2012 for his Trapped by Tradition: A CNN Freedom Project Documentary.The film follows Kapoor, 52, to Bharatpur where most women are sold to the sex trade by the men of their family as part of a `tradition.' The film won in the cultural issues category, beating Moore's film about trafficking in Nepal.

READY FOR RED CARPET
Joining the regulars at the Cannes film festival this year are a host of new faces. The debutantes have their hands full readying for the red carpet. And no, we don't want to know what Aishwarya Rai Bachchan is wearing on her 10th trip down the Croisette.
Niharika Singh The Miss Lovely actor has three gowns to pick from for her walk on the red carpet on May 24--a champagnecoloured, Cinderella-style lacy number, an `interesting' black and white gown with a hint of gold motif and a grey gown with crystal embellishments. She will keep it simple with minimal accessories."I do not want to be over the top. It's my debut, so it has to be very me," she says. 

Sonam Kapoor She has been busy cementing her status as a fashion icon since her first appearance at Cannes in 2011. She will opt for a gown in electric pink, red or blue by an international name, for the closing ceremony where she will represent L'Oreal alongside Aishwarya Rai-Bachchan and Freida Pinto. 

OF THE

WEEK

Thank you @Burberry. For making diaper bags. It makes me feel more like a lady than a bag-lady. --Celina Jaitley, actor

FOTOCORP

MOM
OFTHE

MADHU SAPRE
THE FORMER MODEL AND ITALIAN HUSBAND GIAN MARIA HAD A BABY GIRL ON MAY 11. THEY HAVE NAMED HER INDIRA.

WEEK

Q& A

DEEPA MEHTA
DIRECTOR

"Midnight's Children is my biggest film to date"
Deepa Mehta's Midnight's Children is finally inching towards its October release and the 62-year-old filmmaker is eagerly awaiting the first print that will be delivered to her on June 10. The long wait has been sweetened by the Governor-General Performing Arts Award for Lifetime Artistic Achievement, Canada's highest civilian award. Mehta speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. How do you feel about receiving the Governor-General's award? A. It is such an incredible honour, a definite high point of my career. Salman Rushdie's tribute was extremely moving. Q. How is Midnight's Children from your earlier films? A. This is certainly my `biggest film' to date. We shot in over 60 locations in just 70 days. Q. How much of your own vision have you added to the story? A. Mine is just one interpretation of Rushdie's book. Luckily, he was incredibly respectful of my job as a filmmaker. Q. What are you working on next? A. A film called Masterpiece. It's the story of the French artist Henri Matisse and his muse.
KALYAN

DRAG QUEEN
KAPOOR
AP

MALLYA DURING THE SHOW

Of all the things we expected Siddhartha Mallya to flaunt, a sari was definitely not something we had in mind. He left us speechless with his green sari, complete with a tiny blouse and long flowing locks as Dabani, host of online show No Boundaries Super Over. With co-host Prasanna Agoram, he then proceeded to spoof everyone-- from Sachin Tendulkar to Saurav Ganguly and Chris Gayle to Rahul Dravid. He seemed to have a pretty good time and left us in splits, but we're not asking for an encore.

FOTOCOP

Richa Chaddha It's a Siddharth Arya custommade gown for the Gangs of Wasseypur lead actor, aimed at making her look like `an esoteric Indian meets Grecian goddess'. A knee surgery a month back means she will have to go without high heels but she is hoping to make up for it with a shimmery, glittery Rohit Gandhi and Rahul Khanna dress for the after party.

Rensil D'Silva joins the group OF THE of writers scripting the Indian version of American TV series 24 being made by Anil Kapoor. Kapoor plays Omar Hassan, president of Kamistan, in the American version.

WRITER

WEEK

BEHIND CLOSED DOORS
Nita Ambani has her school, her cricket team and charitable work but what everyone is really itching to know is what's inside her 27-storey Mumbai mansion Antilla. Fabled tales of unimaginable luxury have been doing the rounds but Vanity Fair has actually managed to get inside. Marilyn Monroe may have made the June cover but she will have to wait till we're done ogling the home of the country's richest man.

AMBANI
FOTOCORP GETTYIMAGES



LOCAL HIT

Recently released Telugu action film Gabbar Singh, which is a remake of Salman Khan-starrer Dabangg, had all the ingredients of a superhit. Telugu superstar Pawan Kalyan's energy levels match up to Khan's feisty charisma in the Hindi version. Gabbar Singh grossed Rs 19 crore on the opening day, setting a box office record in the Telugu film industry. Malaika Arora Khan's first southern item number Kevvu Keka, however, didn't live up to the original Hindi chartbuster Munni Badnaam Hui.
by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege
MAY 28, 2012  INDIA TODAY

97

