Mail

Blood Politics On Siachen
M AY 1 4 , 2 0 1 2

As the Prime Minister in his desperate search for a peace trophy pushes for demilitarisation of the Siachen Glacier, the Army is in no mood to surrender what its soldiers won through great sacrifice.

It may become one of the greatest tragedies of our time if what our soldiers won with their blood is given away by our politicians on a platter.
R O B I N A D AVA L ,
Lucknow

YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Siachen Sell-off
The intent of a peace initiative by a universally recognised and proven rogue state like Pakistan can hardly be anything but honest ("Blood Politics On Siachen", May 14). Saltoro Ridge in Siachen is under the Indian Army's full operational and strategic control. So, Pakistan's offer of withdrawal bears no relevance. What is really disturbing is the seemingly never-ending overtures of our clean and `peace-loving' Prime Minister to pocket that one peace trophy that he ostensibly seeks at the twilight of his political career--notwithstanding Pakistan's dismal record pre- and post-26/11.
ANJUM M. SAMUEL , Mumbai

Mayawati on the Move
Mayawati is a seasoned leader and she is definitely playing her cards very smartly by concentrating on the Centre. ( "Mayawati Starts Target Practice", May 14). In a country where coalitions have almost become the order of the day, she knows she has an indispensable part to play in deciding the fate of the bigger parties.
RAVI SHUKLA, Kolkata

It is easy to understand why General Kayani

Even after a humiliating defeat at the hands of a newly rejuvenated Samajwadi Party led by Akhilesh Yadav, Mayawati hasn't given up. Mayawati is perhaps the biggest Dalit leader of our times and she is determined to make that count for her. Her recent decision to move to Rajya Sabha is a very clear indication of the fact that she still has the big picture in mind.
RAHUL JHA, Allahabad

wants to "peacefully" resolve the Siachen issue. Clearly, we have a strategic advantage and it is a worrisome fact that the Pakistani Army can seize the Saltoro Ridge in 48 hours while it'll take us almost a week, should we demilitarise it. Since the cost of re-deployment would cost India even more to regain this strategic height, it seems to be a foolish idea to give up Siachen, that too given the large trust deficit we still have with Pakistan. The sounds of remorse and peace from Pakistan still sound like a wolf's plea in a lamb's clothing.
VIJAY VALLURI, www.intoday.com

With Pakistan having tragically lost 140 soldiers in an avalanche that hit the Pakistani side of the Siachen Glacier recently,

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

``
MAY 28, 2012  INDIA TODAY

``

11

Mail
it is on expected lines that it is reiterating its call for demilitarisation of the glacier. With our Prime Minister being largehearted and sympathetic, it is hardly surprising that he is currently considering conceding to Pakistan's proposal. The militarisation of the glacier has undoubtedly been the worst fallout of the Indo-Pak conflict, for more lives have been lost on either side of the border because of its acutely inhospitable terrain and hostile weather conditions than through actual combat between the two countries.
NALINI VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Thiruvananthapuram

35
Singh. It is unfortunate that she acted the way she did and it is also rather disheartening to see our politicians being embroiled in controversies related to their love lives ever so often.
RISHI SEN, Kolkata

Damage Control
Opium is a useful herb used as an active ingredient in many ayurvedic and homeopathy medicines-- particularly for reducing stress and inducing sleep. ("Opium Smuggling Hits New High", May 14). To check smuggling, the land should be leased out to corporate units on substantial lease rentals who, in turn, would be required to keep track of production and reveal details of it to government agencies, so that the misuse of the product could be checked.
V. K. TANGRI, Dehradun

The story on the massacre of Hashimpura seems to deliberately skirt the role of then Union minister of state for home P. Chidambaram. This is one aspect of the gruesome event that has frequently been talked about, but rarely written in the mainstream media. Subramanian Swamy, though, has consistently emphasised on this vital element of the story.
MOHAMMAD MANZOOR ALAM, Delhi

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J U N E 1 6 - 3 0, 1 9 7 7

A Curate's Egg
The credit policy for the current fiscal year announced by the Reserve Bank of India on May 27 has turned out to be a curate's egg. The "good" part of it received instant notice, but soon almost everyone was found holding his nose.The hungriest clamour was for the so-called relaxation of credit curbs. A persistent campaign had been mounted by the chambers of commerce and even spokesmen of financial institutions against what they called the adverse effects of the credit freeze, imposed by the erstwhile government, for curbing inflationary pressures. They were happy to note that the ceiling on the rate of interest on term loans has now been brought down to 12.50 per cent from 14.15 per cent. Even as industrial circles took added comfort from the fact that banks have been told, though not by specific directive, to pass on the benefit of interest saving on deposits to borrowers particularly in the priority sectors, several popular counters at the Bombay Stock Exchange recorded sizeable gains. Most of these shares have since maintained their upward movement. But a feeling is gradually growing that the stock market has perhaps over-reacted. The new credit policy has, after all, tightened the screws on the availability of credit even while reducing its cost. by Mohan Rao
RESERVE BANK GOVERNOR M. NARASIMHAM ANNOUNCING THE CREDIT POLICY

Dance Drama
I would request Gopal Gandhi to persuade Leela Samson to stay on as director of Kalakshetra and resolve whatever issues led to her resignation with dialogue ("The Dance of Controversy", May 14). Samson was a breath of fresh air--an excellent administrator as well as a skilled exponent of her art. Above all, she gave up her own successful career to dedicate all her time and energy to Kalakshetra. MEGHANA. A, UK

Killer Love
Immorality in social life ultimately leads to disaster and painful consequences for the ones involved and their families ("Love and Murder in Bhopal", May 14). The story is a sad culmination of a love triangle that had all the ingredients of a potential catastrophe-- jealousy, power-driven lust and, of course, loads of decadence.
NAINA NARANG, Patiala

Meerut Massacre
The gruesome massacre of 50 men in Meerut in 1987 needs to be investigated immediately and the guilty should be given the most stringent punishment ("Endless Wait for Killer State", May 14). Strict action is the only way to pacify the affected families and give them some much needed solace. Besides, generous financial aid ought to be given to the families of the victims to help them recover from the trauma.
P. SAINATH, Chennai

Successor Saga
It will be interesting to see how the young guns fare, if Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi does actually go on to replace Hamid Ansari as vice-president ("To Delhi, via Guwahati", May 14). The going may not be all that easy in spite of the clout that the Congress currently has in the state.
DILEEP KALITA, Tezpur

Zahida Parvez seems to have been completely blinded by her lustloaded love for BJP MLA Dhruv Narayan Singh, son of the former chief minister of Madhya Pradesh and Bihar governor Govind Narayan

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

12

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

