E DUCAT I O N

INDIA'S BEST U N I V E R S I T I E S
By Sonali Acharjee

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

nveiling a new media research department; designing student exchanges with the deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam, Nguyen Thien Nhan; chatting with students at the campus dhaba before an event to introduce a hitherto unheralded environmentalist to over 6,000 scholars. The daily schedule of Jawaharlal Nehru University's (JNU) Vice-Chancellor Sudhir Kumar Sopory, 54, is a fitting tribute to the multi-discliplinary ethos of the university. Located in the heart of south Delhi, JNU is a university which focuses on providing a self-sufficient academic environment insulated from outside distractions. Every year new facilities are implemented to enrich the overall student experience. In 2011, the university successfully added the Centre for Media Research, Centre for Census and Centre for Inclusion and Exclusion, as well as a Linguistic Empowerment Cell. The latter has introduced two foundation courses in English as well as tuition on technical and translation writing. Given JNU's

U

VICE-CHANCELLOR S.K. SOPORY

4

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU UNIVERSITY

AClass of its Own
eclectic selection of students, these language courses are a boon. The Training Programme for Equipment Use is a recent addition to the syllabus. One of the few of its kind in India, the programme aims to teach students the functioning of equipment used in daily research such as microscopes, spectrometers, data research software and the hydraulic press. Having established a good reputation in the field of arts, the course is a welcome addition for students of science and quantitative research at JNU. "Instead of mechanically producing data, students will be able to learn how the data is actually produced and be able to invest more confidence in their final results," explains Sopory, who is

With its unique syllabus, democratic dhabas and foreign MOUs, JNU is a laboratory of interdisciplinary study

a molecular biologist and has taught for over 30 years at top international universities such as the University of Munich in Germany and University of Texas at Austin, US. Another proud facet of the university is its affiliation with over 70 foreign universities. These collaborations allow students to visit and study at a number of international universities, increasing their academic exposure. Since taking over in 2011, Sopory has signed over 25 MOUs to facilitate sharing of resources and students. "Our exchange programmes are a great experience for young scholars, especially for those who cannot fund foreign education themselves," says Sopory. For instance, the MOU signed in

DO IT WITH A DIFFERENCE
JNU is one of the few non-tech campuses to train scholars in the detailed functioning of advanced research equipment. To protect the 200 species of flaura and fauna on campus, students have taken to disposing garbage and waste themselves. JNU has over 70 MOUs for students, faculty and information exchanges with foreign universities. The average annual fees still remain around Rs 220, making JNU the most affordable top university.

74

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

E DUCAT I O N

INDIA'S BEST U N I V E R S I T I E S
RAVI S SAHANI/www.indiatodayimages.com

BIG DRAW
acres is the size of the campus

1,000

470 faculty members 13 departments/schools 302 research projects published
in 2011
A CLASS IN PROGRESS AT THE LANGUAGE CENTRE

6,665 students

``

It was a truly diverse place. It was an opportunity to make friends that I wouldn't have made otherwise.

``

Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee Ford Foundation Professor, MIT; MA Economics, 1983

''

One unique aspect of life in JNU is that every student develops a degree of political consciousness. Abhinandan Basu

1 : 14 teacher-student ratio 267 international students 16 hostels
rhino and the Royal Bengal Tiger. It is this feeling of brotherhood and exposure to people from different walks of life that makes studying at JNU a memorable experience. Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee, 51, a Ford Foundation professor at MIT, US, calls his time at JNU an `eye-opener'. "The admissions policy at the time was designed to ensure that a broad cross-section of India, and not just the metropolitan elites, could get in. For someone like me, born and brought up in the hothouse world of the Kolkata upper middle classes, it was an opportunity to make friends that I would have never made otherwise," reflects Banerjee. He joined JNU in 1983 and completed a master's in economics. Sopory emphasises that facilitating a wholesome education is his priority. "Education is more than just gearing up for a job. It is about making an actual difference in society. We encourage talks, exchanges and debates so that students can gain wider perspectives on subjects," he says. That is why teaching at JNU goes beyond the class into life itself. 

Physics professor, DU; MSc Physics, 2008

''

January 2012 between JNU and Trinity Long Room Hub, Trinity College Dublin, allows scholars from one university to visit and undertake research at the other. Return economy class fare, a monthly stipend, furnished apartment and standard provisions of the university will be allocated to the scholars. Two selected fellows will be free to pursue their own line of research as well as get the opportunity to make a few academic presentations. Not all MOUs signed entail only student exchanges. The agreements signed in 2011 with the University of Edinburgh in Scotland, University of Dhaka in Bangladesh and Georg August University of Goettingen, Germany, support exchange of faculty, swapping of academic materials, joint cultural programmes and exchange of administrative managers. Students are the lifeblood of the 1,000-acre campus. On-campus initiatives, debates, talks, seminars, cultural festivals and social movements are advocated and executed by students. One such recent initiative is the `Eco Club', which was formalised in 2011.

Dedicated to freeing the campus of waste and rubbish, the club suggests green initiatives and ways to clean the campus. The club also advocates using bicycles instead of cars inside the campus. This coming together of students of different backgrounds for one purpose is also evident in the informal `Unnoticed Club'. Started this year, the club provides education to children of labourers. They have already begun training sessions on photography and camera use. Mountaineering, photography, book clubs, taekwondo and yoga clubs are some of the other clubs started and run by the student community at JNU. Students also pay close attention to the efforts of people who work for a social cause but go unnoticed. JNU invited Jadav Payeng to be the guest of honour at its Earth Day celebrations this year. A villager from Assam, Payeng is credited with single-handedly growing a forest of over 550 hectares on the banks of the Brahmaputra. The forest, which is now bigger than the JNU campus, is currently home to the endangered Indian vulture, one-horned

76

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

