E DUCAT I O N

INDIA'S BEST U N I V E R S I T I E S
2
BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY

Gains in Transition
By Olina Banerji

Facilities that are open round the clock. Courses from musicology to management. An IIT on campus. BHU rings out the old.
Rs 1,000-crore investment from the Planning Commission for translational research that will bring together IT experts, biotechnologists, agriculturalists and social scientists. The idea is to let every sector contribute to the development of another," says Singh. What sets BHU apart from other universities is its definite slant towards empowering the disenfranchised. They call it their Malviyan principle of providing world-class amenities to the economically backward at lower cost. In addition to being less expensive than other Central universities in the country, it pays a monthly stipend of Rs 5,000 to its research scholars. Then there's also an annual scholarship of Rs 2,000 for 100 economically backward students. "It's a good mix of the local and the global," says Shruti Singh, 21, a finalyear student of Social Science at the Mahila Maha Vidyalaya, one of the five

n the searing mid-May heat of the plains, Banaras Hindu University (BHU) is an oasis of calm, an antithesis to the chaos that lies right outside its arched gateway. Its tree-lined avenues and pale-yellow temple architecture is a relief from the constant human traffic that crowds the ancient streets of Varanasi. The university, a brainchild of freedom fighter and social reformer Madan Mohan Malviya, was established in 1916. It is considered to be the perfect synthesis of the teachings of Hindu culture and modern technology and industry, a romantic notion of synchronicity between the East and the West. Spread over 1,350 acres, BHU is also Asia's largest residential campus and incorporates within its sphere courses as diverse as linguistics, musicology, bio-technology and management. The goal at BHU, as every introductory leaflet, vision plan and prospectus about the place states, is "the synergy of teaching and research". Thus the first task that Lalji Singh, 64, an alumnus of BHU and its current vice-chancellor (VC), undertook was to encourage research by letting students work round the

I

clock. Singh, who has made a name for himself in the field of genetics and DNA fingerprinting, took over in August 2011. Having taught in the Institute of Animal Genetics at the University of Edinburgh for 13 years, he is now keen on fostering a spirit of independent research at BHU. "I made sure facilities were kept open for enthusiasts who wanted to keep working by appointing night watchmen," he says. It may seem like a small step but it's all part of his mega-plan to make BHU one of the best research facilities in the world. In this regard, BHU presented its case to the University Grants Commission in January 2012 and won the status of `University with the Potential of Excellence', a grant that will give them Rs 50 crore over five years. "My dream is to set up an institute of translational research that transforms knowledge into technology that aids society. We have petitioned for a
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

colleges in Varanasi affiliated to BHU. She adds, "Professional courses are accessible because of the low fees and the first priority here is always study and learning," hinting that the administration is less tolerant of petty politics, a constant characteristic of university campuses across the country. "It's a better alternative to a state university because there's less corruption and classes are always held according to schedule," says Subodh Katyar, 21, from Kanpur, who is a final-year mathematics student, as well as a universitylevel swimmer and marathon runner. "Student intake has increased by almost 25 per cent in the last academic year," says Rajesh Singh, chairman of the press, publication and publicity cell of BHU. "There has been 100 per cent placement from the departments of IT, management, agriculture and law," he adds. There may be a lesson in this for Delhi University, as BHU conducts an entrance exam for each course, and recruits purely on the basis of merit. Situated 80 km from the Varanasi campus is BHU's Rajiv Gandhi South Campus, a burgeoning agricultural hub in Barkatcha, where the setting up

CROWDPULLER

447 courses offered 32,011 number of students 500 foreign students from 48 countries 1,800 faculty members 3,000 average research scholars every academic session 1 : 18 teacher-student ratio 10,000 Number of citations 14 collaborations with foreign universities

the benefits of these crops to smallscale farmers. It is BHU'S contribution towards staving off hunger and poverty brought on by a changing global climate. The biggest feather in its cap remains the upgrade of its Institute of Technology to the sixteenth Indian Institute of Technology (IIT). Amid the excitement of hosting an IIT campus on its premises, there have been concerns about the autonomy of the institute visà-vis BHU. While a power-sharing agreement is yet to be reached, the VC is confident that it will be a mutually beneficial relationship. "This is the future of education in the country, to have federal linkages between institutions," he says. Despite being passed in 2011 by both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, the bill to set up IIT BHU is still stuck within the bureaucratic corridors of Delhi. BHU authorities are looking at a two month time-frame before the bill is given a final nod. The VC has a similar vision for the Sir Sunderlal Hospital, lo-

``

BHU's national character and popularity made it a very charged environment to study in.

``

CNR Rao, Honorary President, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research; MSc in Chemistry, 1953 of a Faculty of Veterinary Sciences has been approved by the Academic Council. It will consist of 14 departments. In addition to this, the university is also investing in dairy technology that will allow students to help tribal communities in the area to rear cattle and deal in dairy products as a means of sustenance. "It will be done through a public-private partnership, and channel development in backward areas of Uttar Pradesh," says Lalji Singh. The Institute of Agricultural Sciences has developed 45 high-yielding crop varieties that can withstand extremities in weather and through kisan melas, educate and demonstrate
VICE-CHANCELLOR LALJI SINGH AT BHU'S SAYAJIRAO GAEKWAD LIBRARY

''

BHU was a sort of mini-India that came together at its massive Central Library and art centres to learn from each other. Ranjana Kumari, Director,
Centre for Social Research; MA in Economics, 1974

''

FORWARD MARCH
The Sayajirao Gaekwad Library is the country's largest university library system, with over 7,000 manuscripts, 90,000 books and 1,00,000 journals. The university has proposed a postgraduate degree course on peace and development. An MoU has been signed with the United Nations University of Peace, Costa Rica. The Rajiv Gandhi South Campus has undertaken a 400-acre plantation drive, funded by the Uttar Pradesh Rural Development Department. This will make BHU the country's first carbon neutral university.
66

cated within the campus, to upgrade its facilities to the status of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences in Delhi. The VC and his team have set their sights now on attracting the best faculty, an area that the university has been trying to improve on. Despite being ranked first among Indian universities in the publication of research papers in 2010, and receiving over 10,000 citations in material science, biotechnology, agricultural science and geology, BHU is hungry for international acclaim "We're trying to guide research towards international patents. That requires top quality faculty and research facilities," says Rajesh Singh. If BHU's investment plan in research and development is anything to go, they are well on their way. 

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

MAY 28, 2012  INDIA TODAY

67

