Na tion

KARNATAKA
Men shake their head with bitter resignation when asked about work under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. "No government schemes are working. There is no source of income," says C. Narayanaswamy, 55, at Chikanahalli village in Sidlaghatta taluk of Chikballapur district. Several are worried about repaying loans, while others like Srinivasa Reddy, 49, at Gudavanahalli in Devanahalli taluk, say they have "left it to God". The women don't have time to worry about the future. Be it the aged Narayanamma, 65, at Devanahalli town in Bangalore Rural district or the mother of three, T.M. Manjula, 35, at J. Thimmasandra village in Srinivasapura taluk of Kolar district, they walk miles every day in search of

PARCHED KARNATAKA ON THE BRINK
From politicians to bureaucrats, everyone is milking the drought. And there is no respite for farmers.
By Sowmya Aji

The dry run
As many as 123 out of 176 taluks in Karnataka have been declared affected
PARCHED LAND IN KARNATAKA'S DEVANAHALLI TALUK
SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

n the last summer before the 2013 Assembly elections, drought has officially hit 70 per cent of Karnataka. Politicians and bureaucrats in the state are bustling with activity, and spouting words like water scarcity, migration, employment generation and fodder--which have not been heard of since the 2008 elections. Congress President Sonia Gandhi, on a whistle-stop visit to the state, will inspect a fodder bank in drought-hit Sira taluk on April 28. An all-party delegation from Karnataka is to meet Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on May 2 to seek Rs 4,500 crore in aid. Three groups of senior ministers, led by Law Minister S. Suresh Kumar, Rural Development Minister Jagadish Shettar and Water Resources Minister Basavaraj Bommai respectively, toured the affected areas. Chief Minister D.V. Sadananda Gowda and his predecessor B.S. Yeddyurappa also went on rival tours, with the latter more critical of the state government than the Congress or Janata Dal (Secular). Leaders of the two opposition parties are also visiting the arid parts. There are so many meetings held and promises doled out that the people of the state could be forgiven for thinking that elections are already upon them. "They should be ashamed of turning people's misery into busi-

I

THE STATE GOVERNMENT SUPPLIES DRINKING WATER THROUGH TANKERS TO 482 VILLAGES BUTTHIS IS SIMPLY NOT ENOUGH.
a functional borewell. "I manage to get two pots a day, despite abuse from the borewell owners," says Rajakka, 60, at Koramangala in Sidlaghatta taluk of Chikballapur district. Barely five out of every 100 borewells are functional in Chintamani, Sidlaghatta and Srinivasapura taluks, where groundwater is available at 1,250 feet, triggering health hazards due to high flouride and arsenic content. "Our women go begging at these pumpsets each night and fight to get some drinking water," says A. Narayanaswamy, 60, at Alambagiri village in Srinivasapura taluk. The state government is supplying drinking water through tankers to 482 villages across the state, but this is not enough. "I pay Rs 3 per pot of drinking water from private tankers," says Munitayamma, 55, at Devanahalli town. Naresh, 20, has been supplying water through bullock cart tankers for the past five years in Chintamani town. "This year, the demand has been much more," he says. Naresh buys water for his

THE POLITICS OF

DROUGHT

Senior officials say that most of the money sanctioned for drought relief is siphoned off
Drought appears to be the way out of scams and scandals BJP was looking for. With drought declared in 70 per cent of Karnataka, the stage is set for the Sadananda Gowda government to show that it has managed the crisis well and thus correct its image. The key reason for declaring a

Taluks declared as drought-hit Non-drought affected taluks

taluk as drought-hit is not so much concern for people as the money that gets sanctioned towards employment generation and construction of water structures. Officials admit that most of this money is siphoned off. Law Minister S. Suresh Kumar and Rural Development Minister Jagadish Shettar maintain that the government's only intention is to ensure some money flows into the rural economy to mitigate the impact of the drought. "People are desperate and if this ensures food and money to them, so be it. There is no other way of getting it to them, even if there is

corruption,'' says Kumar. Shettar says there were genuine problems in getting the funds to people through MGNREGA. "We managed to get arrears of Rs 700 crore of MGNREGA projects released due to the intervention of Rural Development Minister Jairam Ramesh. People have been waiting for this for months," he says. Karnataka witnessed drought in 2003-2004 when 162 of 175 taluks were declared drought-hit. S.M. Krishna, the then chief minister, later lost the 2004 Assembly polls badly. Shettar, however, says, "We won't suffer politically." by Sowmya Aji

ness and political tamasha," says farmer leader Kodihalli Chandrashekar. "Legislators and ruling party workers are vying with each other to grab their share of funds for drought relief. The Opposition is trying to derive political advantage from administrative failures," he says. In some parts like rain-deficient

Tumkur, Kolar and and Chamarajanagar district, people are in distress (see box). But officials also admit to exaggeration in figures in other regions. "Several MLAs have managed to get their taluks, even the irrigated ones, into the drought list. It happens in the run-up to an election year," a senior official told INDIA TODAY.

As per official figures, rainfall for the last quarter of 2011 has been the lowest in north interior Karnataka since 1970. "Both kharif and rabi crops for 2011-12 have failed. Kharif crop loss has been estimated at Rs 4,245 crore. We have declared 123 of the 176 taluks as droughtaffected," Revenue Secretary (Dis-

aster Management) K. Amaranarayana told INDIA TODAY. All surface water sources have dried up in Bangalore Rural, Chikballapur and Kolar districts. Sown crop has withered away in the blazing sun, taking with it the next three years' livelihood of nearly 10 lakh families in this region.

38

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

NEW

NEW

Na tion

KARNATAKA GUJARAT
farmers about GGRC's schemes. "What Banaskantha is witnessing is an agricultural miracle brought about by the dynamism of both the farmers and the state government. This revolution is touching the smallest of farmers. The way things stand, the district will continue its agricultural leap for many more years to come," he says. Shankar Mansa's rise is an example of how poor tribal farmers are benefiting by adopting modern irrigation methods. Before he switched to drip irrigation in 2008, Mansa could irrigate just four of his seven acres of land. His borewell used to yield water for one hour every seven hours due to low groundwater reserves. Now he only needs 60 per cent of the earlier quantity of water to irrigate the seven acres. A training stint at Dantiwada University taught him ways to add new highyielding varieties of crops. GGRC laid the drip irrigation network at his farm for Rs 1.50 lakh. With subsidy, he had to pay only Rs 37,500. Ganesh was one of the first farmers to adopt drip irrigation. He was also one of the first to cultivate pomegranates after the fruit was introduced in the district by an NGO. "I now save more than 40 per cent of groundwater, yet grow much more," Ganesh says. Dipak Chaudhary is another beneficiary of drip irrigation. The 30-yearold farmer owns 14 acres of land in Chaniana village. In 2004, his annual income was Rs 1 lakh. This changed in 2011. He earned Rs 18 lakh in 2011 with a new crop pattern. This year, he is growing papayas for the first time and hopes to earn Rs 12 lakh. Golap village, on the GujaratPakistan border, has also benefited from Banaskantha's agro revolution story. Here, it is not the drip or sprinkler methods that have worked but shallow borewell programme. Nagjibhai Ratha Rajput, 60, is an example of the village's quantum leap. His income from his 10 acres is Rs 3 lakh, up from Rs 25,000 in 2004. Rajput also added cumin, castor and mustard to his earlier favoured crops, millet and pulses. With one success story after another, Gujarat's green revolution shows no signs of slowing down. 

FAILED CROPTAKES ATOLL
Debt-ridden farmer ends his life due to the agrarian crisis
He was just 27 years old, but farmer Shekhar of Sagare, H.D. Kote taluk in Mysore district, was so distressed by the drying up of his sugarcane crop, that he committed suicide on April 21. His mother and two brothers are still in a state of shock at the untimely demise. "He called to tell me how upset he was and I counselled him. But he didn't listen," farmer leader Kurubur Shantakumar told INDIA TODAY. Shekhar took the step after the local sugar factory refused to
FARMERS MEET AFTER SHEKHAR COMMITTED SUICIDE

lift his stock of sugarcane; the crop for which he had had taken a loan of Rs 4 lakh dried, leaving them with no means of livelihood. The sugarcane crop in the arid stretches of Mysore and Chamarajanagar districts has failed. Groundwater has depleted to dangerous levels. Thousands of farmers are in distress, with banks seeking foreclosure of earlier loans. Estimates of farmers' loans vary from Rs 3,000-15,000 crore. The state government is considering waiving the loans.

GUJARATREAPS ARICH HARVEST

SHANKAR MANSA 35
Village Virampur Land holding 7 acre Switched to drip irrigation in 2008. Crops added Chilli, wheat, cotton
and fennel.

GANESH PATEL 60
Village Kumbhalmer Land holding 35 acre Switched to drip irrigation in 2004. Crops added Pomegranate and cotton. 2011 income Rs 43 lakh, up from
Rs 2 lakh in 2006.
producing more fodder for his two cows and a buffalo, increasing his dairy income from Rs 18,000 to Rs 41,000. Ganesh and Mansa are among thousands of farmers from Banaskantha who are part of a unique agricultural revolution. Less than a decade ago, the district, 70 per cent of whose area is either totally arid and saline or partially arid and rocky, was one of the most backward districts of western India. Today, with over 70,000 acres of land covered under drip and sprinkler irrigation, it tops the country in the use of this technique. The switch to micro-irrigation was accompanied by the cultivation of horticulture crops such as pomegranate, papaya and other high-yielding varieties. The results are evident. In 2011, Banaskantha produced pomegranates worth Rs 90 crore from 10 lakh trees and papayas worth Rs 50 crore from 14 lakh trees. Even the production of potato, isabgol and oil seeds, common crops in Banaskantha for years, has seen a four-fold rise in production value in the past eight years, from Rs 125 crore then to Rs 500 crore now. Today, Banaskantha is the highest producer of potato in the country at 6.15 lakh metric tonnes worth Rs 190 crore annually. Gujarat Green Revolution Company (GGRC), a company formed in 2003 as the brainchild of Chief Minister Narendra Modi, has played a major role in this revolution, making it possible for farmers to adopt drip and sprinkler irrigation methods by offering aggressive subsidies on capital cost. The success story began nine years ago when GGRC was formed with a seed capital of Rs 1,500 crore and a plan to propagate micro-irrigation methods. GGRC offers 50 per cent subsidy on cost on adoption of drip and sprinkler techniques. This subsidy was 75 per cent for tribal farmers. It was subsequently revised to 85 per cent. Hasmukh Patel's voluntary organisation, Sarvodaya Kendra, has played a vital role in taking the green revolution forward. Patel went door to door and held public meetings to inform

2011 income Rs 92,000, up from
Rs 11,000 in 2008.

PEOPLE SAY THE ONLY MEASURES NEEDED ARE MINOR IRRIGATION AND RAIN-HARVESTING PROJECTS LIKE WHATANNA HAZARE DID IN RALEGAN SIDDHI.
tanker, which can fill 30 pots, from a borewell near local MLA C. Sudhakar's house. "I pay the borewell owners Rs 40 for a full tank and I sell it for Rs 3 a pot," he says. The drought has meant business for others too. "All contractors and ruling party workers make money. If 100 tankers supply water, the bill is made for 1,000. If 100 kg fodder is given to farmers, it is shown as 1,000 kg," says Kurubur Shantakumar, another farmer leader. Politicians and bureaucrats insist they are doing all that is possible to help the people. Ministers Suresh Kumar and Shettar point to successful multi-village water supply schemes, fodder banks, goshalas and new plans to provide additional rural employment through a proposed state-funded scheme in drought-hit areas (see box). People say the only measures needed are minor irrigation and rainharvesting projects like what social activist Anna Hazare did in Maharashtra. "The government should make rainwater harvesting mandatory," says Balappa, 68, of Chintamani town. Lawyer Nagendrappa, 60, also says it is possible to transform taluks like Pavagada through this. The Centre has, so far, cleared Rs 186.68 crore in aid and released Rs 70.23 crore. The state government has also released Rs 369.69 crore for immediate relief. 

New agricultural techniques have changed the lives of farmers in arid Banaskantha
By Uday Mahurkar

ill a few years ago, Ganesh Patel had very little to do with pomegranates. But in 2011, the 60year-old farmer from Gujarat produced 20 tonnes of pomegranate worth Rs 15 lakh on 35 acres of land in Kumbhalmer village in the arid Banaskantha district bordering Pakistan. In six years, Ganesh has taken his land holding from 10 to 35 acres. Shankar Mansa, 35, has a similar tale to tell. A tribal farmer from Banaskantha's Virampur village, Mansa's income from his seven-acre farm increased from Rs 11,000 in 2008 to Rs 92,000 in 2011 after he added new high-yield crops such as fennel, chilli and cotton to his normal crop of maize and wheat, and switched to the drip irrigation technique. This also helped in

T

40

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

