Mail

Shooting in the Dark
APRIL 23, 2012

An unholy nexus of defence agents, officials and government firms flourishes during Defence Minister A.K. Antony's tenure.

S U B H A S H C H A N D R A A G R AW A L ,

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Signal Service
There have been widely differing perceptions about what drove General V.K. Singh to create a situation that has put extreme strain on the relationship between the Government and the military, but in the final analysis it must be conceded that he has done a signal service to the nation ("Shooting in the Dark", April 23). His revelations show how widely corruption has woven its tentacles, enveloping powerful elements in the bureaucracy and the armed forces. Commission agents are calling the shots.
BAPU SATYANARAYAN, Mysore

Modi Should Be on His Toes
Modi has worked hard over the years to catapult Gujarat to being one of the most economically selfsufficient states ("Triumphant Modi Has a Bigger Challenge", April 23). The brand he has built is sure to pay dividends in the upcoming elections but he should not be complacent and must keep his ego in check if he wants to become the prime minister one day.
DILEEP SINGH, Patna

The cover story shows Defence Minister A.K. Antony in poor light, as a person who cannot act decisively. Another grave development is that

Modi has escaped the rigour of law for now, but his government's role in the riots cannot be brushed aside. All said and done, as Modi is the only BJP leader who has never regretted the carnage, the SIT report can give him an issue that he can to exploit to his advantage in the Assembly elections due next year.
K.R.SRINIVASAN, Secunderabad

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

``

``

Why not consider General V.K. Singh as the next president of India? He has exhibited diplomatic skill by exposing wrongdoers at an appropriate time.
Delhi

Antony has fallen prey to the lure of power politics by granting six defence ministry projects to his home state Kerala over the past five years. Obviously, this action makes a mockery of his image of being a man of integrity.
PRITI RATHORE, Ajmer

There is absolutely no reason to doubt the intentions of Defence Minister A.K. Antony. He is doing his best to undo the practice of commission, paybacks and handling charges in the procurement of armament and defence equipment for the Army. He also seems quite intent on cleansing Congress's dubious record in defence purchases. This is a very positive thing to happen for the country and the people.
K.V. RAGHURAM, Kerala

Mail
Little to Show
It is a national shame that DRDO and defence PSUs are unable to produce a satisfactory assault rifle for the infantry, which is the "sword arm" of our Army, even after 60 years of Independence ("The Missile that Cannot Fire", April 23).The less said about main battle tanks, aircraft carriers, combat aircraft, the better. There is a standing joke doing the rounds in Bangalore about the PSU staff: "Two punches and one lunch and the day's work is over!"
MNS THAMPI, www.intoday.com

35
when the case was reported, irrespective of the social status of the accused. We cannot blame the residents of the area for not coming forward as witnesses at the risk of their personal safety. The Government should ensure the safety of witnesses if they were to come forward and testify.
AKHIL KUMAR, Bareilly

reporter has dragged my name into the case.
RAJAGOPAL LAGADAPATI, MP, Lok Sabha Vijayawada constituency

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J U N E 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Where is Jesus Buried?
Jesus Christ did not die on the cross, nor did he ascend to heaven. Instead , he went over to Kashmir, lived there for some time, died a natural death and is buried in Rauza Bal, Khanyar, a densely populated area in the interior of the city of Srinagar. Intrigued by this myth, a large number of foreigners have begun to visit this tomb. This theory was first pronounced by Mirza Ghulam Ahmed Qadiyani (1835-1906), the founder of the Ahmediya sect in India, in his controversial Urdu book Maseeh Hindustan Main (Jesus in India) published in 1899. He challenged the established belief regarding the death of Christ. The theory was elaborated further by Mirza Qadiyani's followers like Mufti Sadiq (The Grave of Jesus1936), Khwaja Nazir Ahmed (Jesus in the Heaven of Earth1951) and Maulana Jalaluddin Shams, ex-Imam of London Mosque (Where did Jesus Die? 1959). Nevertheless, the theory has not been proved beyond an iota of doubt. It could only be done with the support of authentic historical evidence. The Ahmediyas believe that their religious head, Mirja Qadiyani, was the Maseeh-e-Mauood (the reincarnated Jesus), who was reborn in India 18 centuries after the death of Jesus--who had also died in the sub-continent. Obviously, they seem to be keen in making the world believe that Jesus died in Kashmir and was reborn as Mirza-e-Qadian in Qadian, near Amritsar.
by Ghulam Nabi Khayal

Speak Easy
The language of the young generation is here to stay and flourish ("OMG, hve u heard d way ppl tlk?", April 23). They hardly care about instructions of pedantic critics. I wish the SMS lingo is adopted by Parliament so that the Zero Hour is reduced to Zero Minute in order to save precious national time.
V.K.TANGRI, Dehradun

If only DRDO could free itself from unholy nexus of defence agents, officials and corrupt government machinery, it could become the best organisation in the world and strengthen India's defence preparedness. But that utopia is hard to come by and the organisation is thereby destined to suffer indefinitely.
T. JOSE, Kovalam

"Disappointed"
The report "Congress Gets Burned by the Sun" published on March 26, 2012, gives the impression that I solely own and manage Lanco and have manipulated the commissioning certificates. I resigned as the chairman before I became an MP. Lanco is a publicly owned company. My family members and I only have a stake in it. I am not aware about affairs of the company and you have quoted my aide on this in your story. I am deeply disappointed and hurt that even then your

I have nowhere mentioned that Rajagopal has manipulated the commissioning certificates. Even then I clarified his noninvolvement through his aide's quote. A reference to him was given only to illustrate the background of Lanco. As founderchairman, he built Lanco. He and his family has a certain stake in it. His brother is executive chairman, but Rajgopal is perceived as its face. I regret the reference that he "owns" Lanco has hurt him. The story was on how a Congress government in Rajasthan has wrongly issued commissioning certificates. The government and NVVN have accepted this and encashed bank guarantees of such projects.
ROHIT PARIHAR, INDIA TODAY

Waiting for Justice
The story of the poor girl brings out quite explicitly the collusion of the police with criminals in India ("Rape and Murder in Betul", April 23). The moot point is how someone like Rajesh becomes so big a goon that he challenges the entire law and order system by intimidating people. It was the duty of the police to have acted

Corrigendum
The article "Bailout Breather", dated March 5, 2012, did not undermine the image of the State Bank of India, the country's largest bank, in the eyes of its depositors and investors. Information available with us suggests that the bank did not contemplate funding or extension of repayment of loan to Kingfisher Airlines. We stand corrected.

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

THE GRAVESTONE OFYUZ ASAF--THE KASHMIRI CHRIST

