Deep Impact
One of the greatest mysteries in science is the working of the human mind. Siddhartha Mukherjee wrote an extensive story on the science and history of treating depression, PostProzac Nation, in the NYTimes magazine's health issue on April 23, which is now being frantically downloaded. It chronicles how doctors have treated depression over the years--from the invention of Prozac and the discovery of chemical imbalances causing depression to alleviating this with the formation of new nerve cells. Mukherjee, an assistant professor of medicine in the oncology division at Columbia University, became interested in the subject after encountering depression in some of his own cancer-stricken patients. The Pulitzer Prize winner is also the author of Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer.

MUKHERJEE

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for tweeples, wellness junkies and car lovers. For those who own smartphones, these apps could be a cool addition: Twizgrid lets you view Twitter visually, displaying photos that have been uploaded to the service. Pocket Yoga will guide you through your entire yoga session in the comfort of your home. XLR8 connects your phone to your car stereo to make your car sound like a swanky sports car.

viral video

Mum's the Word
The video centred on the London 2012 Olympics is an advertisement directed by Alejandro González Inárritu for Proctor & Gamble and features four mothers from London, Rio de Janeiro, Los Angeles and Beijing. These inspirational women raising their young Olympians are true champs.

A GEM FROM THE SEA OF THE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet

Survivor's Tales
An interview with a survivor of Norway's July 2011 massacre went viral last week.When Andres Behring Breivik (the shooter) was in court explaining how he gunned down 69 people on Utoya island, Silje Melhus Tobiassen,a 17-year-old survivor,held a Q&A with Reddit,an open social networking website.The survivor painted a picture of what it was like during the attack,patiently answering questions from commentators like where he hid,how his life has changed and whether the shooter looked insane.

tumblr tales

NET FLUX

Gone to the Dog
by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI
ATumblr blog `textfromdog' , simulating text conversations between a man and his dog, has attracted thousands of fans."My dog sends me texts. I post them here.Yeah, it's weird," reads the blog, which was created in March.Through snarky SMSs, the Bulldog and his owner argue about the dog's antics. He tears down curtains to use them as a cape and pees on his owner's shirt. Created by a UK-based animator only known via his Twitter handle @OctoberJones, the dog has an alterego (Bat Dog), wants to participate in the Olympics and swears a lot.

TOBIASSEN

buzz feed

Anything for Apple
Five people are in trouble in China with the law after they assisted a boy in selling one of his kidneys.Wang,17,used the money to purchase an iPhone and iPad2.Those charged include the doctor and other accomplices who paid the boy $3,500 (Rs 1,75,000) for the organ and kept the rest of the profit from its sale.The boy is now suffering from kidney failure.

web wow

Tweetheart

Actor William Shatner promised to treat his millionth Twitter follower to dinner. Troy Pound from South Carolina was the lucky millionth fan to follow the actor, best known for playing Captain Kirk on TV show Star Trek. Pound and his wife were treated to dinner and tickets to Shatner's oneman comedy show, Shatner's World. The evening, part of Shatner's 81st birthday celebrations, was recorded and posted on YouTube.
SHATNER
MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

83

