Na tion

MULAYAM SINGH YADAV

JUSTIN CASE
The disproportionate assets case against Mulayam gives Congress a tool to indulge in `friendly blackmail'
By Priya Sahgal

CARROT & STICK
December 2005

Both politics and legal nuance are at play in the disproportionate assets case against the Samajwadi Party chief and his family
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

reserved judgment in a nineyear-old case of disproportionate assets against Mulayam Singh Yadav hangs like the proverbial sword over the Samajwadi Party (SP) chief. A request by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to "proceed further" against him is also pending before the Supreme Court. Mulayam knows that at a time when the Congress is scouting for pliant allies, this could be effective leverage to ensure his support to the UPA Government. In 2003, a public interest litigation was filed in the Supreme Court against Mulayam and his family by Vishwanath Chaturvedi, a member of the Congressaffiliated Indian National Trade Union Congress and the party's candidate from Haidergarh during the 2002 Uttar Pradesh Assembly polls. However, once the court ordered a CBI enquiry against the Yadav clan, the case took on political rather than legal implications. First, in October 2007, CBI asked the court's permission to proceed in its investigation. Two months later, it wanted to withdraw its application. In July 2007, SP had bailed out the UPA Government on the nuclear deal. But two years later, when relations between the two parties soured, CBI once again revived its earlier plea to investigate further. "CBI has become an instrument to save the Government," says Chaturvedi, adding, "I can't tell you how much the Congress has troubled me." Mulayam would agree for different reasons. He told the Supreme Court through a review petition filed on March 15, 2007, "CBI is mainly controlled by the home minister and presently there is a coalition Government with the Congress as the major party. CBI will act as a hand-

A

maiden to the Congress." Unfortunately for Mulayam, the Congress is still in power at the Centre, heading another coalition. But this time, it needs the SP chief's support for survival not just in Parliament but also for the presidential and vice-presidential elections due in July. UPA does not have enough numbers to ensure a win for its candidates. It needs the support of SP's 68,768-strong electoral college. What must be worrying Mulayam is whether the Congress will use `friendly blackmail' to ensure this support. Chaturvedi also reveals how a senior Congress Cabinet minister in UPA 1 brokered a meeting between him and then SP general secretary Amar Singh in November 2007, where Singh asked him to drop the case. Chaturvedi claims another Cabinet minister, Sriprakash Jaiswal, later accused him of trying to break the then Congress-SP alliance by going ahead with the case (see box). Despite its stunning win in the recent Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections, SP is careful not to antagonise the UPA Government. When UPA ally Mamata Banerjee walked out of Parliament during the vote on amendments against the presidential address in March, it was SP and Mayawati's Bahujan Samaj Party which bailed the Government out. Mayawati, too, has a case of disproportionate assets pending against her. Her plea against quashing criminal proceedings against her in the case is slated to come up in the Supreme Court on May 1. The case against Mulayam is not slated to come up anytime soon. But as a Congress general secretary said with a smile, soon after the Uttar Pradesh poll results rolled out in March 2012, "We have ways to ensure Mulayam's support at the Centre." The smile notwithstanding, he wasn't joking. 

POLITICAL BACKGROUND The Congress-led UPA is in power at the Centre and can afford to do without SP's support. Mulayam Singh Yadav is chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, a state which Rahul Gandhi is soon to take over as his karmbhoomi. The battle shifts to the states for Assembly Elections 2007. LEGAL STATUS Vishwanath Chaturvedi files a 1,000 page PIL in Supreme Court (writ petition 633 of 2005) against Mulayam and his family, alleging that they have accumulated assets disproportionate to their income. Chaturvedi claims that Mulayam's family owns "property worth several hundred crores" .

March 2007
POLITICAL BACKGROUND The Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections are round the corner, slated for April-May 2007. By now, Rahul has taken charge of the Congress campaign in the state against both Mulayam and Mayawati. In May, Mayawati forms the government. LEGAL STATUS On March 1, 2007, a two-judge bench of Supreme Court Justices Altamas Kabir and A.R. Lakshmanan orders CBI to conduct a preliminary inquiry into the allegations of disproportionate assets accumulated by Mulayam and his family. (Justice Lakshmanan retires on March 22, 2007. He is made chairman of the Eighteenth Law Commission on May 30, 2007.) The Yadavs file a review petition arguing against the CBI inquiry on March 15. Gaurav Bhatia, the Yadavs' advocate-on-record, cites precedent to claim that "a preliminary inquiry can only be ordered by the court if there is prima facie material before the court that there is a crime committed" .
SAMAJWADI PARTY CHIEF MULAYAM SINGH YADAV (RIGHT) WITH SON AKHILESH
AP PHOTO

VISHWANATH CHATURVEDI

October 2007
POLITICAL BACKGROUND On July 22, 2007, SP saves the Manmohan Singhled UPA Government in a trust vote in Parliament over the nuclear deal. Chaturvedi points out,"Mulayam Singh was shielded from punishment as a voluntary gift to commemorate the support he extended to UPA on the crucial trust vote." But if the SP chief thinks the case against him will be withdrawn, he is in for a surprise. LEGAL STATUS On October 28, 2007,
CBI files an Interlocutory Application

(IA no. 12) requesting permission to "proceed further" in its investigation. This remains pending before the court till December 6, when CBI files another application to withdraw the IA stating "there have been further developments... In view of the legal advice and directions of the Union of India, the IA filed by CBI may be allowed to be withdrawn" . This is contested by Chatur-

32

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

MAY 7, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

Na tion
vedi in court. The petitioner also claims that the security provided to him by court was withdrawn thrice during NovemberDecember 2007 by the Government. He complains to then minister of state for home Sriprakash Jaiswal. Chaturvedi reccalls,"He (Jaiswal) told me,`You want to break the coalition and you want security too?'" Chaturvedi tells INDIA TODAY that in November 2007, a senior Congress Cabinet minister organised a meeting between him and then SP leader Amar Singh."During this meeting, Amar Singh asked me to withdraw my case," he says.

KERALA

KERALAATWAR WITH CENTRE ON MARINES
State Congress is angry about the UPA Government's changing stand on Italians accused of murder

March 2009
POLITICAL BACKGROUND The 2009 Lok Sabha elections take place in April-May. Initially, SP and the Congress explore the possibility of seat sharing in Uttar Pradesh. But by end-March, talks between the two break down LEGAL STATUS On March 30, 2009,
CBI does another U-turn and files an

affidavit in Supreme Court stating that "it stands by its status report of 26.10.2007" .

April 2012
POLITICAL BACKGROUND In March 2012, SP sweeps the Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections. A re-energised Mulayam moves to the Centre after installing son Akhilesh as Chief Minister. The Congress, however, needs a pliant Mulayam to balance cantankerous allies like Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee. It also needs Mulayam's support during the forthcoming presidential polls. LEGAL STATUS In February 2011, the Supreme Court reserves its judgment on Mulayam's review petition against its March 2007 order. That judgment is still pending. In the case of the CBI application, one of the two judges (Justice Cyriac Joseph) retires in January 2012. That case will have to be heard again. No date has been fixed for it.
AP PHOTO

By M.G. Radhakrishnan

MARINES MASSIMILIANO LATORRE (CENTRE), SALVATORE GIRONE (RIGHT) IN TRIVANDRUM

uspicion is growing in Kerala that the Centre wants to bail out the two Italian marines arrested for shooting dead two Indian fishermen off the Kerala coast on February 15. This after Additional Solicitor General (ASG) Harin Rawal told the Supreme Court on April 20 that India had no jurisdiction to detain the marines. The Government later replaced Rawal after a strong protest by the Congress in Kerala, particularly Chief Minister Oommen Chandy. The ASG reportedly said the stance was his personal view and not that of the Government. The Centre will now be

S

represented by Attorney General G.E. Vahanvati in the case when it is taken up on April 30. The marines have been lodged in Central Prison, Trivandrum since February 20. Rawal told the apex court that India had no jurisdiction to detain Enrica Lexie as the incident occurred while the ship was 20.5 nautical miles away from the Indian coastline, in effect 8.5 nautical miles off the territorial waters of India. This is the position of the Italian government as well, opposed by both the Central and state governments until now. The owners of the ship have approached the court to permit the ship

34

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

PUNJAB

TOO LITTLE, TOO LATE
Probe ordered into the death of 23 workers

KOLLAM MP N. PEETHAMBARA KURUP CONSOLES THE VICTIMS' FAMILIES AND RELATIVES

POLITICALPARTIES AND FISHERMEN GROUPS BELIEVE THE GOVERNMENT IS FAVOURING THE ITALIANS.THEY POINT TO SUBMISSIONS MADE IN THE HIGH COURT.
to leave. This has been opposed by the state police. The ruling UDF in Kerala is in a fix over the Centre's changing stand. Chandy's angry protest to Union Law Minister Salman Khurshid against the ASG's statement led to Rawal being replaced. "I am assured the Central Government will do nothing to jeopardise the interests of Kerala or the families of the killed fishermen," he told reporters on April 21. Families of the two fishermen have accepted the compensation of Rs 1 crore each offered by the Italian government as out-of-court settlement. On April 20, they conveyed to the Kerala High Court their willingness to withdraw the cases. The owner of the fishing boat will get Rs 18 lakh, according to the agreement signed by the fishermen and the Italian consul general. The Italian government has appealed in the Supreme Court to quash the FIR filed against the Italian marines. Political parties and fishermen groups in Kerala believe the Centre is favouring the Italians. They point to the submissions made in the high court earlier by Directors-General of Shipping and Mercantile Marine Departments, both under the Central Government, saying they had no objections to freeing the ship, now anchored in Kochi. "It is clearly the Central Government's agenda to let them go," says an angry Charles George, secretary, Fishermen Coordination Committee. Legal experts in Kerala have expressed similar views. "Though there are strong legal provisions to prosecute the Italians, there is a clear game plan to let the Italians escape," says V.S. Syam Kumar, a teacher at the National University for Advanced Legal Studies, Kochi. According to Kumar, provisions of the Indian Penal Code as well as two international statutes--Admirality Offences (Colonial) Act of 1849 and Suppression of Unlawful Act, 2002-- which are in force in India, support the country's right to prosecute the marines. The Supreme Court bench of Justices R.M. Lodha and H.L. Gokhale, who were hearing the case, said after Rawal's submission, "We do not expect such a stand from the Central Government when citizens of this country have been killed." The Opposition Left Democratic Front blames it on Congress President Sonia Gandhi's Italian roots. "We suspect Sonia Gandhi's Italian connections are behind the continued attempts by the Centre to let off the Italians," says CPI(M) leader V.S. Achuthanandan. 

SARABJIT SINGH

THE COLLAPSED FACTORY IN JALANDHAR

took the death of 23 workers to make the Punjab government order a safety audit of the state's factories. The victims, migrant labourers from Bihar, Jharkhand and eastern Uttar Pradesh, were killed when the fourstoried Shital Fibres, a high-end blanket manufacturing unit, came crashing down around midnight on April 16. Securitymen rescued 75 workers. Around a 100 men were working on the night of the collapse, in which 42 were injured. Two are still missing. The state government has announced Rs 3 lakh for the dead and Rs 65,000 for those seriously injured. Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal directed Punjab Industries Secretary Achru Ram Talwar to conduct a safety audit of all factories. "We want to ascertain both latent and patent defects in industrial structures," he said. The factory was operating without licence. The unit reportedly did not have the stability certification. Yet, it was given a power connection by Punjab State Power Corporation Limited. Jalandhar Divisional Commissioner Anurag Verma, heading the probe, has questioned the role of four labour department officers. The probe will test the government's resolve to punish the guilty. by Asit Jolly

I

36

INDIA TODAY  MAY 7, 2012

