rJ

Every year we celebrate World Environment Day on the fifth of June and every year we are faced with some harsh realities of sheer environmental degradation, there are ways to show our blue planet some green love- let us ride a bicycle to work today.
n our rampant pursuit of technology and development we tend to often ignore the serious repercussions that such endeavours have on our environment. Blessed with one of the best topographies, India boasts of a great climate, culture and assorted weather belts. However, the beautiful and picturesque · peninsula has grave environmental concerns like a whooping 175 million hectares of land (35 per cent of India's total land area) is subject to serious environmental degradation. Hardly 10.12 per cent of the total area is under adequate tree cover. In fact deforestation, siltation, water, air and noise pollution, sanitation--all are threatening not only the quality of life but the very survival of human beings in our nation. Industrialisation has the multiple characteristic of being both a boon and a bane at the same time. On one hand it has given rise to a great economy and good urban set ups and on the other hand it has led to the haphazard growth of modern cities, industrial cities, migration of rural population to the cities in search of work, overcrowding, slums, juvenile delinquency, inadequate air amenities, addiction to drugs and alcohol and crime of all kinds. People living in big cities are at a dearth of breathing fresh air or running wild in green open spaces, a constricted and claustrophobic lifestyle is the price to pay to enjoy the perks of living in a city. Noise pollution being rampant in cities has lead to a lot of physiological and psychosomatic disorders. Medical experts have warned that the excessive noise pollution can lead to deafness and create other health problems which can do irreversible damage to the well being of man and ironically it is often seen that a deaf ear is lent to such advice. Air is the most vital and important element required for the survival of man and our lungs are designed to tackle only a certain amount and kind of impurities, one of the worst agents of aerial pollution is the smoke being belched out by the chimneys of the factories and the exhaust emitted by vehicles. Agricultural activities are yet another source of air pollution. Nuclear · energy programmes also pollutes the air. The color of our planet is blue due to three fourths of it being covered entirely in water, yet the water is not safe- with more and more wastes being dumped in water everyday due to poor sewage and recycling systems we suffer from a constant threat of mercury poisoning. It is estimated that more than 500 tons of mercury enters the ocean every year as a result of dumping of wastes into rivers. Mercury concentration increases in fish, which may result in poisoning of the people and domestic animals. The same polluted water is used for irrigation and thus pollutes the food. Fish and animals who drink water from such water bodies meet an instant death from such poisoning, one can thus only imagine the fate of humans in the coming future. We seem to be living in a constant dilemma where we have to choose between growth and development of our race versus the well being of the environment. The Bicycle Association works closely along the lines of safeguarding the environment. The Association has also submitted a proposal to the Government for relaying a generic advertisement in print and electronic media to encourage cycling amongst the people. The production of cycles by the large scale is estimated at 12.5 million bicycles. The small scale produces another 2 to 2.25 million. The Indian Industry is also exporting to a number of neighbouring countries. It is expected that the sales of hiend products would grow with the Commonwealth Games in 2010. The time is opportune to support initiatives for promoting cycling in tier II and Tier III cities. Every year we celebrate World Environment Day on thefifth of June and every year we are faced with some harsh realities of sheer environmental degradation; there are ways to show our blue planet some green love- let us ride a bicycle to work today or water some plants in our nearby park, let us shop in cloth bags or pick up a plastic bag and throw it in a bin or let us pledge to give back whatever we can to the planet for it has given us life and countless reasons to be happy.

