GLOSSARY
Sonakshi Sinha is taking her good girl image a bit too seriously. There wasn't anything spectacularly awful about her black gown, but why is she going all out to cover herself? About time she tried out something more fun and appropriate to her age. Gauri Khan was a fine sight in a long red gown. She even looked less shiny than usual, no doubt having given the bronzer a miss. If only she had spent less time adding volume to her hair and spruced up her shabby husband instead, who looked like he had forgotten to shave.

FOTOCOP

Karan Johar, himself in a fancy bow, had attendants dressed in tuxedos designed by Manish Malhotra at his 40th birthday party in Mumbai. Sadly, many of his guests failed to look half as smart.

>>

YOGEN SHAH

YOGEN SHAH

YOGEN SHAH

OVERSEAS HONOUR
Swati Piramal, 56, director of Piramal Healthcare Limited, has been elected as a member of the Harvard board of overseers. She is the only Indian on the board, which oversees the functioning of all the schools under Harvard University. "My international perspective as well as experience with educational institutes will help a lot," she says.
1

SLIM IS OUT, CURVES ARE IN
2 3

PIRAMAL D'SENA

DOUBLE WHAMMY
Two of the most awaited Bollywood films have unveiled their first look. Releasing on August 24, Sanjay Leela Bhansali's Shirin Farhad Ki Toh Nikal Padi will mark the acting debut of choreographer-turned-filmmaker Farah Khan, alongside Boman Irani. SHIRIN FARHAD KI TOH NIKAL PADI The unconventional duo plays an unmarried Parsi couple in their 40s and is sure to have us in splits. Meanwhile, Ajay Devgn and Sanjay Dutt-starrer Son of Sardaar, a remake of Telugu film Maryada Ramanna, has a rugged look. Its artistic posters look promising and watching Devgn as a sardar romancing Sonakshi Sinha is sure to be a treat this November.
(LEFT) A STILL FROM SON OF SARDAAR
AP PHOTO

It couldn't have been an easy decision to step onto the red carpet in Cannes, but we are glad that Aishwarya Rai Bachchan did it. She stepped out in long flowing dresses for photo calls, in a slimming Angelo Katsapis maxi dress on the first day and a printed Roberto Cavalli kaftan on the second. But she saved the best and boldest for the red carpet, choosing a wellfitted and shimmery Elie Saab gown that revealed her curves, but hid her bulges. If she was out to make a statement, she couldn't have done it better and looked more at ease with herself than we have seen in a long time.
AISHWARYA AT CANNES

PERSONAL PAIN
MOHANLAL

WEEK

Yuvraj Singh "Back to where I belong! Me and Ishant working it out! O F T H E Comeback is not a challenge, it's a statement!!"

Malayalam superstar Mohanlal, 52, created a stir on his birthday on May 21 when he empathised with the mother of slain political leader T.P. Chandrasekharan on his blog titled `Ormayil Randu Ammamar' (Thinking of two mothers). He wrote, "My mother is in hospital for three months after a brain stroke. And I think of the mother of Chandrasekharan who was hacked to death. I can fathom the sea of grief in the mother's mind when she learns that her son is chopped to death." Who can argue with such emotion?
by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege

86

YOGEN SHAH

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 11, 2012

>>

Vivian D'sena, 23, has sunk his teeth into Madhubala. Known for playing a stony-faced vampire in Twilight-inspired television saga Pyaar Kii Ye Ek Kahaani, he has returned as the lead in Madhubala...Ek Ishq, Ek Junoon on Colors. D'sena has put away those fangs and has turned into a superstar, RK or Rishi Kumar, for this one. If he hadn't made it to the top 10 at a Gladrags contest, he would have "become a footballer and gone abroad to play for some team" . But D'sena didn't, and we'd like to see him emote for a change.

BIRTHDAY BLOOPERS

Sanjay Dutt
may have a few worries regarding his production house, even though wife Maanyata is now at the helm as its CEO. But did he really have to turn up in a white kurta pyjama at a black-tie party?

>>
Parineeti Chopra has had
too many flashbulbs going off in her face lately. The poor girl was so blinded that she couldn't even make out how hideous her blue-gold dress was. And no one wanted to burst her newfound starry bubble and tell her that she had got it all wrong.

>>

TEETHING TROUBLE

Rani Mukherji was

preparing to turn in for the day when she remembered she had a party to attend. So she put on her favourite satin nightgown, applied some makeup and grabbed her clutch before heading out. That way she could go straight to bed when she got back. Smart.

>>

JUNE 11, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

87

