Living
WILDLIFE SOCIETY PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

NEW MOMMY BLUES
Celebrities have no choice but to get back in shape soon after childbirth. But science cautions new mothers not to go overboard with weight loss. Here's why.

I

nternet has gone viral with a video clip, "Aishwarya Rai's shocking weight gain". With elephant soundtracks in the background to highlight Rai's post-pregnancy chubbiness, it has garnered over five million hits. And its success has prompted other websites to post similar videos. As Net-cruelty joins hands with body-fascism, the message is clear: The most beautiful woman in the world has had her fun with motherhood. Now give the nation back your body. We want you to fit into your pre-pregnancy skinny jeans as soon as possible. It, of course, doesn't matter that overweight Bollywood heroes appear regularly on screen. In India, women are supposed to provide all the magic and men the reality. But what is it like for a normal woman to deal with post-baby weight? Her body gets bloated, stretched, jiggled, kicked and torn for nine months. From hair to the feet, it goes through changes, sometimes forever. What's more, doctors caution new mothers not to go overboard to get back in shape. Intense exercise can use up energy stores and even lower immune-boosting proteins in breast milk. Here's what happens to the body after pregnancy and the dangers of getting back in shape too soon by Damayanti Datta and too fast.

WHAT HAPPENS TO THE BODY
FACE Many get dark patches on the face,as hormonal
changes spur production of melanin.

GUMS Excessive progesterone hormone can make
gums tender and sore during pregnancy.

BREASTS shrink as tissues stretch.High estrogen levels thicken the skin around the nipples. UTERUS tilts the pelvis during pregnancy and hips get wider to allow the baby an easier exit.For most,hips get back to size. STOMACH takes long to shrink;
white stretch marks become permanent pregnancy tattoos.

BACK After childbirth,lower back pain is common due to high levels of hormone relaxin.Takes time to get back to normal. VAGINA stretches up to four inches to deliver a baby.It's meant to contract eventually,but often does not,to the same size. PITUITARYGLAND continues to manufacture hormone prolactin during breastfeeding,lowering sex drive substantially.

FEET grow a half-size thanks to ligamentrelaxing hormones that aid in child delivery.

HANDLE WITH CARE

Why women should exercise caution
RISK OF TB Found to be high during the first six months after pregnancy, often goes undetected. SLEEP IT OFF A key factor in post-pregnancy weight loss is getting enough sleep, seven hours or more.

PELVIC FLOOR DYSFUNCTION Use of forceps, long delivery, or cutting the vaginal opening wider during childbirth often increase the risk of pelvic floor dysfunction: Incontinence, pelvic organ collapse and other sexual issues.

6kg

is the average extra flab a father-to-be puts on during wife's pregnancy.*
DEPRESSION AND MOOD SWINGS Fatigue, mood swings and frequent crying spells become troublesome for some women. Could indicate thyroid inflammation or rapid hormonal changes.

84

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 11, 2012

* Source: Onepoll Survey, UK 2009-10

REUTERS

