UP FRONT

TABISH KHAIR

IN THE SHADOWOFTHE EMPIRE
n Arab friend once told me that the best thing that Indian writers are ignored because they do not fit Britishcould happen to the Arab lands would be if they ran facing ideas of land or literature, but also that good Britishout of oil. By the same token, the best thing that can plucked Indian authors are at times dismissed in India for happen to Indian writing in English today is if it runs out all the wrong reasons. This affects serious writing much more than pulp: One of the reasons why I champion the of well-meaning British patronage. This seems to be a rash thing to say just three decades Chetan Bhagats of India is that they do not (and actually after Salman Rushdie and then Vikram Seth finally made cannot) go the route of British patronage. It is the serious British publishing take serious notice of `Indian' writing literary writers who seem to need to do so, alas. If the Indian scene, with its westward-looking chatterati, in English. For the first time, British publishers delved deep into their pockets, and other `international' (includ- is bad, the international scene is worse. Excellent Indian ing American) publishers followed suit. Consequently, for writers, even those of the calibre and seniority of Shashi the first time, `Indian' writing went beyond the usual small Deshpande, do not get a fraction of the attention abroad that circle of discerning readers (British, American, Indian, far lesser Indian writers do, because they do not write novwhatever) who were already familiar with R. K. Narayan, els conducive to well-meaning British patronage. Moreover, unlike their American counterparts, major Raja Rao or Anita Desai, and ended up on the society pages of glossy magazines and the display racks of bookshops. British agents are clearly reluctant to be sub-agents to Major British (followed by other international) agents re- Indian literary agents. Is this due to colonial prestige, esmoved the bargepole that they had kept on their desks un- pecially in shining white-washed India, along with the desire to continue to be cultural kingmakers in the `society' til then to deal with Indian English writing. Sophisticated young Indian writers rushed to British spheres of South Asian English-language publishing? Or and American agents and carefully cultivated sympathetic is it just because UK is a small cluster of islands off a dwarf British editorial contacts. British agents and literary edi- continent? It simply does not have the market to sustain tors rushed to India, and still hold an annual durbar at the `different' literary publishing, especially in these days of Jaipur literature festival. It helped that all this happened high corporate-style `overheads'. British agents and pubin decades when social class, which united most of these lishers need the Commonwealth market (of which India is the biggest component) in order to make a real profit on people across nationalities, had ceased to be discussed. certain kinds of publications. And It was too good to be true, partly SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com here we are not even talking of the `inbecause the British have a relationternational' stuff, most of it thorship with India. They often care for oughly unreadable, that is dumped that relationship. In this they are dif`cheaply' on the Indian market by ferent from Americans, who do not British publishers. really have a relationship with India. Indian writing in English has come Actually, Americans only have a relaof age creatively and critically; it tionship with America. This makes needs to be able to stand on its own them far less dangerous as influences commercially and internationally too. in our context. They expect very little There are Indian writers who are from Indian writing in English, unless doing what they can, and there are it is what they expect from any other even Indian critics who are trying to writing: That somehow it should be read such writers on their own. But about America or Americans. Indian opinion-makers, TV hosts, ediThe British scene is different. It tors of glossy supplements, owners of has expectations from India and fashionable bookshops, society hostIndian writing in English. It feels that esses etc still need to overcome our it knows India. And actually it does historically induced colonial tendency know India, but in historically fixed It does know India, but in to tail-wag: Let Indian readers choose and limited ways. British patronage historically fixed and limited for themselves by allowing more genof Indian writing in English distorts eral and public visibility to literature and often obscures some of the best ways. British patronage of of Indian writing in English largely Indian writing in English often that has not been approved by the because of this half-knowledge. obscures some of the best of invisible ink of British patronage. It is a double-edged sword, and it often slices off the best on both sides. Indian writing in English largely Tabish Khair's new novel is How to Fight The problem is not just that good because of this half-knowledge. Islamist Terror from the Missionary Position

A

18

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 11, 2012

