nnimPACTfeature
Shoolini University

Ideal destination for an academL
hootini University is a non-profit private university with a vision to be a top 200 global university in next ten years. It is India's first biotechnology university and is ranked fourth among national private biotech institutes. Shoolini has adopted a research and industry centric model. Located in a thick grove of pine trees in the mid Himalayan Mountains, 14 km from Solan with cool summers and pleasant winters and pollution free environment, the university campus is an ideal destination for academic romance. It offers students learning environment with a wide variety of higher education levef studies leading to undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral degrees in biotechnology, engineering and technology, basic sciences, pharmaceutical sciences and business management. Under the guidance of its founder ViceChancellor, Prof PK Khosla, an alumnus of Oxford University, Shooiini University is committed to impart quality education and holistic approach to research across its areas of focus. Nationally and internationally renowned academicians form the faculty at Shoolini University; one and a half dozen are post-docs from japan, South Korea and Taiwan. With in a short span of its inception, the University has attracted more than Rupees three millions as research grants on biotech related projects, which are funded by various national organizations.

G.D.GOENKA UNIVERSITY TO LAUNCH IN 2013
. D.Goenka University will be opening its doors with UGC approval in 2013, by bringing world class Education to the Indian masses with their own courses as well as tie-ups with world renowned institutions/ Universities. Currently a new campus is being integrated to the existing infrastructure of 9 lac sq ft, of which in the 1st year of operation 3 lac sq ft space is being put in place. This is going to be a Green Building which will be closely monitored by the' Indian Green Building Council' fIGBC) The Campus will have all state of Art facilities like Gymnasium, fitness centre, playfields, and the whole centre will be centrally air conditioned. In the 1st phase there will be 5 schools, i.e. .Management. Design, Law School, Engineering School and Hospitality. The Management School will be adding another 15 programmes, apartfrom the courses already in place from Lancaster University. The Design School wii! be collaborating with the World Renowned 'Politecnico Di Milano' from Milan Italy. The Engineering Programmes will be adding 2 new courses to the already existing programme that of Civil Engineering and Electronic & Communication Engineering. The G.D. Goenka School of Design will be the piece de resistance of the GD Goenka University. To be established in collaboration with the famous Politecnico di Milano of Italy, the school will bring the edgy Italian design education to Indian students. Italy is perceived world over as the fountainhead of good design. Even today each fashion season kicks off with the Milan Fashion week followed by Paris and New York. GD Goenka and Politechnico di Milano Schools of Design represent the best of Indo-ltalian collaboration in the field of design education. Ranked no. 1 in Italy (18th in Europe and 48th in the world among according to The Times Higher Education-QS World University Ranking 2011), Politecnico di Milano is the best and the largest technical University having the largest school of architecture, design and engineering. Politecnico the Milano is a state University accredited by MUIR or Ministry of Education, Universities and Research, jtaly.

G

NIPUN MANAGING
G D Goenka'

ly there are forty Schools in nd one in Dubai; I aim lor 10 in India and at least 10 m the nest five years. The is already set for a World Iniversityirecognized by the multiple foreign ,ire25 franchisee operational schools at the nent and our net market value jday is around 2000 aore.

In the first instance the G D Goenka School of Design will introduce 3-year undergraduate programmes in Fashion Design, Jewelry Design, Knitwear Design, Communication Design, Interior Design and Product Design; and, 1- year Masters programme in Strategic Design, New-tech style design, Accessories Design, Retail Interior Design and Brand Communication. The teaching and learning methodology of all programmes will be truly Italian. Currently the G D Goenka University is in the process of hiring faculty of highly reputable standards that have a Global outlook. The University is also scouting out for logical tie-ups with Universities from the USA/UK /Europe. For the Law school we are looking for tie-ups with foreign Universities for Exchange Programmes and Faculty. The G.D. Goenka group has a vision to make educational institutions truly world class. Being pioneers in this field, G.D. Goenka will benchmark educational standards at all levels, thereby setting the standards for others to follow.

AnimPACTFeature
Accurate Group of Institutions

U

g' »:>:;;ip**x 1 Ik. f X1"^*

S~* &: °.'·"·"%
·$$ knowledge and values and impart the skills pcessary for individuals to lead responsible, productive. irid personally satisfy ing life. Established in the year 2006, Accurate hafgrown immensely arid today it stands tall as a full-fledged Institute Accurate offers a two years (full time) post graduate diploma course in Management is duly approved by AiCTE,. Ministry of HRO and Government of India. The course consists of six terms. The programme has been developed with innovative teaching methodology ensuring thorough grooming of students in fundamental concepts in management and concurrently developing in them business arid§ehnology skills for meeting the jfcf&llenges of the corporate woi kl. The PGD'M students ;: 'are required to indicate the choice of two area(s} of specialization to be opted in the second year i.e. at the time of commencement of the fourth trimester in second year. Twelve elective courses i.e. six each from the two qpted areas of specialization are to be completed spread over three trimesters in the second year for dual specialization.

1LDING CAR
"he faculty at Accurate emphasizes on quality . education with focus on case teaching method, .,; f 'which conimunicates the knowledge and values · "2 and impart the skills necessary for individuals to lead responsible, productive and personally satisfying life The lush green campus of Accurate Institute of Management aedf||f!notogy, combines ;8xpiiisite natural .|eayty & high feolpvirons of modetf | | | f to set an eal seat for highef 'academic pursuitijlpe Institute is ibibed with modem infrastructure with' Wi-Fi facility id technological support to facilitate teaching, learning lersonality development Accurate inculcates its 1 i to have a global perspective, while at the same.: keenly pKCpfve about local conditions. ";*; s to say, tsiay*s management practitioners must ough with the latest technology and be sensitive the importance 4f ethical and human values. The institute has been reckoned among the jpmier business schools of the country by various stakeholders. The faculty at Accurate emphasizes on qualif-education with focus on case teaching method, whichfewnffiunicates

GROUP DIRECTOR

The Group Director Poonam Sharmo is an exemplary lady with a commendable track record of laurels; she speaks on behalf of the institution "Accurate is committed fo provide quality education to become 100% effective both personally and professionally. $ are about the emerging challenges and coiMtmtly update tcjurse content & delivery mechanism to meet them. Our Academic and Training programmes ittllnchored around the philosophy of inculcating an analytical orientation to understand and analyze complex business situations while at the same times possess result based administrative point of view," Dehradun Institute of Technology, Dehradun

THE CRADLE OF KNOWLEDGE AND TRANQUILITY
IT- The very name spells excellence. Excellence in producing professionals equipped with analytical, problem-solving and creative ability. From its very inception, this institute has been striving to develop into a centre of academic excellence in consonance with the contemporary and future needs of the society. National recognition is evident in the form of NBA accreditation for its B.Tech courses and the rare distinction of being the first private college in Uttarakhand to be selected by World Bank forfunding in technical education. Dehradun Institute of Technology, established in 1998, is a leading technical institute offering Undergraduate and Postgraduate programmes in several streams of Engineering, IT, Management, Architecture and Pharmacy. It offers B.Tech courses in nine branches. B.Pharm, B.Arch, MBA and MCA and six Branches in M.Tech courses under affiliation to Uttarakhand Technical University.

D

DIT's key strength lies in its top-notch faculty with PhDs and M.Techs from IITs and NITs; state-of-the art infrastructure and laboratories: 24X7 wellstocked library and computer center; MOU and collaborations with foreign universities, institutions and industries; quality teaching and technical training; and PDF soft skills and professional training programs. All this has resulted in top ranking achieved in surveys by prestigious magazines, campus recruitment by blue chip companies like Adobe, Infosys, TCS, IGATE PATN1 NUT, Mahindra, Wipro, L&T, LIBSYS, HONDA, Ashok Leyland, govt. departments etc. and placement of approximately 711 students in 2012. The packages offered to our students have been extremely good with average of Rs.3.8 Lacs/annum and the maximum offer of Rs.8 Lacs/annum & placement for Batch 2012 is still going on... To be a part of the DIT family is indeed a privilege that leads to the fruitful transformation of student in a dynamic and technically competent professional.

AnimPACTreature
Universal Institute of Technology

SPREADING THE LIGHT OF EDUCATION
niversal Institute of Technology is an upcoming premier institution approved under AICTE, Govt. of India. Engineering and technology play a central role in manufacturing, including the manufacturing or processing associated with agro-products. It should also be obvious that engineering proficiency and technology are major contributors to mining, construction, transportation and infrastructure. Universal Institute of Technology is the brain child of Universal Trust for Education and Research. Untiring efforts of this trust have given shape to this veritable institution committed to nurture young talent who in turn can contribute to the nation's growth and development. This institute will be the harbinger of revolution in the country where visionary insights will contribute immensely in chiselling the future of citizens of tomorrow and thereby the whole nation. The institute has been founded under the aegis of Universal Trust for Education & Research, this institution can be seen as a benchmark in imparting technical education and skill sets to thousands of career-centric youths who have a penchant in scientific and technological research and development Use of existing technologies and formation of new

U

technologies are at the heart of the engineering profession. UIT has determined its exclusivity in order to be an efficient representative of change in engineering education for the 21st century. The University mission consists of three parts, education, research, and services. The institute's dedication is verified by appropriate concern for the intellectual and personal well being of the students. The aim of the institute is develop renowned scientific institution locally and worldwide, contributing to high quality technical education and personnel with a sound background on basic engineering principles, technical and managerial skills, innovative research capabilities and exemplary professional conduct to lead and to use technology for the progress of mankind and adapting them to changing technological environment with the highest moral values as the inner strength The students at UIT are offered a complete learning experience and the industry and government agencies that hire these students will receive the very best quality graduates. UlT's contacts with industry and the college's connections with other educational institutions in the country are evidence to the extent of our institution.

Quantum Global Campus

B.S. Anangpuria Educational Institutes

Excellent Placements
uantum Institute is located at Roorkee, the Mecca of engineering education in India in the picturesque state of Uttarakhand. The campus comprises of aesthetically designed buildings with excellent infrastructure, including state-of-the-art computer and internet facilities, modern workshops and labs, seminar halls, and well stocked libraries, gymnasium, sports and games fields. Quantum has established a Empowered Placement Cell (EPC) for enhancing the exposure of the students and to act as an interface between the Institution and the corporate world. The EPC will focus on final placement as well as on arranging summer internship for the students. It has been set up with the objective of bringing industry and academia close to each other. In addition to organizing management development programs, consultancy, research and in-company training programs, industry visits, guest lectures, quizzes, it will actively involve students in various activities to develop personal and professional skills. Among the various activities for the students, the Industrial Visit is definitely one of the biggest and best things that happen. As the main aim of college is to go beyond academics in all possible ways, these visits have always offered insights to students about the practical applications of their theoretical knowledge. Of course, the enjoyment and the ecstatic moments in the company of peers come as the icing on the cake! The Institute arranges for periodical Industrial visits to the reputed companies. The College offers opportunities for all the students to interact on a consistent basis with industries by way of visits to many renowned companies. In the College separate committee has been formed to arrange the Industrial visit through which the students are taken to the industries and trained with futuristic technologies. For each Semester two industrial visits are arranged by the Committee and make the students in wealth in their practical knowledge.

CENTRE FOR LEARNING
. S. Anangpuria Educational Institutes, being run under the aegis of Bhawani Shanker Anangpuria Charitable Trust, are located in the lap of Aravali Hills on the state highway of Ballabgarh-Sohna at Village Alampur. The campus, spanning over 41 acres, has thus taken the shape of a multi faculty learning centre and is still in the process of expanding its dimensions. Commencing from 2001, B.S-A.E.I. have over the years evolved into an institution of academic excellence having 4 pillars of learning imparting education in following streams:

B

Q

.Pharm., B.Pharm., D.Pharm.

B. S. Anangpuria institute of Education
B.Ed., D.Ed.

B. 5. Anangpuria Institute of Law
LL.B. (Hons.), B.A.LL.B. (Hons.) Integrated Course. The team of committed educationists, state-of-the-art infrastructure, well equipped labs for learning and research, warm and cordial interpersonal relations amongst staff and students are some of the hallmarks of B. S. Anangpuria Educational Institutes. It is also worth mentioning here that ever since their inception; all the institutes have maintained high standards in academics. Our students have set stupendous records in the University examinations by bagging gold medals and maximum university merit positions every year. On account of strong conceptual foundations, capacity to work and exposure to real-life work conditions, there is a strong demand for BSAEI students amongst employers. More than 85% students of current passing out batch have already been placed in various organizations of repute. Companies like Cadence, NUT Technologies, AON Hewitt, Hyundai, Apollo, Religare. Bosch & Thomson Press are among the major employers.

WMWWWWWMWWn

AnimPACTfeature
IIMT Group of Colleges

TO BE THE BEST YOU NEED TO LEARN FROM THE BEST
s the educational challenges of today become more and more complex, our ability to identify, asses, and understand the impact of educational programs and practices must keep pace. IIMT has as its core purpose the development, design; implementation, support, and dissemination of rigorous, relevant, and useful education that will help us meet this challenge. IIMT was established in 1994 and is managed by a group of Rotarians. It is situated on a sprawling hundred acre campus in the midst of greenery in Meerut and Greater Noida with five campuses, 16 colleges, 41 courses, 1330 teachers and 20000 students. Everything in IIMT echoes around the vision of the founders and the process of change they initiated. IIMT strives to provide world class facilities and state of art infrastructure to its students so that excel in their Endeavour to progress. Faculty is the backbone of any institution. We are proud receivers of Education Leadership and Excellence Award 2011. Further, the colleges in our group are been ranked A+ + by Business Sphere, A+ by Business India. CSR-GHRDC has enlisted us in top B-Schools of excellence in 2009,2010 as

A

well as 201. We are also the toppers in terms of results in Greater Noida in management education for 2012. India is changing and so is the world, and IIMT is an exciting bridge to view these changes and actively engage in making history. Believing that, the best way to survive change is to initiate it, we continually engage in our relentless endeavor to improve upon our past performance and to place the students of IIMT in the league of the best companies. Fiserv, Volvo Eisher, GVK. Steria, HCL, TCS, Info-tech, Accenture, Ranbaxy, Jaypee, General Electrics. STUP consultants, ITC. are to name a few. Today, IIMT alumni occupy key positions in top organizations both in India and abroad, and have acted as the ambassadors of change wherever they work. Most intently on behalf of IIMT Group, I express my commitment to make this institution an academy of distinction. We are committed towards accomplishment of the formulated objectives and adherence to the resolved policies and retain a singular uncompromising commitment to communities, parents and students to prepare the next generation for the challenges of a brilliant future.

I Mayank Agarwat
MANAGING DIRECTOR

"If one follows the crowd, he is likely to go no further than the crowd."
ANSAL UNIVERSITY

nsal Institute of Technology (AIT) is now Ansal University. AIT got the university status under the Haryana Private Universities Act, 2006. Speaking on the occasion, Sushant Group of Institutions director Dr C.S. Nagpal said this university's dream is to provide quality education to the youth of the country. Therefore, Ansal Institute of Technology was formed under the banner of The Chiranjiv Charitable Trust. With the help and full moral support of Ansal API chairman Sushi! Ansal, they joined hands to fulfill their desire to set up a university. Sushil Ansal now becomes the first chancellor of the Ansal University. His successful foray in the field of education vis-a-vis Ansa! Institute of Technology (AIT), Sushant School of Art and Architecture (SSAA), Sushant School of Design (SSD) & Chiranjiv Schools are considered as benchmarks for quality education. These schools have carved a niche by offering educational programs and providing the best faculty and facilities to promote academic excellence for over two decades. The organization has a rich intellectual capita! comprising of about 150 highly qualified and experienced faculty from diverse fields. Besides the regular faculty members, the institutes have a history of long standing academic relationship with eminent personalities like late. Mr. M F Hussain, Mr. Jatin Das, Sir Joseph Allen Stein, Mr. Mario Botta, and many more from various fields. Ansal API chairman Sushil Ansal said it is a historic day and said it is now their responsibility to impart quality education not only to the urban but the rural belt too. "We will create a competitive as well as cooperative environment. We aim at developing centres of excellence to usher in cutting-edge to all fields, benefitting society as a whole, especially the poor and the underprivileged,"he shared. DIRECTOR,

A

ANEW
Innovation in education isn't a slogan for us Bat we strongly believe that with quality education we can make future of the students bright. It has been a long journey but it's not the end. a new beginning and eed'to reach the top of 1st of respected and ..puted educational institutes In the c

At Ansal University, the focus lies on integration of our curricula with the needs and demands of industry in all its manifestations, such that our alumni add value wherever they work, achieving fulfillment through secure livelihoods and improved quality of life. Ansal University runs various programmes through its six schools namely Sushant School of Art & Architecture, Sushant School of Design, School of Management Studies, School of Applied Sciences, School of International Studies, School of Computer Applications, School of Engineering & Technology and School of Humanities & Language.

eature Krishna Institute of Engineering & Technology (KIET)

EDUCATION WITH IMAGINATION
rishna Institute of Engineering & Technology (KIET) was established in 1998 by Krishna Charitable Society at Ghaziabad - Meerut Road, Ghaziabad, U.R Started with 180 students in 1998, the Institute now has 4197 students on its rolls in 2011-a substantial growth in 13 years to meet the need of quality technical education in U.R, as also to ensure their overall growth as responsible professionals and global citizens. The Institute offers B.Tech Degree courses in seven disciplines i.e. CSE,ECE,ENJT,ME,CE & El and M.Tech in four disciplines i.e. CS,EC,EN,ME, MCA, MBA & Pharmacy (B.Pharm & M.Pharm) Courses to meet varied aspirations of the students. The institute continues to be preferred destination for students seeking admission through UPSEE Counseling and the Management Quota. With top 5 percent of the engineering aspirants of our state of Uttar Pradesh who appeared for the UPSEE, preferred KIET over other institutions. All our B.Tech and MCA programmes have been accredited by NBA. Also, KIET is accredited by NAAC (An autonomous Institution of the UGC) with "A" Grade for 5 Years. KIET has consistently achieved a placement record of above 80 % with premium companies like TCS, Wipro, Infosys, Kirloskar, AMW, Cummins, M&M, L&T Infotech, Indian Navy, Hindustan Uniliver, etc. being major recruiters of our students. The institute is equipped with excellent ICT infrastructure in terms of 25 MBPS internet pipe, 12 Servers like Mail Server, Web Server, DNS Server, NPTEL Server, etc., 1240 PCs interconnected on autonomous network including 60 W!F! Access Points spread over 17 acre campus. Employing & retaining quality faculty and to provide opportunities for their growth is the key to have the right academic environment. In these aspects KIET is uniquely positioned in comparison to its peer institutions. It has institutionalized processes, policies and support for nurturing growth of faculty and staff. It is heartening to share that today 80 faculty members of KIET are pursuing their Ph. D from various universities/ institutes including HTs and NITs. It excludes 12 faculty members who have already acquired Ph.D degree. "Technology Business Incubator" was set up in KIET i

K

association with NSTEDB, Department of Science & Technology, Govt of India, in the year 2007-08 to promote Innovation and Entrepreneurship in the institute and in the adjoining areas continues to do well. Since inception, 20 Incubatee companies have established their venture in KIET- T8I. Presently 14 are operational and 6 have graduated successfully. To encourage learning beyond curriculum, 7 summer schools of 1-2 weeks duration are planned in the next summer holidays. This will help in creating areas of excellence in the departments & encourage students to work for projects in these fields. Students are being encouraged to go for post graduate studies and appear for GATE. It is heartening to note that in GATE 2012,150 students have qualified, out of which 18 have secured All India rank in 2/3 digit. The vision of the college is "Education with Imagination". To fulfill this, the Institute is working towards supplementing curriculum based learning with e-learning, getting real life projects and encouraging students to participate in design competitions and facilitating faculty to work on research projects. Our effort will be to provide the necessary eco-system to achieve a happy learning for all in the campus.

Dr. No rendra Kumar DIRECTOR

Skyline Group of institutions

CREATING WORLD CLASS HUMAN RESOURCES
kyline Group of institutions is strategically located near New Delhi, the Capita! city of India, in Greater Noida at Plot No.3, Knowledge Park-ll situated on a 8 lane Express highway and sprawls on a 13 Acre lush green surroundings. It has its fully developed infra - structure, Hostels, Air conditioned Computer Labs, Air Conditioned Library. Skyline Group of Institutions has an independent Training & Placement Cell which organizes campus interviews for placement of the students in reputed organizations. The Training and Placement cell provide students with the best avenues to utilize their skills by helping them to find gainful employment with the best firms. Training activities are organized throughout the year in an effort towards preparing the prospective students for the campus selection programs. The cell keeps on inviting various industries and reputed firms for campus

S

recruitment. The cell is sensitized to function all through the year towards generating placement and training opportunities for the students. The Cell is headed by a Training & Placement Officer in-charge and assisted by Student Placement Coordinators who lead a team of placement representatives from various courses of study. The Training & Placement Cell ensures and takes care to provide the best arrangements and hospitality for the visiting company officials. Some of the major recruiters are MindTree, Sterling & Wilson, Birlasoft, Fedders & Llyod, Keane, Syntel, BOSCH Ltd., HCL Comnet. JBM Group, HCL Technologies Ltd (IOMC), Spice, L&T, ADANI Power, A2Z Group, Hitachi, Vodafone, Savitri Telecom, Indiamart, Samsung, Sony, Midas, Thyocare, Muthoot Fincorp& many more.

An

eature

NIET, Greater Noida

standard quality education
great institute is often the result of the workings of a great mind, And Dr. LOm Prakash Agarwal, the Managing Director of N!ET, Greater Noida proves it right. Or. Om Prakash Agarwal was born in a humble middle class family on October 17,1942 in · Piplikhera, a remote village in western UP He Completed his MBBS degree from Aligarh Muslim University followed by a post graduate degree in MD Medicine in the year 1973. Shortly afterwards, Dr. Om Prakash Agarwa! began his career as a Media! Officer at PL. Sharma Hospital, Meerut in 1974. But in a drive to do much more, he set up the City Educational and Welfare-Society in the year - 1992, it catered to the masses in a big way thereby imparting quality education in big numbers since then. Dr. Agarwal then set out to establish the Meerut Institute of Engineering and Technology, Meerut in 1997 which he gradually hauled to ; its zenith. But such was the tenacity of Dr. Agarwal that he thereafter went on to set up ] the Noida institute of Engineering and :° Technology, Greater Noida shortly afterwards in 2000. He has worked untiringly day and night to make NIET what it is today with the current strength of around 4200 students and more than 300 eminent faculty members. To its students also, NIET offers scholarships based on merit and also helps underprivileged students in whatever way it can, NIET has seven streams of B. Tech courses and B. Pharm amongst the undergraduate courses in its kitty. NIET is a pioneer in Greater Noida in offering as many as seven M, Tech courses and three postgraduate M. Pharm programs along with MBA, MCA and PGDM. NIET campus aims at overall development of its students by providing everything under one roof that the students need in terms of infrastructure and resources. Dr, Agarwal has left no stone unturned to increase the employability of NIETians. Today, soon to turn 69, the dynamic Or. Agarwa! manages to strike a fine balance between his identity as a dedicated medical practitioner at Meerut and as an able administrator in his various ventures.

Dr. O.R Agarwal
CHAIRMAN

SOBHASARIA GROUP OF INSTITUTIONS

Imparting quality in higher education
n a globalized world, education at all levels is more important than ever. Education deficits can hinder a society in isolation, but in a globalized world these deficits can be even more detrimental to a country's economy and development. By merging many national markets into one global market, globalization increases the competitive pressures faced by individuals, companies, and societies. Those countries that have been able to improve their productivity and find areas of competitive advantage have thrived. Technical education has been a vital component of the successful globalizes1 progress. In this technical era the technocrats can be proved a better asset for the development of the country if they are boost up with the quality technical education. We, Sobhasaria Group of Institutions, Sikar an educational venture of Rupa & Company, Kolkata and supported by Sobhasaria Jan Kalyan Trust facilitate to add wings to the dreams of the aspirants of Shekhawati vicinity I believe that competition is more of an opportunity than of a threat. It renders us consistent habit of hard working and a leeway to look for fresh realities of the world, therefore, competitive world is a level playing field for those who trust their own confidence and we in Sobhasaria develop creative thinking to meet this field. Well, action speaks louder than words and we are a recent instance to this maxim. Recently we have been awarded the status of accreditation in three core branches of engineering viz. Computer science, Electrical and Electronics and Communication Engineering. The status of accreditation amply proves the quality of teaching we have been imparting in Shekhawati region in particular and in Rajasthan as a whole. The list of accredited engineering institutions are highlighted and offered opportunities by a number of stakeholders and this certainly has created an edge for us on the map of our country. Recently we have been awarded the UNESCO CHETNA AWRAD for imparting quality higher education in rural area. This further proves the kind of responsibilities we have been sharing with our society to uplift the standard of higher technical education of the area. Definitely there is a great deal of engineering institutions coming to the fore but the number of centers of excellence worthy of producing creative students can be counted on fingers. We have state of the art infrastructure with a multistoried air conditioned library, air conditioned Central Computer Lab, well furnished Wi Fi campus with good internet speed, air cooled hostels for boys and girls and separate departmental laboratories equipped with modern instruments. This all prove our worth to be a center of excellence in terms of professional technical education.

An

eature

SWAMI VIVEKANAND SUBHARTI UNIVERSITY

WHERE EDUCATION IS A
of the Swami Vivekanand Subharti Vishwavidyalaya Adhiniyam, Uttar Pradesh (U.R Act. No. 29 of 2008). Swami Vivekanand Subharti University, so created, is a University under Section 2(f) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956. The main campus of the University is in the National Capital Region strategically situated on National Highway-58, Meerut Bypass Road, Meerut. The campus, aptly called Subhartipuram, is spread over a sprawling area of about 250 acres of land comprising of magnificent buildings, lush green lawns and an atmosphere vibrant with over 8000 people, determined to make this a Jewel in the Crown of the Nation. The University has got constituent Colleges which provide higher education in almost all the disciplines like Medical, Dental, Physiotherapy, Nursing, Naturopathy and Yoga, Paramedical, Engineering, Management, Law, Journalism, Education, Physical Education, Hotel Management. Arts and Science etc, thus creating highly qualified, academically and technically excellent professionals, who in addition are good human beings. The University has also started a number of courses through Distance Education and On- Line Education, so that the persons who are already in job and can not pursue regular courses may add on to their education status. The man behind the whole concept is a renowned Surgeon, Educationist, Nationalist, Philanthropist, Entrepreneur and most of all a Humanist, Dr Atul Krishna.

I Dr. Atul Krishna FOUNDER PRESIDENT, SUBHARTI KKB CHARITABLE TRUST ubharti Sewa Sanstha was started as a social service organization way back in 1977- Main aim of Subharti was to provide medical aid and ; education to the poor and needy and the villagers. It was also committed to social communal harmony and national integration and also towards a casteless society. To serve above purposes, a Trust was established in 1991 by Smt. Rajwati Bhatnagar in the memory of her educationist husband late Dr. K.K. Bhatnagar. Several schools up to the levels of intermediate to guide the energy of the youth of the country in the right direction and several health centers were established in villages to provide health services to masses. In 1996 Subharti stepped in the field of higher education. It established a large number of institutions of higher education. Impressed by the work of Subharti. the State Government granted status of a University to its institutions, by virtue

S1
Of

UNITED GROUP OF INSTITUTIONS

ow, with 9 well established institutes in Allahabad and area provides the perfect opportunity for the students to gain hands Greater Noida, over 8000 students and more than 500 faculties on experience and getting to know the grooves of the industry. The members, the United Group of Institutions is poised to reach Greater Noida campus has a great advantage of being in the NCR the next level providing the best technical education. Our region which is the home ground of the corporate giants making it establishment offers NBA accredited courses, Quality simpler for the students to gain a practical work experience along recognized by the World Bank and boasts of more than 5200 with classroom education. All the quality education, has a lot to offer to the

I

MBA & PGDM aspirants.institutions are affiliated to the Mahamaya Technical The management courses in United attracts people from a wide University. Noida & Gautam Buddh Technical University, range of academic disciplines. United has been pioneer in assisting many MBA conduct seminars, workshops, guest lectures, and other students occupying top slots in the corporate world. Industry andevents. academicians have acknowledged the quality of MBA and PGDM Special care is given to the courses of the student which courses at united equally and various awards at both national and demand industrial trainings and visit The Naini industrial international level have recognized our achievements.

