AnimPACTpeature

EVOLUTION OF A DREAM

Shri Ramswaroop Memorial Group of Professional Colleges, Lucknow
n his review of "The Harvard Century: The Making of a University to a Nation" Christopher N. Breiseth, President of the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute in Hyde Park, New York, and President Emeritus of Wilkes University in Wilkes-Barre. Pennsylvania, had said: 'We appear to be at turning point in the evolution of colleges and universities (in America). As in earlier periods of our history, the institutions of higher education are changing in response the knowledge needs of society....." True. The Shri Ramswaroop Memorial Group of Professional Colleges. Lucknow, which in a short span of time not only established itself as a brand name in the field of technical and management education but also evolved a University of its own on Lucknow-Dewa Road, offering a wide range of courses of contemporary significance. In simple words, it's the glaring example of the evolution of a dream into a reality in the placid city of Lucknow, which has turned up as a hub of professional education in the recent times. However, it's easier said than done. A lot of sweat and hard work went into forging SRMGPC into a centre of quality education which emerged as a benchmark evokinga sense of trust and credibility. After all, institutions are not made in a day. Even Harvard, as an institution of higher learning, took a century to become synonymous with the nation. The reputation of SRMGPC with a sprawling campus and modern infrastructure matches the character of the city where it is situated. Lucknow known worldwide as the City of Nawabs has a distinct Ganga-Jamuni culture and still preserves its tehzeeb [mannerism], architecture, unique cuisines and etiquette. With a deeprooted tradition of learning and creative activities Lucknow is also emerging fast
SRMGPC is flourishing through its core values and quality driven performance initiatives. Here the institutional culture transforms students into integrated individuals and competent professionals. -DcANANDMISHRA Professor & HOD, Department of Humanities, SRMGPC, Lucknow.

I

SRMCEM is investing heavily into up gradation of skills of its students. This will bear results on a long term basis. Keep it up. All the best. Mr. HIMANSHU KUMAR General Manager- HR Tata Consultancy Services

as a centre of economic activities which is opening up a new window to the world of opportunities. In this background, SRMGPC began its journey with a modest strength of 5 staff members and 22 students. Presently, however, it runs 12 programmes, has strength of more than 5000 student, and has 600 faculty and staff members backed by a well equipped modern infrastructure laid out aesthetically over a 50 acre campus. The group is accredited by the National Board of Accreditation of AICTE, and, is ISO 9001-2008 certified. It has really set a paradigm shift in modern education. The strength behind this meteoric rise of SRMGPC is a team of dynamic and visionary young couple, Er. Pankaj Agarwal and Er. Pooja Agarwal, both of whom with Gold MedalsfromllTKanpur, left greener pastures and dedicated themselves to the cause of education, which has been their life's "Mission". The founding body of SRMGPC has made incessant efforts with a vision to make SRMGPC as one of the leading institutions of the country. Coming up with a fullfledged University from this session is a part and parcel of the realization of the same vision. The Executive Director, Mr. Pankaj Agarwal adds. "We organize various seminars and workshops to expose students to the practical experiences of top corporate delegates. We also lay emphasis on cultural front. At SRMGPC, multiculturalism and cross-cultural communication is especially emphasized to sensitize its students fora changing global environment". A long, yet worthwhile, struggle of thefounding members of the Shri Ramswaroop Foundation, has brought the college to the status of one of the most sought-after colleges in the field of Engineering and Management. Even in it's as-yet short life span, the students of this college have secured high meritorious positions. Scores and scores of SRMGPC students have secured merit positions in BJech, MBA, and MCA results of G.B. Technical University, Lucknow overtheyears.

Feature
SHRUTIVERMA Location : Msc. Management from London School of Economics Year of Passing : 2008 (B.Tech-EC) Cross cultural ambience of SRMCEM makes students feel comfortable in pursuing higher education abroad LOVE KUMAR MISHRA Current Deployment: Syntel Inc. New York City, USA Year of passing : 2006 (MCA) The strong foundation and strict adherence to the basic rules makes SRMCEM so unique categories of awardsfor merit holders are: The Shri Ramswaroop Memorial Award for GPTU merit holders where final year GPTU topper from the college is awarded Rsl lakh cash. Besides, SRMGPC waives off the entire tuition fees of the topper of GPTU merit list. It offers Smt. Nirmala Agarwal Memorial Award for college merit holders where the cash award varies from Rsl 1,000 to Rs 1000. Admission The entry of B.Tech, M.B.A. and M.C.A. students is through state entrance exam, UPSEE. The students of BBA, BCA take admission through the entrance test conducted by the University of Lucknow, whereas admission of the students in the PGDM course is through CAT, MATandXATexams. Faculty, Placement and Activities SRMGPC has a strong faculty base. The ERP system is used in monitoring even the minutest activity of the students that leads to the direct access to a variety of information in its raw and analyzed form. The evaluation system is based on grading after an estimation of multi-facets of student's performance. The teaching staff at SRMGPC is highly reputed and knowledgeable and easily approachable to all students. Extensive student interaction is encouraged, and colloquiums, seminars, projects and conferences are conducted on regular basis. The college celebrates a decentralized cultural festival, "Abhivyakti", that promotes fraternity and awareness for cultural diversity among its brethren, as every individual from the group is expected to be a part of it. This festival provides diverse opportunities to the students for their interaction with various corporate houses, electronic and print media, and various ethnic groups. The group has a student senate, which extensively discusses every academic and other problem openly and transparently with the management The teaching process is structured in an industry-relevant manner to fine-tune the skills of the students in order to make them better professionals. The group has an efficient placement cell with a proud record of 100% placement. Industrial interactions are organized by the cell to expose the students to the business world and acquaint them with the demands of the industries. This cell maintains close relations with the corporate sector and has ties with several companies of repute, such as Infosys, IBM, Wipro, Birla Soft, Tata Chemicals for trainingandplacementdrives. Shri Ramswaroop Memorial University In SRMGPC's march towards the mission of providing quality professional education, the need for autonomy was long felt. Towards achieving this aspiration, thefoundingbody of SRMGPC has come upfrom this session with Shri Ramswaroop Memorial University, spread over 150 acres of land on Lucknow Oeva road, running a host of modern day courses meeting the requirements of diverseset of students and professionals. The contribution of Shri Ramswaroop Memorial Group of Professional Colleges can be summed up in terms of its endeavors for a culture of holistic development,^ of students that has always set standards in professional education.

Courses & Curriculum
SRMGPC is known for its innovatively taught curriculum in Engineering and Management. For students aspiring to become engineers, the college provides Electronics and Communication, Electronics and Instrumentation, Electrical and Electronics. Information Technology, Computer Science, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Civil Engineering as its main courses, which are affiliated to G B Technical University, Lucknow. Students looking for courses in Management and Computer Applications may apply to the postgraduate-level MBA and MCA programs, which are again affiliated to G B Technical University, Lucknow. SRMGPC also runs graduate level BBA and BCA programs, which are affiliated to Lucknow University. In addition to the above, students may also apply for the autonomous PGDM course of the group. Scholarship & Awards SRMGPC awards scholarships in order to encourage meritorious students. It also gives scholarship to support economically disadvantaged students. The two main WHAT SHS SRMCEM APART To illustrate our commitment to excellence, some of the explanatory and noteworthy fads are:  Recipient of "Academic Excellence Award" by GBTU  13 glorious years of academic existence producing QUALITY professionals in QUANTITY  All round holistic development of the students to shape them as proficient professionals and responsible citizens.  Pedagogy designed to meet the current industry aspirations.  Effective placement cell. Quality campus placements in well known companies like TCS, Wipro, infosys, Mahindra, Tata, Reliance, HCL etc. Last year a total of 100 companies visited the campus.  Quality faculty with rich academic background from NTs & IIMs and with affluent industry experience from private and government sectors.  Faculty to student ratio of 1:10, which is even better than the AICTE prescribed ratio of 1:15.  Proactive commitment to corporate social responsibility by way of numerous activities, such as providing scholarships to the needy and deserving, running a school for the underprivileged children with free books, stationery, uniform, and meals.  Emphasis on soft skills, gender sensitization, cultural activities, values and ethics  Adopting a hospital for blood donation; numerous other philanthropic activities.

