SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

IN THE CITY
THEATRE RESTAURANT

Musical extravaganza
Prepare yourself for two and a half hours of ultimate Bollywood dhamaka with the Great Indian Nautanki Company's latest production, Jhumroo. With 19 Bollywood retro songs, this musical comedy is a tribute to the legendary singer Kishore Kumar. The story revolves around the protagonist Bhola (Gaurav Gera) who works at an advertising agency in Mumbai, and has two dreams in life--to become a singing superstar (despite the lack of a singing voice); and to express his love to Meena (Shweta Gulati), a co-worker at the agency. Written by Darshan Jariwalla and directed by Vikranth Pawar, this act will not let your attention waver for even a second, instead the larger than life sets and the amazingly well coordinated audio-visual effects will transport you to a dream land. Good acting, witty dialoges, and melodious songs are sure to keep you entertained throughout. This colourful extravaganza turns interesting and interactive when the audience turns into a `live audience' for a music competition. Look out for actors flying down from the ceiling, popping up from beneath the stage, and many such surprise elements! Tickets Rs 750 onwards depending on the choice of seat Where Kingdom of Dreams, Sector 29, Auditorium Complex, Gurgaon Tel 0124 45280000; kingdomofdreams.in


REUBEN SINGH./www.indiatodayimages.com

Mixed platter
The recently opened joint Out of the Box (OTB) at Khan Market is bright and cheery eatery compared to its original outpost at Hauz Khas Village, which has a more rustic appeal. On offer is an eclectic mix of Indian, Oriental and European dishes. The menu divided into classic, contemporary and fusion has more dining options, unlike the street food variety offered at their first outlet. We suggest you try some of their fusion delicacies such as the thyme mushroom dumplings, Thai grilled fish or penne makhani pasta, which are pungent, delightful treats. So next time you are at Khan Market, make sure you call on OTB for a dose of spice and cheer! Average meal for two Rs 1,500 plus taxes Where 5  by Shilpa Mehta Khan Market Tel 43065355

by Ekta Marwaha

Sinful delight
With one outlet in GK1 and another in CP, it has taken only a few weeks for Dunkin' Donuts to become a runaway hit among Delhiites. With doughnuts being the highlight, there are over 40 flavours to choose from. Be sure to try their classics--toffee nougat, classic glazed, nutty choco-donut, orange delight and chocolate éclair. Also on offer are a host of sandwiches, ciabattas and bagels. Price Rs 45 per doughnut At N6, Connaught Place; M Block Market, GK 1 facebook.com/dunkinindia


A still from Jhumroo

by Marcia Rodrigues

s-18

SIMPLY DELHI  JUNE 2012

SIMPLY DELHI
DANCE

Buzz
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Happy feet
After successful performances at the Shri Ram Centre, IIC, LTG, Iskon Auditorium and more, Footprints DanceWorkz has managed to create a name for itself through their dance-dramas that aim to create awareness about various social ills. They have used dance to convey social messages about causes like Saving the Girl Child and Gender Discrimination. Innovatively, they also manage to incorporate popular film songs like Senorita and Chhamak Chalo in their plays to keep the entertainment factor alive. These dance classes are open to people of all ages, as well as those who are specially abled. They have workshops all through the year, (pic, right) and the two month long summer workshop which is followed by a performance usually includes a number of Bollywood chartbusters which are used to communicate a social message. For information about classes or upcoming events  by Ekta Marwaha contact 9910672400
SOUMIT AND SOUMITA

EVENT
JUNE 21-22
Just dance
Watch The Gati Summer Dance Residency 2012's choreographic production All Warmed Up at the Shri Ram Centre. Organised by The Gati Dance Forum, each year six emerging choreographers get the opportunity to work with experienced mentors in the field during a period of nine weeks to develop their own individual choreographic works. Timing 7.30 pm onwards At Shri Ram Centre, 4, Safdar Hashmi Marg, Mandi House For passes call 9971406113

BOOK

Eat and make merry
If you find yourself constantly undecided about which restaurant to eat at, look no further than zomato.com's newest initiative. The popular foodie website has launched their first food guide called Citibank Zomato Restaurant Guide 2012. Unlike other guides, this one is based on `moods'. Just flip to the section that best describes your mood-- Romantic Dinner, Catching Up, Beer in a Bar, or Late Nighters. The guide lists 200 mustvisit restaurants in Delhi NCR along with a brief review, cost for meal for two, service provided by the joint and most interestingly QR codes, so you can simply place your smart phone on it and be directed to the restaurant's webpage. Available at all leading bookstores.  by Ekta Marwaha Price Rs 199

s-20

SIMPLY DELHI  JUNE 2012

