. IMPACT,

Ansal Institute Lucknow
P I O N E E R E D by IITians

BEST CHOICE FOR
Leadership of a renowned academician Prof. M.P. Singh, Fulbright scholar, got Ph. D from the prestigious Maryland University, USA; taught & researched at Ivy league Cornell University, Cambridge University, NASA etc. The French Government awarded the "Knight of the order of the academic palms";got"Distinguished Service Award"by III Delhi. Prof. M.P. Singh Executive Directoer Post Graduate Program (AnsalInternational Campus)

Ansals, the Real Estate tycoon, have earned name in providing US based twinning education in the country. This mode of education is now accepted by the Government of India as an initial step to facilitate entry of foreign education providers in the Country. More than 1500 students have benefitted from this pioneering step initiated by Ansals 12 years ago and is the hallmark of the education initiative of the Ansals at its international campus setup at the Ansal's prestigious, Hi-techSushant Golf City, Lucknow. Today, Ansals are the largest provider of US based twinning education. The highlights: Undergraduate Program: Engineering & Business Management (Ansal Technical Campus) B Tech degree from reputed & accredited US based University.  Approved by AICTE* to provide twinning based education under 2+2 arrangement : 2 years at the Ansal institute Lucknow and 2 years in a reputed & accredited US based University of more than 100 years of standing.  Huge overseas scholarship ranging between $7,000$16,000 per year to every student who successfully completes the 2 years program studied at Ansal Institute.  First Institute in UP that has received approval to run twinning based education leading to a prestigious degree from accredited US University. Those not able to go to US can get a lateral entry in the 3rd year to get B.Tech Degree from U.P Government established Technical University.  One year paid internship after graduation: 1 year paid internship after graduation allowed in the US to gain practical experience important for lucrative jobs in MNCs in India & overseas.  Meritorious students get scholarship for the 2 years of studies at Ansal Institute of Technology & Management, Lucknow. One of the most economical programs to obtain prestigious coveted US degree- cost less than half the normal cost that student will normally spend for US degree.

Ansai Institute

One year Post Graduate certificate program awarded by Ansal Institute and accepted by large number of Industries and number of collaborating accredited overseas Universities in US, Canada, Australia for lateral entry.  After studying additionally for 1 year at partner overseas Universities,student gets the coveted & accredited Master's Degree awarded by these collaborating overseas Universities: MBA or MS in computer science/Computer Information System.  Provision of huge merit based scholarship awarded by the concerned US based Universities like Valparaiso, Tarleton State University, Eastern Michigan University, North Dakota State University, etc. Infrastructures Environment friendly International standard Infrastructure and Facilities:  Wi-Fi facilities on the entire 14 acre sprawling campus Entire Campus Air- Conditioned  State of the art laboratories and well equipped library. Sports and Other Recreational Facilities Accommodation  International standards, well-furnished separate hostels for boys and girls with boarding facility. Placement Track record: Placement in companies like CISCO, IBM, KPMG, PWC, DELL,ZEEGroup, BankofAmerica, HSBC, Global System LLCand Beyond Management Inc. Ansal Institute of Technology & Management, Lucknow
Sector C, Pocket 9, Sushant Golf City, Lucknow- 226002. Phone (Lucknow): 7379777728/29/30/31/34/35/89 Phone (Gurgaon): 0124- 4087186, 9871592064 for admission mail to: admissions@aitmlucknow.org For more details visit: www.aitmlucknow.org, www.atclucknow.org



Ansal Institute

* Approval is in pipeline

.IMPACT*

[A] Medical Program For 'Medical Program', AH IMS has collaborative arrangement with Hope Medical Institute (HMI), USA, an international institute maintaining affiliations and cooperative working relationship with schools of medicine in several overseas institutions. All the courses of Medical programs are taught in English and based on U.S. Medical Education System and the efforts are focused to place qualified and deserving students in pre-approved reputed Hospitals and offer opportunity to gain unique experience to build medical career in Europe, US, Canada or India. 4-year M.D. degree program based on US medical education system and delivered in English from Polish medical universities (Europe) as detailed. Medical degree is recognized by the MCI, European Union and related US medical bodiesCourse work to be completed in India  Entry Qualification-10+2 with minimum 60% aggregate followed by 2 years of prescribed (NonMedical basic sciences) course work at Ansal-Hope institute of Health Sciences (AHIHS), Lucknow leading to the Indian certification. Course work to be completed Overseas  Successfully qualified students at AHIHS, Lucknow will be transferred to the relevant Polish Medical Universities for 4 years of medical studies leading to MD degree recognized by Medical Council of India, European Union and concerned US based Medical bodies. 4-year MD program 2-year of basic medical science course work followed by 2-year of clinical rotation-ship leads to Polish Medical University M.D. degree (equivalent to Indian MBBS). Clinical experience  Clinical experience in Europe The students desirous to get clinical experience in Europe: All the 4-years of M.D. degree programme should be completed in Polish Medical University or First 2-years in Poland and last 2-years of clinical rotation-ship can be done in pre-approved hospitals in U.S.orlndia.  Clinical experience in US The students desirous of pursuing medical course in the U.S.: First 2-years of basic Medical studies should be completed in Polish Medical University and last 2years of clinical rotation- ship should be done in U.S. based pre-approved hospitals following USMLE part 1 and 2 norms.  Clinical experience in India The students who want to come back to India have to do their 4 yrs course work in Poland. I n the last two yrs

ACHIEVERS

Ansal-Hope Institute of Health Sciences (AHIHS), Lucknow
of clinical rotationship, the students can come for 3 months practical clinical experience in pre-approved Indian hospitals in a year. Post Graduate Medical degree For Post Graduate medical course, the students are required to follow norms of the respective countries.  For India, they have to pass Eligibility test conducted by National Board of Exams [N.B.E. (Medical)] for foreign medical degree holders & complete Post Graduation through MD/MS degree program conducted by Indian Medical colleges as per norms or seek admission for D.N.B. (equivalent to M.D./M.S.) following norms established by N.B.E. for medical studies.  For gaining clinical experience in Europe, respective country's norms for residency for P.G studies are required to be followed.  For the U.S., the students will be required to clear USMLE Part-1 & 2 for doing residency in preapproved U.S. based hospitals to gain recognition in the area of specialty for practicing in the U.S. [B] Nursing Program About 'Nursing Program', AHIHS has collaborative arrangement with Edith Cowan University (ECU), a large multi-campus institution serving communities in Western Australia and a significant cohort of international students. ECU is one of the Australian Government Universities that works closely with private and public sector organizations, locally and overseas, in designing its study programs. 3-year UG degree in Nursing from Australia leading to Registration as Professional Nurse in Australia as detailedCourse work to be completed in India Entry Qualification: 10+2 to study 1 1/2 years of certification courseatAHIHS Lucknow Course work to be completed in Australia  After successful completion of course work at AITM, Lucknow, students will be transferred to Australia to study additional 1 % years there leading to the coveted bachelor's degree in Nursing which qualifies the student to become a Registered Nurse in Australia with Salaries of about A$ 45000/- p.a.
Ansal-Hope Institute of Health Sciences (AHIHS), Lucknow Sector C, Pocket 9, Sushant Golf City, Lucknow- 226002

