Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

What's Cooking?
Joey Matthews, in her early 30s, may not have English food writer and TV presenter Nigella Lawson's curves yet, but she wants to hang up her modelling heels to cook up a storm on television. Matthews's cookery show will have her whip up her favourite dishes for friends, much like her buxom English counterpart. She studied law, then dabbled in modelling for a while, ran her own music production company Audio Ashram, before settling down in the kitchen. "I'm going to be cooking with love," she says.
MATTHEWS KAZAN

HIGH HOPES
Elena Kazan, 25, Bollywood's newest foreign

discovery, can skip Hindi lessons as she speaks the language fluently. So the German model will be much at ease when she romances Randeep Hooda in Anjum Rizvi's thriller John Day. She also made a fleeting appearance in Agent Vinod. "I want to play women who actually do something, not just look good and run around," she says. Good luck with that.

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND THINGS THAT MATTER
MUST SKIP

Maximum Exposure
The boyfriend snatcher is back. Hazel Keech, 25, did not win too many fans for her lacklustre performance in Bodyguard, and lost many more when she stole her best friend's boyfriend in the film. A little hip-swivelling in shiny pink underwear in Kabeer Kaushik's Maximum may change all that."I was dead against doing an item song for the sake of being provocative," she says. So what made her change her mind?
KEECH

Anu Malik's Kolaveri-style ode to Sachin Tendulkar's 100 centuries on YouTube. Sheer waste of time.
MUST BID FOR

Sunny Leone's lingerie in Jism 2, which will be auctioned to raise money for charity.
MUST BELIEVE

Sharmila Tagore's assurance that Saif Ali Khan and Kareena Kapoor will marry on October 16.
MUST LAUD

Prince Charles's speech at the Queen's Diamond Jubilee show that began with "Mummy" .

138

Volume XXXVII Number 25; For the week June 12-18, 2012, released on June 11



Compiled by Nishat Bari

