AnimPACTfeature

AJAY KUMAR GARG ENGINEERING COLLEGE, GHAZIABAD

SCALING THE ZENITH OF EXCELLENCE
Recipient of the academic excellence award for "best engineering college in UPTU" for the second successive year by H.E., the Governor of U.R
jay Kumar Garg Engineering College (AKGEC), Ghaziabad is approved by AICTE and affiliated to U.R State Technical University, MTU. The college was established in 1998 and offers B.Tech Courses in seven disciplines of Engineering. The college also offers postgraduate courses in Computer Application (MCA) and M.Tech in five engineering disciplines. The college is accredited by NBA and certified for ISO 9001- 2008 by BSI, U.K. AKGEC has excellent infrastructure with state-of-the-art laboratories, computing facilities, automated library with e-journals, interactive satellite (EDUSAT) terminal, modern well furnished hostels for 1200 students and faculty residences on its wi-fi enabled 40 acres campus. The college also has highly qualified and experienced

A

faculty lead by its Director, Dr R.K. Agarwal, who is an alumnus of NT Kanpur, CIT, UK and HSc Bangalore with vast teaching, research and administrative experience. The college has been consistently maintaining excellent results and conducts a number of industrially relevant programs to make its students globally competitive. During the year 2010-11, AKGEC has the distinction of having 13 of its students in the University merit lists including gold medalists in all the four B.Tech branch groups being run in the college. During the year, over 600 students have been placed in reputed companies like Infosys, Wipro, MAQ Software, DELL Perot, Cummins India, Birla Soft, Lohia Group, Syntel, NUT etc. The college had the distinction of being the only Engineering College in the state of U.R to have received

MISSION
We strive to provide and maintain academic environment and systems, enabling maximum learning to produce competent professionals. We
Electrical Engineer by profession, he is an eminent industrialist, educationist and philanthropist also aim at achieving this through transparent academic and

administrative policies in the college. We intend to provide conducive atmosphere for research, development and consultancy services to our
faculty at national and international level.

AnimPACTreatiire

DR R.K. AGARWAL
Director What are the key strengths of AKGEC? A. The main ingredients for quality education are competent faculty, proper infrastructure, committed staff and an inspiring leadership effective, efficient and synergistic use of these resources. AKGEC is a confluence of all these factors. Also, our innovative approach to academics and our intellectual property are our key strengths. Having reached the top position in U.R, what are your plans now? There is no limit to excellence. We believe in setting audacious goals and infusing fresh ideas to achieve them. Our objective is to raise the overall academic standard as well as to bridge the gap between academic curriculum and industry requirements. The college is planning to expand the existing M.Tech. programmes and also promote industry oriented projects, R & D activities and industrially relevant training programs. These initiatives will make our studen competent and globally employable engineers who can match the changing requirements of industry. What is the measure of AKGEC s credibility? Consistently excellent results and ever improving placements are the true evidence of our success. Past admission trends through UPSEE counseling clearly indicate the perception and preference of students for our college.

approval from Department of Science and Technology for establishment of Centre of Relevance and Excellence in Automation & Robotics. The college has also set up India's first Industrial Robotic Training Centre in collaboration with Kuka Robotics of Germany. The training programs and certification by the Centre are internationally recognized. The college has also established the first LabVIEW Academy in UP in collaboration with National

Instruments, for conducting industrially relevant training programmes in Data Acquisition & Control, Embedded System and Mechatronics. The college emphasizes all round development with focus on inculcating self discipline, good moral values, ethics, work culture and a positive attitude to make its students not just competent professionals but also good citizens and responsible members of the society.

University Gold Medalists in all four B.Tech branch groups run at AKGEC during 2010-11 Maximum Number (13) of Students in University Merit List during 2010-11 100 % MCA and 93% B.Tech Students graduated with 1st Division and honours during 2010-11 Over 600 students placed in reputed companies during the session 2010-11 First and the only Institution in U.R to have received approval from DST for establishment of Centre of Relevance & Excellence in Automation & Robotics First Institution in India to establish industrial Robotic Training Centre jointly with Kuka Robotics to provide

First institution in UP to establish Nl- LabVIEW Academy in collaboration with National Instruments Firs! Institution in UP to establish Virtual Lab for remote experimentation in Collaboration with NT Delhi 1 EDUSAT interactive Satellite Terminal · Sprawling campus spanning over 40 acres with Excellent Infrastructure 1 900 Networked computers and Wi-Fi for 24x7 internet with 26 Mbps fiber optic connectivity 1 Modern Hostels having accommodation for 1200 boys and girls

www.akgec.org

