Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OFPILGRIMS
India is united by its sacred core, not by the power of kings and governments
By Sudheendra Kulkarni

INDIA: A SACRED GEOGRAPHY
byDiana L.Eck HarmonyBooks,NewYork Price: RS 599 Pages: 559 BETWEEN THE COVERS Eck's bookconclusively shows that India is shaped not bythe modern notion of a nation-state,but bythe extensive and intricate interrelation of geographyand mythology.

hen Marxist and other Hindu-bashing scholars, at least some of them sponsored by the well-funded evangelists' conversion industry, debate the `Idea of India', they will be discomfited by the profound meaning of the following passage, on page 443, in Diana L. Eck's latest gem of a book INDIA: A Sacred Geography: "Ela Bhatt, founder of the Self-Employed Women's Association (SEWA) in Ahmedabad, once described to me the first-ever yatra that women of SEWA took, as soon as they were able to save just enough money to take the first trip of their hardworking lives. It was not a trip to Mumbai or any glossy tourist destination, but a tirthayatra by bus through Rajasthan to Krishna's Vrindavan, and its participants included both Hindu and Muslim women." What has made countless people in India, down the ages, trek to shrines near and far in fulfilment of their sense of duty--not externally imposed but internally willed duty? What has made India the world's most multireligiously vibrant nation? Why are pilgrimages so important in our national life that, as this book by Harvard's star professor (author, earlier, of the much-acclaimed Banaras, the City of Light) reveals, it is "through these sacred pilgrimages that India's very sense of nation has emerged"? What is it about India that the Hindus in a village ceremoniously welcomed their Muslim neighbours when the latter returned from Haj pilgrimage? "The pilgrim's India," Eck writes, "reaches back many hundreds of years and brings to us an astonishing picture of land linked not by

W

the power of kings and governments, but by the footsteps of pilgrims." India's unification was accomplished by the wanderings of pilgrims-- from Hinglaj Mata Temple (now in Baluchistan) to Dhakeshwari Temple (now in Bangladesh), from Sharika Devi's shrine near Srinagar in Kashmir to Rameshwaram in Tamil Nadu. Eck's book conclusively shows that India is shaped not by the modern notion of a nationstate, "but by the extensive and intricate interrelation of geography and mythology (around rivers, shores, mountains, forests) that has produced this vast landscape of tirthas". Jawaharlal Nehru said this even more authoritatively--Rahul Gandhi, please note--in his historic address at AICC's Madurai session in October 1961 (not quoted, surprisingly, by Eck): "India has, for ages past, been a country of pilgrimages. All over the country, you find these ancient places, from Badrinath, Kedarnath and Amarnath, high up in the snowy Himalayas down to Kanyakumari in the south. What has drawn our people from the south to the north and from the north to the south in these great pilgrimages? It is the feeling of one country and one culture." The Spirit of India is, in fact, the Idea of India. You cannot even begin to understand India without acknowledging, experiencing and comprehending its sacredness--that is, without becoming a pilgrim yourself. Whether you go to Amritsar or to Ajmer Sharif, whether you bathe in the Holy Ganga or in the "tirthas of the heart", to reach the shores of after-life, is up to you. Speaking for myself, I "found myself", and turned decisively away from Marxism, when I first went on a pilgrimage to the Himalayas in 1990. Reading Eck's book, I found deeper layers of the meaning of pilgrimage. 
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

JUNE 18, 2012  INDIA TODAY

131

