BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

TWO ELECTIONS FOR PRICE OF ONE
dealists, never content with a good idea, insist on distilla- Mrs Pratibha Patil was Marathi. Sharad Pawar has been tion towards purer variations. One would have thought insisting on consensus for weeks. Consensus, it should be that Churchill ended the debate about democracy with his noted, is not the same thing as unanimity. The Congress refused to see the obvious because complapithy reminder that while it could be awful, everything else was worse. But ever since the savage became noble enough cence is a blindfold and eight years is a long time in power. to share power on some basis other than physical strength It even took a while to understand why Dr Manmohan Singh or economic stranglehold, the search for "total democracy" was on the Mulayam-Mamata list. The hope that this might has been as relentless as it is illusory. Purity is the privilege give Sonia Gandhi a bit of wriggle room evaporated when, of heaven; earth, alas, is all about varieties of putrefaction. within hours, the Prime Minister firmly rejected the option. Indian variety can get odorous. An election begins This was his own decision. By then Mulayam's spokesmen with arbitrary selection. Candidates are named by a leader. had told the country on television that their real purpose was The voter merely chooses from among the chosen. Merit is to push the PM upstairs so that someone more competent rarely the primary qualification; loyalty is, followed by the could take his place. They quoted the eminent industrialist compulsions of demographics. As the stakes rise, and we Azim Premji, who dismissed UPA as a leaderless government. move into the rarified regions of Rashtrapati Bhavan, the The implications are uncomplicated. SP and TMC MPs can no complexities multiply if the environment is unsettled. The longer support a Manmohan Government in Parliament--if only satisfying by-product is that the process becomes as there is a next session of this Parliament. The Congress could not even see what was widely discompelling a story as the election itself. An election can be only as clear or confused as the state cussed along the political grapevine. We are witnessing the of the electorate. If the people of India were choosing the next play for not just one election, but for two. The strategies President, there would be enviable clarity. The establishment move on parallel lines, before they intersect. The second is candidate would lose. But votes will be cast by MPs and the more important battle ahead: The next General Election. MLAs; roughly, the polity. Since the political class is in disar- Mulayam has been totally transparent. He held a parliamenray, the Presidential poll cannot be in array. No one is in com- tary party meeting to choose his candidates for a Lok Sabha mand of numbers. The Congress, for reasons best known to campaign. He wants them early. He knows that time can itself, assumed that it could live above the reach of growing only diminish his prospects. If UPA cannot get its candidate public anger and still control events by a wave of Mrs Sonia as President, the Government cannot survive. This is only the first, if dramatic, Gandhi's magic wand. Mulayam SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com bit of evidence of the impact that a Singh Yadav and Mamata Banerjee Mulayam-Mamata partnership can have drained the magic out of this have on Indian politics. Their first wand by telling Congress that omobjective is to make Congress yesnipotence may work with gods, but terday's story. Their second is to is not sustainable in human affairs. win between 60 and 70 seats in a Nothing is an accident in politics. 2013 poll, and, with help from President Abdul Kalam's name did smaller parties, form a bloc of not emerge from a conjurer's hat. 100 or more MPs. This will give The leaders of the coup that stunned them decisive bargaining power in Congress and maimed UPA knew that the next alliance. NDA wanted to re-elect Kalam but did Mulayam left Lucknow to son not have the ability which is why it Akhilesh not because of age, but used silence as strategy. They have because he has Delhi in his sights. placed dynamite under UPA, since Kalam is the one person Congress UPA can pretend that this is busicannot accept except under huge ness as usual, and the PM blithely duress. The fuse is with Mulayam continue on his 10-day tour to the and the matchbox with Mamata. more exotic parts of the world, but They also have a pretty decent his Government has become about We are witnessing the play for not argument. Kalam brings both conas fragile as that of Deve Gowda or just one election, but for two. The sensus and stature to the table. Inder Gujral after Congress withstrategies move on parallel lines, Another significant UPA partner, drew its support. When democracy before they intersect. The second slides off into confusion, there is DMK, cannot ignore the fact that he is the more important battle ahead: only one solution: more democracy. is Tamil, just as five years ago Shiv The next General Election. Sena could not ignore the fact that Time for fresh elections. I

I

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

50

