Pro file EMRAAN HASHMI

ASTAR IS REBORN
By Nishat Bari

He's chased women and money, been twisted and tacky. Now Bollywood's favourite B-list hit machine has finally gained artistic respectability.
by his detractors," says uncle and mentor Mahesh Bhatt. Hashmi has come a long way from the time he turned up on the sets of Yeh Zindagi Ka Safar for a trial photo shoot with Ameesha Patel in 2001. "He looked petrified, like a rabbit caught in the glare of headlights," says Bhatt. This was even before Footpath, his first film, barely two months into a six-month acting course with Roshan Taneja. A `directionless' Hashmi was brought to work by Bhatt to Vishesh Films where he tried his hand at everything from editing to scripting and directing. The son of an Air India employee, he was studying BCom from Sydenham College with vague ideas about doing an MBA, but attended five lectures in five years. The fifth time, he was thrown out of class for chewing gum. He studied in Maneckji Cooper School in Juhu. Most of his friends have known him for over 25 years and live in Pali Hill near his home. Instead of attending college, he hung out with them at Marine Drive where Not Just

E

mraan Hashmi, 33, is quite the onscreen scumbag-- pimp, conman, thug, with a taste for married women. His reel life has him constantly embroiled in drugs, mafia, guns, with frequent breaks to fall into bed with comely co-stars, his characters streaked with grey and bordering on psychotic. "I burned down my backyard as a seven-year-old. I poured kerosene over dried leaves and set the whole place on fire, just for fun," he says sitting in his sprawling Bandra home. "Yeah, not a very normal thing to do," he muses before going on to explain that this streak may be the reason why he plays such twisted characters in films. On another occasion, he organised a mud fight with his friends the day after their building was painted and got away with just an apology letter to the society. His eyes glint at the memory now, but he was sulking just a few days ago when Shanghai premiered at the

International Indian Film Academy awards in Singapore and he sat at home with the flu courtesy a six-day multi city tour, his packed bags mocking him. But he can't be too upset, not when his character Jogi Parmar has got even the sternest critics to sit up and take note of the man they once dismissed as a serial kisser. He went through gruelling theatre workshops with Atul Mongia to get into the mind of a character with low self-esteem, gained 10 kilos to trade in his six-pack for an unsightly potbelly, and spent over an hour daily on sets getting the make-up, moustache and hair right to transform into a sleazy small-town videographer with ugly teeth. Director Dibakar Banerjee's political thriller has given him the final leg up to the mainstream, a space he has steadily been inching closer to since portraying Shoaib Khan in Once Upon A Time In Mumbaai. A space that had eluded him in spite of the success of Murder 1 and 2 and Jannat 1 and 2. "There is no denying that he was declared dead on arrival

KISS SELL

&
Murder (2004)
Budget Rs 4 crore Revenue Rs 20 crore
Embarked on his epic journey of an onscreen low life as Sunny, a philanderer with a penchant for married women. The necking and kissing with costar Mallika Sherawat set the stage for his serial-kisser tag.

Dubbed B grade, Emraan Hashmi has had some top class money spinners.A hero of the masses, he has been making effort to woo the classes.

Once Upon A Time in Mumbaai (2010)
Budget Rs 32 crore Revenue Rs 78.5 crore
Stepped out of the comfort zone of the Bhatt banner and into the shoes of Mumbai's most feared gangster as Shoaib Khan. He stood his ground next to Ajay Devgn and showed that he could do more than just kiss the girls.

The Dirty Picture (2011)
Budget Rs 18 crore Revenue Rs 117 crore
Even though he played second fiddle to Vidya Balan as Abraham, a film director, he got his own song and even kissed the star. Ironically he played a filmmaker who was against using a woman's body to draw in the crowds.

Jannat 2 (2012)
Budget Rs 18 crore Revenue Rs 43 crore
He played to the gallery as Sonu Dilli, better known as kutti kameeni cheez. A petty arms dealer and police informer, he has plenty of time to canoodle with his gorgeous girl in between running a pirated CD store.

Shanghai (2012)
Budget Rs 10 crore Revenue Rs 15 crore on
opening weekend Turned his onscreen image on its head playing a down-at-heel videographer who looks as seedy as his work. He's Jogi Parmar, a pot-bellied occasional pornographer with an unlikely conscience. The critics are still reeling.
MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Pro file EMRAAN HASHMI
Jazz By The Bay was a favourite as was the nightclub Athena in Colaba. Then Bhatt offered him a role in Footpath, thinking he may have the gene since his grandmother Purnima Verma was an actor. Parveen Shahani, who is now his wife, and his friends laughed when he told them. "It's been a complete accident. I never intended to be an actor," he says. The first time in front of the camera was `scary as hell' even though he had done television ads as a child. "There was the fear of being judged and the feeling that you are not prepared," he says. That fear was why he changed his name from Emran Hashmi to Farhan. An astrologer gave him two options, Farhan or an extra `a' in Emran. Footpath flopped and he became Emraan. A slump and string of flops between 2005 and 2006 has ensured the fear persists. "In school I swore I would never wear rings but this is where I am at right now," he says, holding up his hand to show four jewelled rings. He has had four hits since he acquired them so they may stay. Bhatt introduced him to the industry and stood by his side, helping him battle his insecurities and encouraging him in his struggle. "For a long time he was extremely conscious of his body not conforming to the bogus standards of the image of a hero," says the filmmaker. But the two weren't always close. While growing up, Bhatt was the uncle Hashmi saw on rare occasions while it was cousins Sunny and Pooja he spent time with. The other memory is of watching Bhatt direct Sanjay Dutt and Raj Babbar in Kabzaa (1988) at his other apartment (Hashmi, his parents, wife and son occupy two apartments on different floors in the same building). "That was the first time I saw him direct a film in my house. I remember he used to sit on the floor and direct." Bhatt didn't want Hashmi to play Shoaib Khan in Once Upon A Time In Mumbaai, which was a huge turning point in his career. "This country confuses roles with the actors and I didn't want him to play Dawood Ibrahim." But a stubborn Hashmi went ahead with the film. "I knew the palette of the film, something that Bhatt Sahab probably didn't know as I had heard the narration." Work started pouring in from good production houses and from directors he had always wanted to work with. And now with Shanghai, he says "people never expected to see me in a character like this, never thought I could pull it off". For all his insecurities, Hashmi has immense mass appeal. "There is hysteria wherever he goes," says director Milan Luthria. He attributes Hashmi's appeal to his "naughtiness". "It appeals to the common man who leads a life bound by convention. They like to see a man who can steal a kiss from a girl once in a while, who can play a rogue who has a way with women. It appeals to the Indian libido," says Luthria. He is an imperfect hero for our flawed times. There is a downside. He can no longer go to his favourite college destination, Goa, and walk into a restaurant; he cannot walk down the streets where he roamed till 10 years ago. But the plus side is lots of money "which is great so I don't mind making that sacrifice". He has reportedly raised his fees to Rs 10 crore a film. For all his lazy, bad boy onscreen image, Hashmi is a thorough professional. "His life is deceptive," says Luthria. He looks casual about his work but he comes prepared. He prefers to be given the complete script so he can prepare for his role, learn his lines and get an understanding of his character. He has a tremendous sense of humour and he is a recluse. He is emotionally close to his friends and family but not demonstrative. And he remains a simple man, a non actor in his real life. "I haven't changed in the last seven or eight years," says Hashmi. But he is still the man best known for bedding the beauties on screen. Filming erotic scenes has got better with practice. "It's like shooting any other film although it is a bit unnerving as it is a very personal thing and you have to do it with either a stranger or someone you may not know too well," he says. Being `fairly liberal' about sensuality may have helped make his work easier but there are new responsibilities now that he is a father. His twoyear-old son Ayaan already recognises his father on television and in the papers and dances to all his songs. Hashmi is not too worried about his son growing up and discovering the serial-kisser tag. "By the time he grows up what we are doing now will seem pretty tame." I

REEL STAR
Comedian, journalist, magician. Coming soon to a theatre near you.

Rush
Hashmi is an investigative journalist in the crime thriller. The film by late director Shamin Desai also stars Neha Dhupia and Sagarika Ghatge.

Raaz 3
He's back to the family fold with a romance vampire horror thriller with Bipasha Basu and Bhatt discovery Esha Gupta.

Ghanchakkar
Paired opposite Vidya Balan in Rajkumar Gupta's comedy, he is a former con artist who gets conned himself.

Ek Thi Daayan
In Vishal Bhardwaj and Ekta Kapoor's supernatural psychological thriller, Hashmi is a deluded magician. Keeping him company will be Konkana Sen Sharma, Kalki Koechlin and Huma Qureshi.

Untitled
An untitled Dharma Productions film directed by Rensil D'Silva

76

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

