Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

THEY KILLED THE GROWTH GENIE
fter declining by 3.5 percent in March, industrial growth gasped for life at 0.1 perA cent in April. The magnificent genie of India's economic growth has died. It was, in fact, murdered. The Government says the Greeks did it. Perhaps the Government should call in its favourite investigating agency, CBI, to prove that charge. The CBI, after all, specialises in nailing the Government's chosen enemies while letting the real wrongdoers off the hook. No, the Greeks did not kill India's economy. The Government has a second trail that leads to Writers' Building in Kolkata. Mamata Banerjee killed the growth genie, it suggests. Mamata may yet claim full responsibility for the murder in one of her frequent moments of insanity. But no, Mamata Banerjee did not kill India's economy. The Congress-led UPA Government did. It would be easy to put Pranab Mukherjee's name on the top of the list of accused. As finance minister, he has presided over the sharply deteriorating macroeconomic environment and sharp slowdown in economic growth. It would be equally easy to put Sonia Gandhi's name alongside his. Her insistence on grandiose spending schemes, allegedly bound to alleviate the poverty of India's most wretched, have driven the Government close to a 1991-style bankruptcy--a scenario which ought to have been confined to the dustbin of history. To be fair, neither Sonia nor Pranab hide their left-of-centre leanings. For them, economics is subservient to the political cause. They believe populism wins elections. History will judge their calculus harshly. But history will be much harsher on what was once called the "dream team" of economic reform and economic growth--Manmohan Singh, P. Chidambaram, Montek Singh Ahluwalia and C. Rangarajan. None of them has stood up to be counted either in UPA 1 or UPA 2. Contrary to popular perception, the Prime Minister can take a stand. On the nuclear deal, the Prime Minister stood up for what he believed in, at the risk of losing his Government. On economic reform, he has shown no such inclination. Chidambaram, finance minister in UPA 1, could have used the global boom to push reform, particularly the curtailing of wasteful subsidies--it is easier to be tough when the going is good. But he did not. Instead, he fuelled UPA's reckless spending spree. Montek Singh Ahluwalia has had the longest tenure ever as head of the Planning Commission. Instead of reorienting the moribund commission to become an intellectual force that builds popular consensus for economic reform, he has spent his time tinkering with poverty lines and, more recently, redoing the commission's toilets. Chairman of the Prime Minister's Council of Economic Advisers, C. Rangarajan, has constantly obsessed with his former remit as RBI governor, forcing his protégé D. Subbarao to raise interest rates to ridiculously high levels in a failed attempt to curb inflation. The private sector has choked to near death. The lure of being in office has turned the "dream team" into willing participants in the murder of the growth genie. There may, of course, be life after death. But for the economy to be reborn, it would take political leadership of the quality, cunning and stature of a P.V. Narasimha Rao or an Atal Bihari Vajpayee. The UPA has only political midgets. Rest in peace Growth Genie, until 2014.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

FOR THE ECONOMY TO BE REBORN, IT WOULD TAKE POLITICAL LEADERSHIP OF THE QUALITY, CUNNING AND STATURE OF A P.V. NARASIMHA RAO OR AN ATAL BIHARI VAJPAYEE. THE UPA HAS ONLY POLITICAL MIDGETS.

S I G N P OSTS
WON The French Open mixed doubles title, by Mahesh Bhupathi and Sania Mirza. Bhupathi and Mirza MIRZA (LEFT); beat the BHUPATHI MexicanPolish pair of Santiago Gonzalez and Klaudia Jans16
INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

Ignacik in straight sets. The win is their third Grand Slam together. WON Gold in Thailand Open, by Saina Nehwal. She defeated Thailand's Ratchanok Inthanon in the final of the event in Bangkok. The 22-yearold beat Inthanon 19-21 21-15 21-10 for her second title of the year.

SUSPENDED Public sector undertaking Bharat Earth Movers Ltd (BEML) chairman VRS Natarajan, by the defence ministry on a CBI recommendation that is probing the Tatra military trucks supply deal. The official denied any guilt and asserted he would come clean.

NOMINATED Chandigarhborn Indian-American Srikanth `Sri' Srinivasan as federal judge, by US President Barack Obama. The US court of appeals post SRINIVASAN is "often called the nation's second-highest court".

NEW

