BRINGING WORLD CLASS MEDICAL CARE WITHIN REACH
t was like any other day, for Murali a 35 year old executive as he was driving backf rom his work place in his car on the Neelambur bye-pass road, nearCoimbatore. In a split second, everything changed as a speeding truck rammed into his car. His world went blank. The next few minutes would decide whether he would live at all. It depended on Dr. Nalla G Palaniswami Chairman - KMCH the network of ambulances and the initial response from the Kovai Medical Centerand Hospital's (KMCH) Critical Care Unit. A team of radiologists waiting at the CCU rushed Murali to the CT Scan centre. The news was not all that good. The scan showed that his pelvis was shattered, his liver was split into two and he was bleeding actively into the abdomen. Before attempting anything, the first hurdle now was to quickly identify the site of bleeding and stop it. In the next 20 minutes, he was wheeled into a complex angiographic suite and the bleeding site showed up on the angiogram. A team of minimally invasive radiologists, also called interventional radiologists quickly blocked the bleeding. In the next 45 minutes, Murali's blood pressure stabilized. The Orthopedicians then fixed up the fractured pelvis and surgeons stitched up the torn liver. Murali recovered a mere six weeks after the accident and lived to tell the tale. The treatment that Murali received is on par with the best available in the world. A combination of interventional radiologists, general surgeons, orthopaedic surgeons and a well established critical care centre all worked together to save Murali, one of the many lives that have been saved at KMCH. Dr.NallaG Palaniswami, Chairman, KMCH says, "I had a dream of an international quality hospital in India inspired by my exposure to global quality health care as a medical professional in the US. KMCH is a magn if icient realization of that dream." Indian Healthcare needs.. The relevance of KMCH is evident as our healthcare sector has started experiencing a marked shift in disease patterns and a growing need for healthcare infrastructure. We need more hospitals which offer preventive & comprehensive healthcare, more beds per hospital and more balanced doctor-patient ratios. On a personal level, more than anything else, we need the reassurance that our loved ones, irrespective of the nature of illness, will be offered the best possible medical care available by the hospital of our choice. Today KMCH has emerged as a 700 bed multi disciplinary super specialty hospital with 50 medical disciplines and 20 state of the art operation theatres which provide specialized medical attention through qualified care givers. The best of equipments in each field such as Varian Trilogy Linear Accelerator, the world's most advanced PET-CTScan,3TMRI, 500 slice Volume CT Scanner, Endo Bronchial Ultra Sound (EBUS), Bi Plane Cath Lab and Computer Assisted Navigation for surgeries make the best healthcare possible.

I

The hospital has over 150 internationally renowned full time specialists, 250 post graduate medical professionals and over 1500 paramedical, patient relations and administrative staff who take total care of the patients 24x7. Super specialty procedures like Open heart surgeries, Valve replacement, Kidney transplants, Cancer surgeries, Hip and Knee replacements, Complex Brain surgeries and Advanced Spine surgeriesaredone regularly atthe hospital. Cancer, the killer disease: Cancer, which in many cases is preventable and curable, if detected early, continues to be a killer disease. According to Free Press Release as of Feb 2011, "12 million people are affected by cancer in India. 55% of cancers are preventive and 65% of cancers are detected only in the third and fourth stages delaying treatment." Comprehensive Cancer Center Awareness, early detection, treatment and palliative care are all under one roof at the Comprehensive Cancer Center at KMCH headed by Dr. V. Kannan. The center offers latest treatments in following oncology fields Radiation Oncology - RapidArc therapy with IMRT / IGRT, Stereotactic Radio Surgery (SRS) & Radiotherapy (SRT), Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy (SBRT) & 4D breathing adapted IGRT / IMRT treatment - Substantially benefits the patient with high tumour dose and significant reduction in radiation side effects. Treatment duration can be drastically shortened to 10-14 days with SBRT (Compared to usual 6-8 weeks of treatments). Brachytherapy - A highly specialised form of radiation therapy in which the radioactive source is kept inside the applicator, kept in the tumour area. Intra operative brachytherapy using very high precision focal radiation done here is practised only in few centres in the world. Medical Oncology uses a wide range of chemotherapies and targeted treatments for solid tumours & hematological malignancies. An exclusive day care center enables treatment without admission. The Scalp Cooling System for Chemotherapy greatly helps to prevent hair loss. Nuclear Medicine - The latest whole body PET CT Scan is available for cancer staging. Iodine | radioisotope for diagnosis and treatment for thyroid disorders / malignancies and SPECT for bone metastasis are done.

Surgical Oncology - The center routinely performs the entire range of cancer surgeries like head and neck surgery, surgery for brain tumours, gastrointestinal and genitourinary cancers, sarcomas, lung tumours and breast cancer surgery including Breast Conservation and reconstructive procedures. Amazing journey through blood vessels Non-invasive procedures, interventional radiology and brain aneurysms : Interesting medical and technological breakthroughs have made possible what was unheard of a few decades back. A clot in a blood vessel in the brain, an aneurysm meant trauma, pain and open surgery - opening the skull with all its implications. Today interventional radiologists at KMCH handle this complication with ease and without surgery. The Interventional radiology department under Dr.Mathew Cherian have been performing their medical miracles using sophisticated imagingguidance. The Radiology department The department of Radiology delivers patient information to enable accurate diagnosis an effective treatment with the help of sophisticated equipments like 3T MRI scanner, 500 Volume CT Scan, MAM MO MAT Digital Mammography, Ultra sound machines and digital x-rays to help precise diagnosis. MAGNETOM Skyra 3T MRI delivers superior image quality with accurate results. Rising Cardiac ailments : As India gears up to join the developed western economies taking advantage of its demographic window of opportunity, the young working population is beginning to feel the stress with changes in lifestyle and work culture. The king of stress related ailments, heart problems have started surfacing at an earlier age for the working adults. Over the years, KMCH's Cardiology and Cardiothoracic initiatives have sharpened and become more focused on prevention, management and treatment of heart-related ailments. Department of Cardiology The Cardiology Department provides a continuum care for the prevention, treatment, recovery & rehabilitation of heart and vascular diseases. It is a pioneer institute in introducing quality cardiology procedures in South India at a time when cardiac surgery was considered the only solution for treatment of serious heart ailments. KMCH is one among the first few hospitals in India to offer 24/7 Primary PCI program. Cardiology Day Care Center, CCU and Cath Lab provide state of the art care to achieve the WHO goal of "door to needle & door to balloon" in Coronary Revascularisation therapy. Diagnostics facilities include 500 Slice coronary CT, Left and right heart Catheter Studies, Coronary and Peripheral Angiography, Echo (Echocardiography), ETT (Exercise Treadmill Test), TEE (TransEsophageal Echocardiogram) & Ultrasound. Various therapeutic procedures such as Coronary Angioplasty, Stenting, ASD & PDA Closure and Pacemaker Implantation are done here. Valvuloplasty-Mitral, Aortic & Pulmonary are carried out regularly.

Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery The department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery has been serving people since 1993 with Prof (Dr) V. Nandakumar as the head. The department has 3 well equipped cardiac theatres and one theater exclusively for thoracic surgery and Endoscopy. Post operative intensive care area has 8 beds, experienced critical care nurses, ultra modern facilities and central monitoring with automatic incident report recording facility which improves the quality of patient care. A unique feature is that patients in the wards are also linked to the central monitor which is constantly monitored by specialists in cardiac ICU. Cardiothoracic Surgical department has performed over 750 major cardiac and thoracic operations during last year. Two thirds of the cases are coronary artery bypass surgery. 95% of the coronary artery bypass surgeries are done off pump without the use of heart lung machine. This has great advantages over conventional surgery using heart lung machine. Redo CABG, Carotid Endarterectomy, Excision of Cardiac tumours, Valve repairs and repairing aortic aneurysms are done with extremely good results comparable to the best centers in the world. Other surgical procedures such as closure of ASD and VSD, intracardiac repair of Tetralogy of Fallot, division and suture of PDA, repair of coarctation and aortofemoral bypass are done. The entire thoracic range of surgical procedures carried out in this department which includes Mediastinoscopy, Tracheal reconstruction, Lobectomy / Pneumonectomy, Thoracoscopic lung biopsy and Diaphragmatic Hernia repair. Neurosurgery The department caters to the needs of neuro and spinal trauma victims with a dedicated intensive care unit and specialized neuroanaesthesia dept. Brain tumor surgeries, neurovascular skull base surgeries, key hole brain surgeries, microscopic spinal discetomy are regularly done at KMCH with latest hitech equipments like Operating microscope, Midas Rex Drill system and Steriotactic equipment. Kidney Transplantation The Department of Nephrology under Dr.Vivek Pathak has pioneered the break through steroid free kidney transplantation technique & performs one of the largest number of successful kidney transplants in the region with minimum post operative complications. KMCH - Making Medical Tourism happen KMCH has always been one of the few early adopters of specialty treatments. Today KMCH has a stream of patients from various parts of India and from across the seas who get international quality care in areas of highly specialised surgeries at an affordable cost. Dr. Nalla G Palaniswami, Chairman KMCH states, "Apart from global quality medical attention, we give them a warm and healthy ambience for pleasant recovery." If today Coimbatore has a prominent place in the healthcare map of India, a significant credit for the same goes to KMCH.

KJM C H

KOVAI MEDICAL CENTER AND HOSPITAL

Avanashi Road,Coimbatore - 641014 Ph: 0422 3083800,4323800,801,802, E-mail: kmch@vsnl.com www.kmchhospitals.com

