EXCLUSIVE

The Big Story

BHINDRANWALE MEMORIAL

The Man Who SawBhindranwale Dead
Bhindranwale has been resurrected as an icon but not a rallying point for sectarianism
arnail Singh Bhindranwale had a clear bullet on the left side of his forehead. There was a second, visible injury, a fracture, on his right shin. His leg dangled at an impossible angle," says a former Indian Army officer who walked into Amritsar's Golden Temple Complex on the morning of June 6, 1984. Then a young major deployed with the armoured brigade at Amritsar, Col Gurinder Singh Ghuman, 60, vividly remembers seeing the lifeless body of the man who had inspired thousands of Sikhs in challenging the might of the Indian state through deadly and armed resistance just hours earlier. "He lay just inside the Clock Tower Entrance on a large slab of ice," the officer recalls. On the white marble floor besides Bhindranwale lay his two most trusted lieutenants--the All India Sikh Students Federation (AISSF) chief Bhai Amrik Singh and Thara Singh. "There wasn't much blood and it was as if they were asleep," he said. All three were dressed in surprisingly clean chogas (long kurtas) but none had his turban. Ghuman and his 2-IC, Captain Arvind Bhardwaj, proceeded down the short flight of stairs into the temple complex where further horrors awaited. The parikrama (walkway around the pool) was grimy and littered with bodies. In the long verandahs fringing the walkway, the officer and his colleague saw "what must have been

REMEMBRANCE OFTHINGS PAST
SITE OFCONTENTION
The three-storeyed monument will be prominently positioned on a 30x30 ft plot near the Akal Takht

J

Pool of nectar

Harmandir Sahib

SITE OF PROPOSED MEMORIAL
Main entrance

30 to 40 bodies in a bloody heap." A damaged APC (armoured personnel carrier) had been pushed to one side of the parikrama and Ghuman remembers seeing two Vijayanta tanks of the 16 Cavalry inside the complex: "One was stuck after the marble floor collapsed under it and the other was positioned near the langar building. Their cannons were still pointed towards the Akal Takht." The officers counted over a hundred dead civilians on the walkway. Though just past 11 a.m., the bodies were already starting to decompose. "One could smell death and gunpowder but this seemed to be overpowered by the smell of excreta and urine," he recalls, alluding to the long siege before the Army gained control of the shrine. On the night intervening June 7 and 8, Ghuman received orders to secure the cremation ground where 68 bodies he had seen inside the temple complex were consigned to fire. Around 3 a.m. on June 8, a Punjab Police patrol led by one Inspector S.P. Singh brought the bodies of Bhindranwale, Amrik Singh and Thara Singh. "The three were accorded a funeral in accordance with Sikh rites. A granthi recited an ardas and everyone stood with folded hands," Ghuman said. That was the end of Bhindranwale's life but not his memory. Col Ghuman is an advocate at Punjab and Haryana High Court in Chandigarh

Langar

BHINDRANWALE WITH HIS SUPPORTERS, NEAR THE GOLDEN TEMPLE

By Asit Jolly

ARTIST'S IMPRESSION OFTHE MEMORIAL

hallughara Diwas ("Sikh Holocaust Day") on June 6 drew an unprecedented 3,000 Sikh men and women to the Golden Temple complex in Amritsar. The annual remembrance service for the victims of Operation Bluestar held a special significance this year. The five Singh Sahibs, or high priests of Sikhism, unveiled the foundation stone for a memorial for Jarnail

G

Singh Bhindranwale and his armed fighters, killed during the Army assault on the shrine in June 1984. "Sikhs have paid for this most precious piece of earth with their blood," says Tarlochan Singh, 27, the only son of Bhai Amrik Singh, All India Sikh Students Federation (AISSF) chief who died alongside Bhindranwale during Operation Bluestar. Muktsar Tarlochan, a computer science teacher at the Government High School in Bhuttiwala and Bhindranwale's 40-year-old son Isher Singh, a Jalan-

dhar-based property dealer, are the faces of a rapidly resurfacing cult that identifies its heroes among slain Kalashnikov-toting militants. That morning, Akal Takht Jathedar Gurbachan Singh presented them with shawls and siropas (traditional short turbans) alongside other militant kin including Bhai Amrik Singh's wife Gurmeet Kaur and Piar Kaur, mother of Indira Gandhi's assassin Satwant Singh. The cleric conferred the title of zinda shaheed (living martyr) upon Balwant Rajoana, a Babbar Khalsa International

militant awaiting death sentence for the August 1995 assassination of Punjab chief minister Beant Singh and 17 others. A day earlier on June 5, the Dal Khalsa, proscribed as a separatist, militant outfit from 1982 until 1994, also celebrated the construction of the Bhindranwale memorial. Close to 40,000 lives were lost in Punjab over a decade-and-a-half, ending with the Beant Singh assassination. These included nearly 2,000 police and security personnel and more than 8,000 militants and Khalistani sympathisers.

Terrorists pulled civilians out of trains and buses and shot them at point-blank range. Of the civilian toll, more than 60 per cent were Sikh. A multitude of websites, including pages on social networking sites such as Facebook, hosted by Khalistani sympathisers abroad, seek to project Bhindranwale as a "defender" of Sikhism and its holiest shrine. They wilfully gloss over the venomous violence--targeted assassinations, random killings, indiscriminately gunned down bus and train passen-

30

6 ft

30 ft

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

31

new

new

The Big Story
September 1981
Lala Jagat Narain,
former Congress minister and editor of the Hind Samachar Group of Newspapers, is shot.

BHINDRANWALE MEMORIAL

BHINDRANWALE'S KILLING FIELDS
October 5,1983
Eight Hindus on a Punjab Roadways bus are singled out and shot near Dhilwan. President's Rule is imposed.

The face of the sepa ratist movement for Khalistan led a brief but eventful life.His malevolence continued after his death.
PRAMOD PUSHKARNA/www.indiatodayimages.com

June 1-6,1984
Indian Army storms Golden Temple code-named Operation Bluestar. Bhindranwale and close aides killed.

June 23,1985
Bomb planted by Babbar Khalsa militants on board Air India flight kills 329 people.

July 1988
73 people are killed in bomb attacks over three days--two in Amritsar and one each in Kurukshetra and Delhi's Tilak Nagar.

April 25,1983
Ajit Singh Atwal, a
Punjab Police DIG is shot dead on the stairway leading to the Golden Temple's Clock Tower entrance.
BHAWAN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

August 1985
Harchand Singh Longowal,
Shiromani Akali Dal president is gunned down.

June 15,1991
Militants massacre 82 passengers on board two trains. 52 killed at Baddowal and 30 outside Qila Raipur.

August 1995
Beant Singh,
Congress leader and Punjab chief minister is killed in a bomb blast.

BUS PASSENGERS MURDERED BY MILITANTS NEAR HOSHIARPUR IN 1986

LT GEN (RETD) KULDEEP SINGH BRAR,
who led Operation Bluestar in 1984.

KANWARPAL SINGH,
General Secretary, Dal Khalsa

KPS GILL,
Former Punjab Police Chief

32

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

``

``

``

gers--orchestrated from the Golden Temple, by the very man they want to resurrect as an iconic hero. Emotions still run high. "The construction of the memorial is a major breakthrough towards fulfilling the ideals of Sant Bhindranwale," says Dal Khalsa's 45-year-old General Secretary Kanwarpal Singh, a former militant who spearheaded a concerted 14-year-long campaign to resurrect the Khalistani chieftain as a popular religious and political icon in the Sikh psyche. Since its revival as an overground political organisation on August 6, 1998, with Khalistan as its stated objective, Dal Khalsa used generous cash contributions from sympathisers in the UK, US and Canada to mount a Goebbelsian propaganda campaign. "We employed every trick we could think of," says Kanwarpal, evidently fearless of repercussions that the very mention of Khalistan could invite just over a decade ago. Seminars, stickers, T-shirts with Bhindranwale's images, "we used anything and everything that could make his memory a part of the popular consciousness in Punjab", he admits, now ensconced in the air conditioned comfort of Freedom House, Dal Khalsa's headquarters adjacent to Amritsar's railway station. Stirred from their long and complacent stupor, the pat-your-own-chest `all

is well' variety, Punjab's politicians typically failed to note the developments in Amritsar. This until it became politically expedient to respond ahead of the municipal elections this month. On June 7, the Union Ministry of Home Affairs shot off a letter to Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal advising action against the radical elements behind the setting up of the memorial. Closer home in Chandigarh, Punjab Congress chief Amarinder Singh condemned the proposal, insisting it would "revive fear and create communal divisions". Relatively muted in its response, BJP, which partners the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) in ruling the state, merely said the memorial was "inadvisable" and "best avoided". Deputy Chief Minister Sukhbir Badal, widely seen as the man running the government in Punjab, was deliberately ambiguous. Besides attributing the venture to the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC), Sukhbir Badal refused to be drawn in by reporters in Ludhiana and Jalandhar on June 6. Almost the entire SAD leadership kept away from the events championing militancy in the Golden Temple. "None of this could be happening without the approval of the Punjab government," says Lakshmi Kanta Chawla, the firebrand BJP politician

from Amritsar and former state health minister, known to speak her mind, often at the cost of offending her own party colleagues. "What else can you expect in a state where the chief minister, his son and daughter-in-law go to plead mercy for a terrorist," she adds, alluding to the clemency appeal Parkash Singh Badal submitted to President Pratibha Patil ahead of Rajoana's scheduled hanging on March 31, which was stayed following the appeal. Sitting in her two-room home in Old Amritsar's Tunda Talab locality, Chawla is worried. She sees the glorification of Bhindranwale as part of a dangerous conspiracy to revive the Khalistan movement. She says, "Before the building of any memorial, this country will have to decide who its

martyrs are. How can a vinashak (destroyer), the murderer of hundreds of innocent people be a shaheed?" Thirty kilometres north of Amritsar at Chowk Mehta, the custodians of the Damdami Taksal, a Sikh seminary once headed by Bhindranwale, view things quite differently. "The yadgaar (memorial) is a tribute to men who sacrificed their lives defending Harmandir Sahib," says Baba Harnam Singh Khalsa, 44, the incumbent Taksal chief who is entrusted with constructing the controversial monument. The stoutly radical Taksal aligned with the SAD to help it win the SGPC polls in September 2011. The latter's endorsement of the Bhindranwale memorial is widely viewed as a quid pro quo. Delighted at the prospect of finally being allowed to honour the memory of

his mentor, Harnam Singh insists that rather than the memorial, it was the continuing opposition from sections within the BJP and Congress that could vitiate the atmosphere in Punjab by arousing communal passions. "These people must stop playing politics over what is a purely religious venture." But mindful of the hostility, he is anxious to get the job finished possibly well before the 18-month construction plan given by architects appointed by SGPC. "There is no dearth of resources for the project. Even Hindu families are contributing," he claims, offering a perusal of the receipt books. Former Punjab Police chief KPS Gill, 75, however sees little possibility of militancy piggybacking on the machinations of overground radical outfits. "These people are insignificant and

``

We don't have a national war memorial to honour fallen Armymen and here we have a memorial being built to honour criminals and militants.

``

The construction of the memorial is a major breakthrough towards fulfilling the ideals of Bhindranwale.

``

These people are insignificant and must at best be treated with humour. The memorial is yet another means for the SGPC to collect money.

must at best be treated with humour," he says dismissing the Bhindranwale memorial as "yet another means for the SGPC to collect money." Gill believes that any governmental or political response would be tantamount to committing the same mistakes made in tackling Bhindranwale in 1984. In retrospect, the man deputed to arrest Bhindranwale at Chowk Mehta on September 20, 1981, agrees it was "rank mishandling by the state and Central governments" that helped build the Bhindranwale myth. Senior superintendent of police, Iqbal Singh, who sought voluntary retirement this January, however believes that Punjab is teetering precariously close to a revival of violence. There are currently more than 200 proclaimed offenders wanted for militancy-related crimes in Punjab. "That is easily four times the number of insurgents when violence first visited the state in the late 1970s and early 1980s," he points out. Ominously, the radicals are already talking of the "rapidly rising trust deficit between Amritsar and New Delhi". Dal Khalsa's Kanwarpal Singh says, "It would be a mistake to believe that Punjab is peaceful. It is only temporarily quiet." The people of the state can only hope it isn't the proverbial lull before the storm. I

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

33

