Cover Story PRESIDENTIALPOLL
By Priya Sahgal, Devesh Kumar

and Dhiraj Nayyar

TRAPPED INA CORNER
SONIA GANDHI IS OUTFLANKED BYA MULAYAM-MAMATA REVOLT THAT COULD DESTROY UPA 2
18
INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

AP PHOTO

(FROM LEFT) PRANAB MUKHERJEE, MANHOHAN SINGH AND SONIA GANDHI

onia Gandhi's first reaction was stunned silence. At 5.30 p.m. on June 13, Mamata Banerjee stepped out of what was a routine consultation with the Congress president at 10 Janpath and broke the code. She announced the Congress presidential candidates to the media, Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee and VicePresident Hamid Ansari. Then, an hour later, she had another press conference with Mulayam Singh Yadav at his 16 Ashoka Road home where they rejected both names. Instead, they offered their own slate, at the top of which was former president APJ Abdul Kalam. The other two were former speaker Somnath Chatterjee and, most embarrassingly for Congress, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. By proposing Kalam, who was also NDA's preferred though yet undeclared candidate, the duo trapped her. Sonia first mulled the candidature of the only Congressman in the Mulayam and Mamata (M&M) shortlist, but quickly realised it was not an option. The Prime Minister decided he was not going to move to Rashtrapati Bhavan. He knew, as Samajwadi Party (SP) spokesmen were pointing out on television debates, that it was a kick upstairs. The only way out for Sonia was to make Mukherjee, not her first choice, the Congress party's undisputed candidate. Then she informed Mukherjee. A second trap had closed in on her. Her strategy of playing one against the other had failed spectacularly. Those four hours between the M&M press conference and the Prime Minister's refusal to bail Sonia out alchemised Indian politics from dross to mid-term election sparkle. At 4.30 p.m.

S

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

19

NEW

NEW

Cover Story PRESIDENTIALPOLL
that afternoon, Sonia had invited Mamata to discuss UPA's candidate for president before an overseas break. A confident Sonia offered Mamata a choice: Mukherjee or Ansari. She expected Mamata to veto Mukherjee. Her gameplan clearly was to use Mamata to trump Mukherjee and promote Ansari, her personal preference. Mamata heard Sonia out during the 55-minute meeting and told her that she would discuss the names with Mulayam. By June 14, the game had changed yet again. Sonia met senior leaders of the party at 10 Janpath after which General Secretary Janardan Dwivedi announced that the party had rejected M&M's three names. Party leaders also hinted that they would soon be announcing their own candidate, Mukherjee. Mamata actually did her greatest nemesis a favour. Her shenanigans gave him something that he did not have earlier--a clear endorsement from the Congress. Now suddenly, it has become a matter of prestige for the Congress to ensure that Mukherjee scales Raisina Hill. If he doesn't get through, then the Government loses credibility. Which is why one of the first things that Sonia's political secretary Ahmed Patel did on the morning of June 14 was to arrange a meeting with Mulayam. The Congress has realised that its alliance with Mamata is over. It is now trying to break the Mamata-Mulayam axis. Despite Mamata's assertions to the contrary, Congress strategists say that it is only a matter of time before she withdraws support. The numbers are precarious. If Mulayam comes on board with his 21 MPs, UPA will lose the

MAMATA (LEFT) AND MULAYAM AT A PRESS CONFERENCE IN DELHI ON JUNE 13

candidate at the next General Elections. Political support is a perishable commodity; when aspirations are high, it rots very fast. Mulayam can hope to win a majority of Uttar Pradesh's 80 MPs if polls are held soon; by 2014 it might be another story. Clearly, his recent bout of U-turns will not endear him to the electorate. But they will certainly help bolster arch rival Mayawati's credibility. Even after meeting Ahmed Patel, the shrewd SP An electoral college consisting of the elected members of Parliament and the elected MLAs in states and UTs leader is keeping the Congress guessing. On the NDA (BJP+JDU+AD+SS) TOTAL NUMBER NDA UPA (Congress+TMC UPA (Congress+TMC+DMK+NCP+Allies) OFVOTES evening of June 14, Ram +DMK+NCP+Allies) (BJP+JDU+SAD+SS) Non-UPA/Non-NDA Smaller parties SP+ TMC BSP+ BJD+ JD(U) The number of votes (X) for each MLA depends on Gopal Yadav said that "midUPA (Congress+TMC+DMK+NCP+Allies) 10,98,882 Votes: 3,04,785 Votes: 2,62,408 Votes: 4,46,345 Votes: 71,498 Votes: 116,658 Votes: 114,993 the population of his/her state. X = Total population term elections should not be (5,49,408 of MPs and of state divided by number of MLAs divided by 1,000. 5,49,474 of MLAs) ruled out". Mulayam imme6% diately scheduled a meeting 4% THE WINNER MLAs from larger All MPs have an equal 24% 2% 28% with Mamata. In the mean6% NEEDS AT LEAST 41% states such as Uttar number of multiple votes 4% 3% time, the Congress set about Pradesh have more votes (Y). Y = Total numbers of all 5,49,442 doing something it should MLA votes divided by than MLAs from smaller votes states such as Manipur. number of MPs. have done much earlier-- right in the middle of the politicking for Rashtrapati Bhavan. He told his party to prepare for the next General Elections and told them that all the candidates for the 80 parliamentary UPA (Congress+TMC+DMK+NCP+Allies) seats would be finalised by August, two years before the elections are due in 2014. He is already the kingmaker. Now he would like to see how he can position himself as a prime ministerial

tacit support of Mayawati's 20 MPs. Not to mention Trinamool Congress's (TMC) chunk of 19 MPs. But Sonia has been left with little room for manoeuvre. Mulayam has realised this, and is playing both sides. On June 14, his cousin Ram Gopal Yadav was telling journalists how his party was not opposed to Mukherjee's candidature. "Dada has all the qualifications to become the president of India,'' he said. This came as an about-turn from the M&M press conference a day earlier.

Congress sources are hopeful of winning Mulayam over. But Mulayam has his own price tag, the most important being a clean chit from CBI in the 2007 disproportionate assets case-- which is pending in the Supreme Court. As Ram Gopal Yadav confided in a friend, "Inki zindagi mein yeh case hat jaaye toh achcha hoga (It would be nice if the case against Mulayam is dismissed during his lifetime). This is Mulayam's short-term goal. His long-term plan was revealed during an SP Parliamentary Party Board Meeting that took place on June 11,

MULAYAM IS ALREADY THE KINGMAKER. NOW HE WOULD LIKE TO SEE HOW HE CAN POSITION HIMSELFAS A PRIME MINISTERIAL CANDIDATE ATTHE NEXT GENERAL ELECTIONS.

WHO ELECTS THE PRESIDENT?

THE NUMBERS

BSP(4)+BJD(3)+JDU(2) UPA (Congress+TMC+DMK+NCP+Allies) NDA (BJP+JDU+AD+SS)

Graphic: SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

BSP(4)+BJD(3)+JDU(2) SP(6)+TMC(4)

SP(6)+TMC(4)

20

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

NDA (BJP+JDU+AD+SS)

NEW

NEW

MUKESH AMBANI Cover Story PRESIDENTIALPOLL

GOVERNMENTIN LIMBO
Absentee Prime Minister
The economist Prime Minister has switched off from the economy just when he is needed most. Industrial growth is close to zero and GDP growth has fallen below 6 per cent. But he prefers to spend time travelling abroad.
MANMOHAN

UPA 2 has travelled the arc in poor governance, from an economic slowdown to shoddy legal advice

HRD Minister faces heat from IITs
The HRD minister picked a battle against the IITs which he may lose. Instead of focusing on the more onerous task of expanding the education system, Sibal has lost political capital by intruding on the autonomy of institutions of excellence.
SIBAL

Law Minister fails in the court
The Supreme Court upheld an Andhra Pradesh High Court verdict quashing reservations for Muslims within the OBC category. Embarrassingly, Salman Khurshid's law ministry was ill-prepared to answer tough questions from the court.
KHURSHID

Pension Reform Bill deferred
The Pension Reform Bill was presented to the Cabinet on June 7, only to be deferred after a protest by the TMC. What could have been a positive signal to investors as a bold reform measure ended up dampening sentiments.
MUKHERJEE

building a consensus around its candidate's name. The fig leaf of Ansari was discarded. Sonia told her managers to build a consensus around Mukherjee. After a meeting with the Prime Minister shortly after noon at South Block, Mukherjee stepped out to meet the media and announced the latest inflation numbers for the month of May. As soon as he had finished his brief statement on inflation, reporters began to quiz him about UPA's presidential candidate. "That will be decided shortly," said Mukherjee ending the interaction. However, he went home and dialled Left Front leaders Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee and Biman Bose to solicit their support. Sonia herself began to do some lobbying. She met both NCP's Sharad Pawar and DMK'S T.R. Baalu at

her home. Both told her that their parties would support any candidate the Congress suggests. She also met Mukherjee, Digvijaya Singh, M.L. Fotedar, A.K. Antony and P. Chidambaram before driving to Race Course Road for a core committee meeting. The presidential elections are critical for the Government's survival. M&M control over 10 per cent of the total vote in the presidential college. The Congress holds only 30 per cent (see chart) but wields the power of a majority shareholder. Mamata and Mulayam want to alter the balance of power. Mamata said as much at an impromptu press conference outside her Baba Kharak Singh Marg home in Delhi on June 14: "I don't want early elections but I don't know what will

OFFICIALLY, BJP IS YET TO DECIDE ITS CANDIDATE BUT THE PARTY MAY WELL SUPPORT APJ KALAM. HE WAS NDA'S CHOICE FOR PRESIDENT IN 2002.
22

happen if UPA loses the elections." Together, M&M make a formidable alliance. The crafty Mulayam managed to lull the Congress into a false sense of security before he pulled the rug from under its feet. Mulayam used the West Bengal-based SP General Secretary Kiranmoy Nanda to open a channel with Mamata. Keeping in mind his future utility, Nanda was recently given a Rajya Sabha berth by Mulayam. The SP leader had also been in touch with BJP President Nitin Gadkari. The two met in mid-April and discussed Kalam's name. However, the plan went a bit awry when Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha, Sushma Swaraj, prematurely let the cat out of the bag. On May 1, she told the media that VicePresident Ansari lacked the "stature" to be president. Swaraj also hinted that BJP was open to a quid pro quo with regional parties like SP and Bahujan Samaj Party, as well as the Left, if they proposed someone like Kalam for pres-

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

NEW

Cover Story PRESIDENTIALPOLL
WAITING TO BE CANDIDATE WAITING TO BE PRESIDENT
gued that if the Congress had already finalised its presidential candidate and merely wanted her endorsement, she was not willing to oblige them. Sonia had to call her twice in the evening of June 11 to persuade her to visit Delhi. But the news from Mitra was not good. While Mukherjee, who was accompanied by Finance Secretary R.S. Gujral and other ministry officials, was willing to provide additional funds under various Central Government schemes, he was not willing to commit himself to the state government's demand for a three-year moratorium on repayment of a Rs 2 lakh crore loan from the Centre. The state has to pay Rs 22,000 crore annually to the Centre as interest. In practical terms, Mamata wants a Rs 22,000-crore special grant--in addition to the annual grant of around Rs 26,000 crore approved by the Planning Commission in April 2012--from the Centre in each of the next three financial years. According to a Trinamool Congress MP, this failure was the last straw.

APJ Abdul Kalam
Mulayam Singh Yadav and Mamata Banerjee's first choice, he should get BJP support as he was NDA's choice in 2002. When his name was proposed by some small parties in 2007, Kalam refused, saying he would only contest if there was a consensus.

Pranab Mukherjee
Mukherjee had made no secret of his ambition to be the next president. Sonia Gandhi finally named him as Congress's first choice. But his old foe Mamata Banerjee shot it down. He may yet be the unintended beneficiary of Sonia's reluctance.

ident and, in return, backed an NDA nominee for vice-president. Officially, BJP is yet to declare its view, but a senior party leader told INDIA TODAY that the party would support Kalam. The former president was NDA's choice in 2002. When Mamata dropped in to visit Mulayam on the evening of June 12, he brought up Kalam's name. Earlier in the day, BJP leader Jaswant Singh had called on Mulayam. The low-profile visit became public as it coincided with the tail-end of Baba Ramdev's meeting with Mulayam. Jaswant and Mulayam discussed Kalam's candidature. Mamata's relationship with Congress was already in tatters before she

reached the Capital. According to TMC sources, she arrived on June 12 in a rage. Yet another meeting between her Finance Minister, Amit Mitra, and Mukherjee on June 11 had proved infructuous. Mitra wanted more funds for West Bengal. "The Chief Minister has met Mukherjee 20 times and the Prime Minister at least 10 times, but to no avail," says a TMC MP with typical hyperbole. After his two-hour meeting with Mukherjee, Mitra called Mamata at 3.10 p.m. The West Bengal Chief Minister was sitting at her office in Writers' Buildings in Kolkata, having rejected an offer from Ahmed Patel to meet the Congress president. She ar-

he fracas at the top also reflects the rising anger at ground level. Disaffection is at a peak, creating pressure upon politicians who will have to pay the price. The UPA Government has presided over an unprecedented slowdown in economic growth and rampant inflation. Instead of delivering decisive action, governance continues to be in a state of disarray. On June 7, the Government botched up a desperate attempt to shore up investor confidence, when the reformist pension bill was brought to Cabinet only to be summarily deferred following a murmur of dissent from TMC. A busy finance minister, who has to pilot the bill, did not have the time to bring Mamata on board before the Cabinet meeting. The second rung of UPA's leadership has also failed entirely. Union Human Resource Development Minister Kapil Sibal has been locked in a bitter battle with the IITs over his decision to introduce a `one, nation, one examination' for engineering courses. Sibal claimed that he had arrived at a consensus with

T

24

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

NEW

Cover Story PRESIDENTIALPOLL
REUTERS

PASTTENSE
Congress, SP share a love-hate relationship
APRIL 1999 After the then A.B. Vajpayee government fell on the floor of the House, a confident Sonia Gandhi met then president K.R. Narayanan and laid claim to forming the next government. It was at this point that she made her famous "We have 272" claim to reporters. She had counted Mulayam's 20 MPs in her calculations. But Mulayam walked out soon after. MAY 2004 The Congress-led
UPA swept to power at the Centre. Mulayam Singh offered support of his 39 MPs but was rejected by the Congress. His then aide Amar Singh gatecrashed a UPA dinner at 10 Janpath along with the late H.S. Surjeet but was ignored.

JULY 2008 When the Left
SONIA (LEFT) AND RAHUL AT VIR BHUMI IN MAY 2012

WHILE SONIA IS BUSY BALANCING HER MEDICAL TREATMENT SCHEDULE WITH HER POLITICAL CALENDAR, RAHUL HAS TAKEN OFF FOR ANOTHER HOLIDAY ABROAD.
all IITs to redo their common entrance test and give weightage to Class XII exams in admission. The open rebellion that followed rubbished his claims and his legitimacy. On June 13, the Supreme Court turned down Law Minister Salman Khurshid's brainchild of a 4.5 per cent sub quota for Muslims within the 27 per cent OBC quota in higher educational institutions. A Supreme Court Bench of Justice K.S. Radhakrishnan and Justice J.S. Khehar asked difficult questions of the Government. The Government brief was unprepared, sparking Muslim anger. Says a senior bureaucrat, summing up the state of governance, "Nobody knows who is in charge. Everyone in the council of ministers is pulling in different directions. Bureaucrats are just waiting and watching." After M&M's combined comeuppance, they will do even less. Unfortunately for Sonia, the one solution to her problems is reluctant to step up. She has made it quite clear that her one political ambition is to hand over the party and Government to Rahul Gandhi. The idea of Manmohan as president and Rahul as prime minister has been suggested to her by more than one Congress MP. But from all accounts, Rahul does not seem to be interested. While his mother is busy balancing her medical treatment schedule with her political calendar, he has taken off for yet another holiday abroad. After the June 4 Congress Working Committee meeting, he went abroad. Congress sources say that while he did return from the trip, it was only a brief stopover--the general secretary packed his bags yet again, this time for a European destination. Andhra Pradesh is a headache that

stopped support to UPA 1 and moved a no-confidence motion against the government, the Congress turned to Mulayam for a bail-out. The SP leader bailed out UPA but was not invited to join the Congress-led government.

MARCH 2009 The Congress and SP explored a tie-up in Uttar Pradesh for the coming General Elections. Out of power in the state, the SP needed Congress support to stave off Mayawati. The Congress played hard to get and did not even include SP in UPA 2. NOVEMBER 2009 Akhilesh Yadav fielded wife Dimple in the Firozabad bypolls. Congress made this a prestige fight by pitching SP rebel Raj Babbar against her. Rahul campaigned for him and Dimple suffered an ignominious defeat. JUNE 2012 At first, Mulayam offered support for the Congress candidate for president. In return, the Congress did not field a candidate in the Kannauj by-election where Dimple was trying her luck. Dimple won unopposed on June 11. Two days later, Mulayam rejected the Congress list of nominees.

26

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

NEW

Cover Story PRESIDENTIALPOLL
PTI

DIDI'S DIKTATS
Ally Mamata has won most battles with the Congress
JULY 2011 In an unprecedented snub, then Trinamool Congress minister of state for railways Mukul Roy refused to follow Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's directive to visit the site of a rail accident in Assam. Roy insisted that since the Prime Minister was railway minister, he should go. SEPTEMBER 2011 Unhappy
with the Teesta water-sharing agreement with Bangladesh, Mamata dropped out of accompanying the Prime Minister on his important trip to India's eastern neighbour on September 6, 2011, causing a diplomatic incident. India had to pull out after having agreed in principle to the text of the document.

NOVEMBER 2011 Mamata embarrassed the Government by forcing it to roll back its executive decision to allow 51 per cent foreign direct investment in multi-brand retail. The rollback reinforced perceptions among both domestic and foreign investors of policy paralysis in Government. MARCH 2012 Mamata forced
the Prime Minister to sack railway minister Dinesh Trivedi after he announced a hike in fares in the Railway Budget despite her known opposition to such a move. Her chosen replacement, Mukul Roy, rolled back Trivedi's reformist effort.

JAGAN MOHAN REDDYAT THE CHANCHALGUDA JAIL IN HYDERABAD ON JUNE 10

JAGAN COULD ENCOURAGE CROSS-VOTING BY CONGRESS MLAS AGAINST SONIA'S NOMINEE FOR PRESIDENT, FORCING A CRISIS IN ANDHRA PRADESH.
is fast becoming a migraine for Sonia. The bastion which brought Congress to power has crumbled. The party is expected to be wiped out in the recent round of 18 Assembly and one Lok Sabha bypolls. What is worrying the Congress is that the win may spark off defections from the Congress to the Jagan Mohan Reddy camp. Following Jagan's arrest, two Congress MLAs have already tendered their resignation letters to Speaker Nadendla Manohar. The immediate concern is the presidential election. There is a fear that Jagan could encourage crossvoting by Congress MLAs in a secret ballot. The Kiran Kumar Reddy government is holding on to the state by a wafer thin majority. Sonia has till June 30 to negotiate with her allies. That is the last day of filing nominations. On June 16, the Prime Minister is leaving for yet another trip abroad, his 27th foreign visit during UPA 2. It is a record that can perhaps be equalled only by the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission, Montek Singh Ahluwalia. The `last-minute strategy', which squeezed time out of Opposition ambit, has been pre-empted by M&M. Clearly, both Mamata and Mulayam have taken the game away from Sonia. It's not just finalising a candidate for president. It is also looking for a replacement for Mukherjee in Government, in the critical finance ministry, as Leader of the Lok Sabha as well as chief troubleshooter. What is certain is that this is the end of Mukherjee's political career. If he wins, he enters Rashtrapati Bhavan. If he loses, the Government loses its moral compass. The fabled Congress leadership has been reduced to an ailing Sonia Gandhi, a lame Prime Minister, and an invisible heir. It adds up to a Government in paralysis.
with Bhavna Vij-Aurora and Amarnath K. Menon

MAY 2012 The Trinamool
Congress strongly opposed the Government's move to permit a steep Rs 7.50 per litre hike in petrol prices after the rupee's sharp downslide against the dollar. The Government, however, won this battle by refusing a rollback.

JUNE 2012 Faced with a sharp slump in economic growth, the Government tried to get the Cabinet to approve the long delayed pension reform bill. It was indefinitely deferred when Trinamool Congress's Mukul Roy dissented in Cabinet.

28

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

NEW

