AnimPACTFeaiure

^Creating Wealth for
"TM Journeying on a high growth trajectory, SPMCIL has integ
Social performance has become a benchmark of the competitive world. SPMCIL ensures that it actively embraces the public sphere, apart from its corporate world in recent years and the Corporate own employees and consumers. It believes the CSR is part of its endeavor for Social Responsibility (CSR) has grown as an realization of Mahatma Gandhi's business-trust model.  INCORPORATION important activity for businesses throughout the SPMCIL, incorporated on 13th January, 2006 under the Companies Act, 1956 globe. What began as a form of philanthropy has with its Registered and Corporate Office in New Delhi and wholly owned by the of India, soon became a Schedule 'A' mini-ratna CPSE in grown into a more organic, community-based, Government Category-l. The company is under the administrative control of the sustainable development portfolio. It is amazing to Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. It is headed by a see a corporate body, printing currency notes and Chairman and Managing Director. All the 9 units of four production verticals i.e. Currency Printing Presses, India Government Mints, Security Printing minting coins, making achievements in diverse Presses and Security Paper Mill headed by General Managers are industrial organizations and are regulated in accordance with the labour laws and fields of social activity.

T

his is the saga of a comparatively young public sector undertaking, Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL), established after corporatization of nine Govt. units, viz. four mints, four presses and one paper mill. SPMCIL is engaged in the manufacture of security paper, minting of coins, printing of currency and bank notes, non-judicial stamp papers, postal stationery, travel documents, etc, besides canvassingand executing overseas orders in today's

The production of 6282 mpcs of circulating coins by India Government Mints in 2011-12 is the highest ever in the history of mints
-- MSRANA
Chairman and Managing Director

directionsof the Government of India issued from time to time.  CURRENCY PRINTING The Bank Note Press, Dewas and Currency Note Press, Nashik are engaged in the production of banknotes for our country as well as for foreign countries using state of the art technology. More than 40% of currency notes circulated in India are printed by these units. These units are equipped with designing, engraving, complete pre-printing and offset facilities, Intaglio printing machines, numbering and finishing machines etc. The Bank Note Press, Dewas, also manufactures different types of security ink which is supplied to other units of SPMCIL as well as BRBNMPL, a subsidiary of RBI. Its annual installed capacity of inks is about 240 MT.  SECURITY PRINTING The Security Printing Presses have a glorious history of more than 80 years employing specialized technology and multiple printing processes to produce security products under secure operating procedures and manufacturing protocols. The Security Presses at Nashik and Hyderabad are engaged in printing of Passport, Visa Stickers, Postal Stationery, Non-judicial Stamp Papers, and other security products such as MICR and Non-MICR cheques in continuous stationery form, identity cards, railway warrants, income tax

The continued financial performance of the Company is due to enhanced productivity leading to substantial increase in production of coins and currency. In a short span of six years, the coin production has more than doubled from about 2.5-3 billion pieces to about 6 billion pieces. Currency products have also increased from about 4 billion pieces to about 7 billion pieces. This is despite the fact that there has been 36% reduction in manpower. The selling prices of currency and coins to RBI and Government continue to be unchanged since 2007-08. The increase in Sales Turnover, Gross Profit and Net Profit is due to increased productivity, reduction in material wastages, process re-engineering and reduction in inventory and debtors, etc. The Company has created reserves of about ? 2000 crores upto F.Y. ending 31.03.2011 and paid the maiden dividend of ? 115.43 acres for the F.Y 2010-11 to Government of India. As on 31.03.2012, the
v>

AnimPACTFeature

the Nation
rated CSR into its business model
It is amazing to see a comparatively young public sector undertaking, Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL), a corporate body into printing currency notes & minting coins doing wonders in shouldering its corporate social responsibility on Mahatma Gandhi's business-trust model.
return order forms, saving instruments, commemorative stamps etc. These security documents are printed and supplied to various State Governments, Union Territories and Central Government departments. It also has to its credit the introduction of e-passport for the first time in India by undertaking production of official and diplomatic e-passports, besides printing tickets for the CWG 2010, ASI, etc.  SECURITY PAPER MILL The Security Paper Mill (SPM), Hoshangabad is responsible for manufacturing of different types of security papers. Papers manufactured by this unit are used for printing of banknotes by CNP, Nashik and BNP Dewas and for allied security documents printed by ISR Nashik and SPR Hyderabad. The SPM has the distinction of incorporating numerous security features in paper viz. fluorescence fibres, multi-tonal three dimensional watermark, electrotype watermark, various types of security threads, tangents, etc. At SPM, the ecofriendly process and the energy conservation aspects are assigned the utmost importance.  MINTS The Mints are situated at Mumbai, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Noida. They have the richest minting heritage and legacy of producing quality products. These Mints are carrying out minting of all coins circulated in the country. The India Government Mints (IGMs) offer comprehensive range of services covering every stage of the minting process - from planning to the finished products. The IGMs have made a niche in the minting world with excellence in design, expertise in minting precious metals, and above all, a long tradition of craftsmanship. They are engaged in the minting of 100% Circulation Coins, Commemorative Coins, Medals and Medallions.  CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY  As part of its CSR initiatives, in the field of education, SPMCIL is providing 12 school buildings in Rural Areas of West Bengal and Maharashtra for imparting education to under privileged children with special focus on girl child education (52% girls and 86% minorities).  SPMCIL has supported Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh in States of Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and Chattisgarh.  In another CSR initiative, SPMCIL had contributed for helping disabled persons to regain mobility and dignity by providing artificial limbs, calipers and crutches. CSR proposals for providing Jetty at Narmada River Ghat in Hoshangabad and Print, Video and Audio visual campaign on Family Welfare Programmes in Hoshangabad, M.P have also been taken-up.  Blood donation camps were organized successfully by SPMCIL in its units at Nashik, Kolkata and Dewas duringyear2011-12.  Mid Day Meal Programme, Rainwater Harvesting System and Sanitation projects, etc. were undertaken through Indian Red Cross Society, Mumbai.

SPMCIL's maiden dividend of Rs 115.43 crore to Gout of India lor 2010-11

 FUTURE PLANS In addition to meet the requirement of the Country it is envisaged that in future 3-4 years, 25-30% revenue should come by diversification to other countries for coins, currency, passports, etc. and commemorative coins for the public. The investments to deter counterfeiting indigenize critical raw materials of Banknote like paper, ink and security features are made so that India remains way ahead of the counterfeiting. R&D and Indigenization of the critical inputs remain the thrust of all investments by the Company. RECORD PERFORMANCE The production of 6282 mpcs of circulating coins by India Government Mints in 2011-12 is the highest ever in the history of mints. The Security Paper Mill, Hoshangabad, produced 2924.88 MT of CWBN paper (Banknote paper) during 2011-12 as against 2857.80 MT of paper during 2010-11. The enhanced production of indigenous CWBN paper and security inks are important milestones towards achieving indigenization of critical raw materials needed for printing of our currency notes. SPMCIL's gross income for the FY 2010-11 grew to ? 3,416.59 crore from ? 3,206.05 crore in the 2009-10. Profit after tax during the year 2010-11 went up to ? 577.19 crore from ? 542.25 crore during the previous year. The PAT per employee during the year 2010-11 rose to ? 4.28 lakh as against ? 3.63 lakh in the year 2009-10, resulting in an increase of 17.90 per cent. SPMCIL has obtained EXCELLENT rating for 2009-10 & 2010-11 MOU Performance. SPMCIL has finalized Capital Expenditure Plan of ? 2500 crore for five years from 2009-10 to 2013-14. The JV Paper Mill at Mysore in association with BRBNMPL is under implementation. Further, the Phase-l modernization of India Govt. Mints has been completed by installation of new presses, blanking lines, pickling, polishing & finishing lines, etc. Modernization of ink factory at Bank Note Press, Dewas has been completed. One line of Banknote printing at BNP, Dewas has been commissioned and one new paper line at SPM, Hoshangabad is under implementation. The Company is implementing ERP/SAP across all its units. To enhance transparency, the Procurement Manual of SPMCIL has been released by Hon'ble Union Finance Minister and provisions of the same are being followed strictly with effect from 1 st June 2011.

