Spe cial Report MERCYPETITIONS

WHO HAS SHE PARDONED?
Murderers, rapists and killers have been saved from the hangman by President Pratibha Patil
By Damayanti Datta

MERCY, SHE WROTE
Patil has pardoned criminals who have shocked the conscience of the Supreme Court

SUSHIL MURMU Pardoned in Feb 2012
He beheaded a nine-year-old boy in a ritual `sacrifice'for prosperity to Goddess Kali in 1996. Had similarly `sacrificed'his own brother.

MOLAI RAM AND SANTOSH YADAV
Feb 2012 Guard and gardener to a jailer, they raped and killed his daughter within the prison premises in 1996. Santosh was serving a rape sentence then.

ovindasamy's life is mired in controversy. Some call him a simpleton, others a depraved killer. He murdered five of his relatives brutally in their sleep in 1984, but nobody saw him do it. To some, he killed because his parents were tortured over a land dispute, to others, it's a cold-blooded murder. The only certain truth is: He faced five near-executions and three mercy plea rejections in his 22-year-long wait for death. The man from a dirt-poor family in Tamil Nadu is the first beneficiary of President Pratibha Patil's clemency largesse. By a Government Order on December 31, 2009, the 45-year-old is on a new lease of life at the Coimbatore jail. No President in India's history has used the power to pardon death-row inmates as extensively as President Patil. She has granted a record of 30 pardons in the last 28 months, over 90 per cent of India's total death sentences pardoned ever. But 22 of those relate to brutal multiple murders and gruesome crimes on children, the worst of what human beings can do to one another. Some are rogues who lived on the edge of law and bounced in and out of the penal system for most of their adult lives. Yet others have

G

shocked the conscience of the courts by the viciousness of their crimes. Do they deserve mercy? Think of Sushil Murmu. On December 11, 1996, nine-year-old Chirku Besra went missing in Hazaribag, Jharkhand. While his father looked for him, Murmu lured the boy into his home and beheaded him in a ritual "sacrifice" to Goddess Kali. Later, he stashed the body in a gunny bag, lugged it on his bicycle and threw it into a lake. It was not the first such crime for Murmu. Investigations revealed that he had "sacrificed" his own brother earlier. Upholding the death penalty in 2004, the Supreme Court noted it to be a "crime against humanity". Murmu was pardoned by the President on February 9, 2012. The Supreme Court has no choice but to accept it. As the legendary American jurist, Oliver Wendel Holmes, pointed out, in a modern democracy, the power to punish with death rests with the judiciary and the power to spare life with the executive. "It is for the judiciary to find a person guilty or not and their job ends there," says former chief justice of India, J.S. Verma. "Mercy is entirely an executive process, for the President to decide. The judiciary should stay out of it." In June 2010, the nation reacted with visceral revulsion when Dhar-

MOHAN AND GOPI Feb 2012 The brothers kidnapped a boy in 1993, tortured and killed him and then went ahead to extract a ransom of Rs 5 lakh from his family. SHOBHIT CHAMAR Oct, 2011
He and his gang gunned down male members of a family and killed two children to prevent revenge. The court noted that he rejoiced after the crime.

DHARMENDER SINGH AND NARENDRAYADAV June 2010
Killed a family of five in 1994 when the minor daughter resisted rape attempt.Three people were beheaded and a 10-year-old boy tossed into the fire.
PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

mender Singh and Narendra Yadav of Uttar Pradesh were pardoned. In 1994, they had wiped out a family of five, including a 15-year-old girl. Narendra had tried to rape her a few days before, failing which he conspired with Dharmender to teach the family a lesson: Three people were beheaded while a 10-year-old boy was tossed alive into the fire. Article 72 of the Constitution gives the president absolute and unfettered

It is for the judiciary to find a person guilty or not. Mercy is entirely an executive process.Once the judiciary does its job it should stay out of it.
J.S. VERMA, former Chief Justice of India

The president's power to grant pardons is absolute because it's in public good.But it can invite judicial review if pardons are found to be mala fide or unreasonable.
UDAY U LALIT, Supreme Court advocate

power to grant pardon, suspend, remit or commute sentences, even in death penalty. "But he has to act on the advice of the Union Council of Ministers," says jurist Rajeev Dhavan. The president also has to examine the merits of a case himself, as upheld in the Kehar Singh case of 1999. In 2005, for instance, former president APJ Abdul Kalam started considering the mercy petition of Govindasamy in a positive light when he found "there were no eyewitness" to the murders the man had committed. One wonders on what grounds Shobhit Chamar won his pardon in 2011. A landless cobbler from Tirojpur Durgawati village in Bihar's Bhabua district, he was condemned to death for killing six members of his upper-caste

landlord's family, including two children aged 10 and eight, on suspicion that the family was behind the murder of his brother. "He exhibited the most inhuman conduct while rejoicing his victory after the commission of the crime," the apex court noted in 1998. Almost every case of clemency in 2012 tells the story of unmitigated brutality against children. On February 20, 1996, Molai Ram was on duty as a guard at the jailor's quarter in Central Jail, Rewa, Madhya Pradesh. Santosh Yadav, already serving a rape sentence, was assigned to tend the garden. The jailor's minor daughter went missing, to surface the next day in a septic tank at a nearby cattleshed. Ram and Yadav had raped and strangulated her.

"The philosophy of punishment rests on four tenets," says Markandey Katju, former Supreme Court judge, now Press Council chairman. "It can be a deterrent and work by creating fear. It can be retributive, making one pay for it." It can also be preventive, to stall a crime; or reformative, to strengthen the human character. It's the last theory that inevitably works behind clemency. That's what Kalam wrote on Govindasamy in 2005: Law is also "a medium of reform". But for over two years after being elected on July 25, 2007, President Patil had simply carried on with the old tradition of allowing mercy petitions to gather dust. As reported by Minister of State for Home Affairs M. Ramachandran in the Rajya Sabha in May, there were 34 pending petitions when she took up Govindasamy's case, whittled down rapidly to 19 now. Other anomalies abound: Gurmeet Singh, on death-row for killing 13 people in 1986, doesn't feature in the pardon list even after 25 years in jail and two mercy appeals. Why has the 2003 mercy petition of Devender Pal Singh Bhullar, the 1993 Delhi bomb attacker, moved up the list and ahead of the 2000 petition of Rajiv Gandhi's assassins? The Supreme Court is concerned and has asked for all mercy records. "The power of the President to pardon is premised on the assumption that it works in public interest," says jurist Uday U Lalit, special prosecutor appointed by SC in the 2G scam. But if pardoning powers are found to be "perverse or mala fide", the judiciary has the right to review. That is a sceptre that hangs over the president. "In that sense the power to pardon is neither absolute nor unfettered," he points out. President Patil's acts have put mercy on trial in these unmerciful times. With growing international consensus towards abolition of death penalty, India's inability to balance crime and punishment may turn into an embarrassment. Govindasamy is now busy with his new passion of book-binding in jail, perfectly unaware that he has become a footnote in history. I

40

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

41

