HEALTH special 2012

THE WAYWE EATNOW
against quantity, matra virudh, may have adverse effect, says ayurveda. Don't go for badly-combined meals, sanyog virudh. Say, a combination of radish, salt, yoghurt and fish with milk is likely to harm the body. Also, do not consume swabhav virudh food that may trigger allergy: Amla is widely used in food and medicine but may cause allergy in some. Ayurveda cautions against the culture of free and mindless eating that modern India has now resorted to. Abrupt eating habits, such as long gaps between meals, are called anshan. Continuous eating is adhyashan. Eating deep-fried and reheated food in any combination and in irrational quantity at any time--something that disturbs the acid-alkaline balance of the body and triggers disease--is called mithya aahar. Culture and religious beliefs influence eating patterns all over the world and help different types of diets to evolve. Deviations from age-old food systems are now putting people at the risk of a host of chronic lifestyle disorders. Resorting to traditional methods might be difficult, but forgetting one's dietary heritage hardly helps. One needs to modify lifestyle and dietary habits by following the essentially Indian culture of eating that we have inherited. 

BACK TO THE ROOTS
VAIDYA BALENDU PRAKASH
Founder-director of Vaidya Chandra Prakash Cancer Research foundation in Dehradun, he is actively involved in R&D of new formulations based on ayurveda in combination with western science. He has developed Prak-20, a formulation for liver disorders. A consultant at Dharmshila Cancer Hospital and Research Centre in Delhi, he is known for his work on cancer.

The science of life, ayurveda, has a 3,000-year-old way of looking at rational eating and healthy living. It's time to learn from it.

grew up with ayurveda. My father, Vaidya Chandra Prakash, ran his clinic and prepared metal-based ayurvedic formulations at home with the active help of my mother, Shashi Mukhi. The food at home was diverse and went by the season: Chapattis made of wheat, barley and gram after the summer festival of Budh Poornima; chhach or fat-free butter milk with jaggery as a refreshing summer starter; no green leafy vegetables and roots during monsoon; maize and rice in autumn; bajra-jowar-rice, jaggery soup, sweets made of aloe vera or sesame seeds, green leafy vegetables

I

and nuts during four months of winter. The classical texts of ayurveda were my best friends. I was fascinated by Bhav Prakash, which depicted foods for human health. I came to know about the beneficial properties of madya or alcohol, provided it was taken in moderation, on time, according to age and season. I salute the ancient masters who compiled their knowledge. But as I entered college, I found hardly anyone was interested in ayurveda. The focus of students and teachers was solely on western medicine. As I had seen many miraculous cures for incurable diseases in my father's clinic, I took up ayurveda after graduating in science. My aim was to meld ayurveda with mainstream medicine. I must say it has been a difficult and lonesome journey. Ayurveda, our ancient medical science, emphasises three basic principles: Aahar or diet, vihar or lifestyle and aushadh or medicine. One should avoid eating incompatible or virudh food. Hence, food can be desh virudh or against area. Don't have dry, sharp foods if you live in a dry area, or greasy food in a marshy land. Don't go against

kaal or seasons, too. Apple from the foothills of Himalayas wouldn't help much when consumed at the peak of summer in southern or central India. It would be ayu virudh, against one's age, to have a diet rich in fat and protein by the middle-aged and the elderly. Quantity of food is also important. Fifty per cent of one's diet should be solid, 25 per cent water and the rest air. If there is rich, caloric food, then it should be one-third of each. Eating

YOGI FOOD

Your relationship with food is often determined by things beyond the platter

Desh-Kaal Virudh
Don't clash with the climate or seasons in your food choice.Ayurveda recommends food that has the opposite qualities of the area one lives in, say, moist food in a dry area. Similarly, don't forget to include seasonal food in your meals.

Matra Virudh
Quantity of food is crucial. If you can't control quantity, you will be saddled with disorders. Fifty per cent of one's diet should be solid, 25 per cent water and the rest air. If there is rich, caloric food, it should be one-third of each.

Sanyog-Swabhav Virudh
Don't go for badlycombined meals, or sanyog virudh. Do not consume swabhav virudh food that may trigger allergy: Amla, widely used in food and medicine, may cause allergy in some.

Ayu Virudh
Act your age. A diet rich in fat and protein that is easily digested by children, adolescents and the young may harm the middle-aged and the elderly.

48

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

OCTOBER 13, 2008  INDIA TODAY

00

