Nei ghbours

PAKISTAN

IN COURTCROSSHAIRS
Pakistan's new prime minister is already hobbled by charges of corruption
ithin days of his taking oath of office on June 23, the Supreme Court on June 27 gave Pakistan's new Prime Minister Raja Pervez Ashraf a fortnight to write to Swiss authorities to reopen long-dormant corruption cases against President Asif Ali Zardari. The court had sacked the previous incumbent, Yousuf Raza Gilani, for his failure to do so. Ashraf had also been put on notice by the apex court in March 2011 in a power rental scam, when, as power minister, he had sanctioned the purchase of electricity from private rental power plants (RPP). An immediate fallout of the scam has been that Ashraf cannot leave the country. His name is on an Exit Control List (ECL) that contains names of individuals wanted by different law enforcement agencies. The list is circulated to all immigration points to stop individuals from leaving the country. Fasih Bokhari, chairman of the National Accountability Bureau (NAB), an independent investigation agency, told INDIA TODAY that the prime minister's name was forwarded to the Ministry of Interior to be placed on the ECL in April 2011. RPPs, typically installed within four to six months, are ideal for meeting short-term electricity needs. Ashraf, who was power minister from March 2008 to February 2011, had approved the installation of 19 such plants with a collective capacity of 2,734 MW. The government, taking bank loans, had paid 21.8 billion Pakistani rupees to RPP companies but none of these plants functioned to their full capacity. They produced only 120 MW of electricity. Pakistan's daily power requirement is 14,000-15,000 MW but its plants produce about 8,000-9,000 MW per day. Sources from the power ministry said that the country's electricity demand could rise to 22,000 MW within a few years.

W

RAJA PERVEZ ASHRAF

ASHRAF'S PARTY COLLEAGUES BELIEVE HIS POLICIES AS POWER MINISTER HAVE EFFECTIVELY PUSHED THE COUNTRY INTO A POWER CRISIS.
AP PHOTO

Allegations of kickbacks against Ashraf were made by a member of the Pakistan Peoples Party's coalition partner PML(Q) and former housing minister Syed Faisal Saleh Hayat, and Opposition leader Khwaja Asif. Ashraf's party colleagues believe his policies as power minister have effectively pushed the country into a loadshedding crisis. The Supreme Court took suo motu notice of the allegations made by Hayat and Asif on December 15, 2011. The allegations, coupled with the failure of the power plants to deliver, prompted the Supreme Court to cancel the deal in March 2011 and initiate an inquiry against Ashraf. "The contracts of RPPs are ordered to be rescinded forthwith and all the persons responsible for the same are liable to be dealt with for

civil and criminal action in accordance with law," said a two-member bench comprising Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry and Justice Khilji Arif Hussain. If found guilty, Ashraf could face disqualification from the National Assembly. Following the Supreme Court's verdict, the NAB began an investigation against Ashraf. The court's verdict also stated that prior to RPPs, the electricity generation system had sufficient potential. But instead of taking curative steps, such as enhancing the electricity generation capacity of existing dams, billions of rupees were spent on installing RPPs, which proved to be a complete failure. It is now a matter of when, not if, the prime minister will go.
by Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad

48

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

