UP FRONT

ABHISHEK PODDAR

THE ARTOFSHAME
I
The effect of our failing museums is immediately ndia's growing economy, booming businesses and expanding middle class are often commented upon, but tangible, as art works are deteriorating through a lack of are these really the criteria by which we should be care and attention, and also philosophical--in the sense judging our progress? Shouldn't a country truly be able to that the study of art can instil a feeling of context, pride call itself a leading nation only when it has an enlightened and intellectual inquiry in the nation. Rather than attitude towards its art and cultural heritage, as well as encouraging us to take an interest in art and antiques, its economic development? Unless there is a drastic the current system inhibits private collectors and change in approach towards the future of our dealers through endless red tape and archaic laws which museums, we are at the risk of turning India into a dictate that complex registrations and forms be filled Potemkin Village, whereby a cultural vacuum lurks each time anything above 100 years old is bought, transferred or even transported. Without becoming a behind a glossy facade of development. Indeed, there is no shortage of glitzy shopping malls plausible place for the art trade to operate, and thus filled with relics of economic power, but when it comes to without a community of specialists, enthusiasts and spaces of true integrity, we in India fall embarrassingly professionals, the art world in India will lack the grassshort. By maintaining the status quo, we will lose not only roots foundations it needs to progress. Whilst the current state of affairs is being increasingly priceless art works, but also the wide range of cultural acknowledged, relatively few initiatives have been activity that such objects encourage and inspire. From major institutions in the capital to smaller proposed to tackle the problem. These currently focus museums around the country, the idea of preservation, around staff development and consultancy through tie-ins presentation and curating are well below international with international bodies like the British Museum and standards and seem instead to belong to another century, the Art Institute of Chicago. The impetus for such schemes when it was merely enough to put objects in cabinets, is commendable, but how much do these partner with no further thought to how to bring them to life. institutions really understand the unique challenges of Museum staff are under-qualified, uninterested and India's government infrastructure? It is perhaps time we looked beyond the state and few in number. Acquisition budgets are either nonexistent or paralysed by red tape and visitor numbers are further towards the private sector for the future of our museums--following the example of the Dr Bhau Daji Lad not even worthy of comment. The contemporary art scene may appear vibrant, but Museum in Mumbai, which rescued itself through its partthe influx of new commercial galleries is only further nership with the Jamnalal Bajaj Foundation. By combining propping up the façade. Without major contemporary the financial support of larger corporations with the exhibitions in non-commercial institutions, we do not passion, knowledge and networks of private individuals and foundations, these various entities have have the necessary means to attribute SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com the unique potential to set up new muacademic meaning to current artistic seums and develop them into dynamic, outputs. Our rich past and endlessly engaging and sustainable spaces. In fascinating present should make us a other words, if the Government won't world leader in cultural production-- wake up to the responsibility and this is simply not the case. benefit of reforming our museums, then By comparison, museums in the perhaps it is time to leverage the power West have become the lifeblood of of India's liberalised free-market capicities. Often referred to as the churches talism (which one normally associates of the 21st century, such places are with industry and technology) to help charged, dynamic and teeming with the country grow culturally, as well as people. Serious academic research economically. The hope being that such coexists with fun and educational initiatives will kickstart a new era of days out for the family--the study of interest in the arts--inspiring, educatthe past corresponding with a celebraing and enriching the country along the tion of the cultural present. The British way. At the least, such initiatives will act Museum in London, for example, The idea of preservation, to preserve the art and heritage of our attracts nearly 6 million visitors a year presentation and curating seem past until the state system wakes up. (many of them Indian), whereas the to belong to another century National Museum in Delhi is one of the few places in the city where one can when it was merely enough to Abhishek Poddar is a Bangalore-based put objects in cabinets. actually escape the crowds. collector and promoter of art

10

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

