Mail

Messpot of Despots
J U LY 2 , 2 0 1 2

Corrupt politicians, obdurate judges and compromised journalists have driven Pakistan's crumbling democracy to despair.

It is ironic that Pakistan is still called a democracy with so much of debauchery perpetrated by their politicians, the media and the judiciary.
K.C. KUMAR,
Bangalore

Future Tense
Pakistan is no stranger to constitutional crises; it has been struggling through it since 1947 ("Messpot of Despots", July 2). The present controversial ruling marks another attempt of the judiciary to assert itself as an institution that towers above a weak, ineffective civilian government and an opaque, intrusive military. Pakistan today showcases a sorry spectacle in the comity of nations with its head of state the fountainhead of corruption. Asif Ali Zardari may have got away for now with the prime minister's job sacrificed in the process. Pakistan being Pakistan, this isn't the end of the story, only another chapter in its turbulent political history.
MEGHANA. A, UK

Fall of the Indian Idol
A few `friendly tips' to a friend have disgraced Rajat Gupta, the poster boy of the corporate world ("Indian Verdict in America", July 2). The insider-trading scandal has brought the world crashing down around him. Rajat Gupta was one of the earliest Indians to bring alive the quintessential American dream and his trailblazing career had in fact paved the way for many others from the subcontinent to strike big.
KAMAL KISHORE, Patna

Given the brilliant corporate track record of Rajat Gupta and his philanthropic activities in the US, the court ought to take a lenient view of his lapses and sentence him to a lighter punishment. He doesn't seem to have gained anything through insider trading. He has only lost all the respect he had earned over the years.
RADHA MARY, Delhi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

``

``

AP PHOTO

Yousuf Raza Gilani's exit from power comes as a blow to an already besieged democratic consolidation in Pakistan. The neighbour nation once again experiences devastating consequences of politics. As the authorities withdrew security to Gilani's son contesting Multan bypoll as PPP candidate, Pakistan's new prime minister, on the other hand, retained most key members of the Gilani Cabinet in the same position. The hypocrisy of governance is not easily understandable to the common man.
RAMESH SINHA, Gurgaon

An unstable Pakistan will jeopardise world peace and its immediate neighbours face the maximum danger. The Frankenstein monster created by Pakistan in the form of

Mail
terrorism is bouncing back on its creator. Its India-centric policies are ultimately working against it. One can only wish that a country like United States of America takes control of Pakistan's nuclear installations and reins in the disruptive elements before the condition gets out of control.
R.K. MISHRA, www.intoday.com

35
Manmohan Singh's name for president. Pranab Mukherjee has failed as finance minister. Inflation is virtually beyond control. Besides, his wrong policies are responsible for laying hurdles in the path of economic growth. The economist Prime Minister should take over as finance minister.
MAHESH KUMAR, Mumbai

very easy to fall into the trap of vices, but very difficult to come out of it. Youngsters should avoid bad company for their own sake. A casual, just-for-fun drink could turn into a nightmarish addiction and thus destroy all the possibilities of creating a noble and meaningful life in future.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
AUGUST 16-31, 197 7

A Start for Bigger Things?
Was Mrs Indira Gandhi's threeday trip to Paunar (70 km from Nagpur) a prelude to her re-entry into active politics? Despite her statement that she did not discuss politics with Vinoba Bhave, her contradictory statements to the press and public, and her proposed country-wide tour in September, beginning with a trip to her constituency Rae Bareli, has increasingly led observers to speculate about her staging a comeback. Apparently, Mrs Gandhi went to Paunar for inspiration. This was her first officially announced trip out of New Delhi since she stepped down in March. She went to Haridwar once with her family to meet her spiritual "guru" Anandmai. Perhaps, Anandmai predicted that Mrs Gandhi would stage a comeback and the Paunar trip is part of a well-conceived plan to recharge her spiritual batteries for the task ahead. Whatever her intentions, she received a tumultuous welcome at Nagpur Airport by a 7,000-strong crowd on July 24. Mrs Gandhi stopped twice to give spontaneous speeches. She said in one of her speeches that she knew the people were waiting for her to move. "But you should move," she said. "Unless you move, no movement can succeed. I will follow." At the ashram she met Vinoba Bhave seven times. The first meeting lasted only four minutes. The others over an hour. None revealed the nature or subjects discussed.
by Vijay Phanshikar
MRS GANDHI WITH VINOBA BHAVE

Political Battle
Drastic poll reforms are necessary before the Lok Sabha elections due in the year 2014. This is crucial towards ensuring that an era of blackmail alliance politics is not possible ("The Countdown Begins", July 2). The prime minister and chief ministers should be elected by secret and compulsory vote of all members of the Lower House on nominations signed by at least onethird members. Such an elected leader may be removed by the same process but with the naming of the alternate leader in the same motion mandatory. To avoid members racing for ministerial berths, the system should be such that only those persons as prime minister, chief ministers and ministers who might not have contested any election in last six years.
MADHU AGRAWAL, Delhi

Drinking Young
The increasing problem of drinking is mainly because of lack of parental guidance ("Is Young India Drunk?", July 2). We have become too busy in our lives, leaving our children to fend for themselves. Teenagers resort to drinking and crimes due to poor upbringing and a callous attitude. Today, students consider drinking and late-night parties as trendy, and parents turn a blind eye to the indiscipline of their children. The answer lies in exemplary punishments, meted out fast. Schools and colleges must also play their part in ethical growth of the personality of children. The backbone of future India can be saved only by collective action.
R.D. SINGH, Haryana

Games People Play
It is very sad and unfortunate that personal egos have become greater than national pride ("Double Fault", July 2). We all know that Leander Paes and Mahesh Bhupathi remain our best bet in men's doubles tennis event at London and that is why All India Tennis Association (AITA) chose them to represent the nation but had to give in to the demands of Bhupathi and Rohan Bopanna. The kind of immaturity these players have shown may have spoiled our chances of winning a medal. And it has set a very wrong example for our young players.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

Mamata Banerjee was right in recommending

The rat race for money, power and prestige has distanced parents from their wards. They have no time to see what their children are up to. It is

Tennis today smacks of an attempt to please all by compromise. It is at its lowest ebb ever. If AITA has displayed a lack of spine, our tennis players like Bhupathi and Bopanna have exhibited a shocking self-centredness.
MOTUPALLI S. PRASAD, Chennai

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

