Cover Story 26/11 MUMBAI ATTACK
DEADLY DECEPTIONS
ISI wanted to leave enough red herrings to implicate Indians in the 26/11 attack

The Secret Plotto

Fake identities
The attackers carried ID cards of Arunodaya College, Hyderabad. The college is genuine but the ID cards were fake.

BLAME INDIA
The arrest of Zabiuddin Ansari, a Lashkar-e-Toiba terrorist used by Pakistan in the execution of 26/11, exposes Islamabad's agenda of turning the Mumbai attack into an Indian conspiracy
By Sandeep Unnithan

Threads of distractions
LeT plotter David

Headley purchased wristbands for all 10 attackers at Mumbai's Siddhivinayak temple.

Blame it on Indians
`Kharak Singh from India' bought the Internet calling service used by LeT handlers. His IP address was in Pakistan.

Lies on live television
"We're from Hyderabad. Don't you know Hyderabad? Don't you know your country?" attacker Fahadullah told a TV channel.

Numbers game
All 10 terrorists were given mobile phones with Indian SIM cards by LeT's communications chief Zarar Shah.

n May 21, 2009, Ajmal Amir Kasab, the sole surviving Pakistani gunman from the 26/11 attack, was giving evidence in the court of Justice M.L. Tahaliyani at Mumbai's Arthur Road prison. Suddenly, he dropped a name. The person, he said, who had been their principal guide during the 60-hour operation from a control room in Karachi was Abu Jundal. No one in India had heard this name. Some were puzzled. Prosecution lawyer Ujjwal Nikam believed it was misinformation. And, as so often, the name Abu Jundal disappeared into a file. Three years later, on June 21, 2012, Saudi Arabia bundled a wanted Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) operative, Syed Zabiuddin Ansari, 30, on a plane and sent him to New Delhi. Ansari had more than one alias; among them was Abu Jundal. When Kasab, from his Mumbai cell, heard that Abu Jundal had been deported by the Saudis and was a captive in India, he became, say his jailors, contemplative. The final pieces of a complex puzzle was coming together. Perhaps the most

O

Photo imaging by SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

OCTOBER 13, 2008  INDIA TODAY

00

Cover Story 26/11 MUMBAI ATTACK
deceptive element in the exhaustive planning that had gone into the barbaric terrorist attack on Mumbai, conceived by the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and implemented by LeT, was a poisonous sting in the tail. When the horror that took 166 lives was over, the ISI wanted to leave behind enough false trails to implicate Indians for its most spectacular offensive against India. It was a plot in which Ansari was a key protagonist. Born in Gevrai village in Maharashtra's Beed district, he completed his matriculation and did an Industrial Training Institute course to become an electrician. He became an anti-India radical after the 2002 Gujarat riots and went into the shadows of terrorism, first joining the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), then the LeT. Ansari came on the police radar for another plot against India, in transporting a shipment of 43 kg of RDX, 16 AK-47 assault rifles and 50 hand grenades to Aurangabad in 2006. This shipment, meant for a terror attack, was intercepted by the Maharashtra police. Under pressure, Ansari contacted LeT and fled to Pakistan. His name entered the public domain when the Indian Government handed over a list of 50 Most Wanted Fugitives to the Pakistani authorities in March 2007. But Ansari was proving to be an invaluable asset for the LeT. A highly committed operative, he knew the layout of the land and directed terrorists during the attack on Mumbai on November 26, 2008. He was involved in plotting the blast at Pune's German Bakery on February 13, 2010, that killed 17 people. But still, India did not know of his role in the 26/11 attack. The

DESCENTINTO TERROR
Zabiuddin Ansari's journey began in Maharashtra's backyard and ended in Saudi Arabia

1

November 13, 1981

2

2002

3

2005

Born in Gevrai town, Beed district, Maharashtra, as Syed Zabiuddin Sayed Zakiuddin Ansari.

Joins the Students Islamic Movement of India. Becomes a Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) activist after the Gujarat riots.

Goes to Pakistan for training in an LeT camp. Starts plotting terror attacks from Aurangabad.

Muzaffarabad Delhi Dammam Karachi Dhaka Aurangabad Beed

D E S O THE MUMBAI CONSPIRACY EXP
Key 26/11 plotters and perpetrators say Pakistan masterminded the attack

4

May 2006

5

November 26, 2008

6

April 26, 2011

7

May 2011

Ajmal Kasab
Kasab told the Mumbai Police on November 29, 2008, that he was trained by LeT and had met its chief Hafiz Saeed as well as military commander Zakiur Rehman Lakhvi. He also detailed the entire journey of the attack team from Karachi to Mumbai. The LeT brass asked them to kill as many people as they could, he added.

David Coleman Headley
Headley told the National Investigation Agency in New York during questioning between June 3 and June 9, 2010, that he had been in close touch with two serving ISI officers, Major Iqbal and Major Samir Ali. He said ISI had financed his stay in Mumbai and was fully involved in the 26/11 attack. All LeT leaders had an ISI handler, he added.

Zabiuddin Ansari
Ansari told the Special Cell of Delhi Police and intelligence sleuths during questioning in New Delhi on June 21 that ISI officials and LeT supremo Hafiz Muhammad Saeed were present in the LeT control room in Karachi when the attackers laid siege to Mumbai on November 26, 2008. The control room was later destroyed.

Escapes to Pakistan via Bangladesh after police intercept an LeT shipment of 43 kg of RDX, 16 AK-47 rifles and 50 hand grenades in Aurangabad.
Graphic by SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

Guides and monitors the Mumbai attack from an LeT control room in Karachi.

Leaves Karachi for Dammam, Saudi Arabia, on a false Pakistani passport.

Nabbed by Saudi authorities after a tip-off from US and Indian intelligence. Deported to India from Riyadh on June 21.

breakthrough came in May 2010 when the Delhi Police intercepted a call from an India-based terrorist, Ajmal, who was in touch with his Pakistani handler. Ajmal had planned an attack on foreigners during the Commonwealth Games in Delhi that year. He referred to his handler as Abu Jundal. The agencies tracked Jundal down inside Pakistan. He was using the alias of Riyasat Ali and shuttled between LeT's headquarters in Muridke, near Lahore, and Karachi. Then they made a stunning discovery. Jundal, Riyasat Ali and Zabiuddin Ansari were the same person. Now they waited for their target to travel out of Pakistan.

under surveillance. Meanwhile, New Delhi provided the Arab kingdom with proof that Riyasat Ali was Zabiuddin Ansari, an LeT operative and originally an Indian citizen. DNA samples of his relatives were sent to the Saudi government even as the home ministry provided evidence of Ansari's involvement in the Aurangabad arms haul case. Islamabad, fearing

that his deportation could explode their ploy of deniability, still maintained that he was a Pakistani citizen and wanted him back. But the Saudis interrogated Ansari and discovered that he was indeed an LeT operative. They had to take a call. Should they stand by their long-time ally Pakistan and let Ansari remain in Dammam or stand by international

I

n early 2011, Pakistan issued a passport to him, and sent him to Saudi Arabia to recruit potential jihadis from Indian labourers on behalf of LeT. In the oil-rich port of Dammam, Ansari ran a small taxi rental business, posing as Pakistani national Riyasat Ali. The US intelligence alerted the Saudis about Ansari's terrorist links; Riyadh put him

PAKISTAN'S INTERIOR MINISTER REHMAN Malik, while defending his army and the ISI, was silent on how Zabiuddin Ansari, an Indian citizen, managed to get a Pakistani passport and a National Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis.
AP PHOTO

20

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

Cover Story 26/11 MUMBAI ATTACK
law and hand him over to India? The Kingdom chose India. At a safe house of the Delhi Police's Special Cell in the Capital's Lodhi colony, Ansari has been telling his interrogators details of the secret plot at the core of the deadly attack on Mumbai. The intent was to land a double sucker punch. The first blow would devastate Mumbai. The second blow would, with just enough `evidence', promote conspiracy theories among a section of media, opinion makers and political leaders that Hindu militants were behind the carnage. The conspiracy theorists didn't let Pakistan down. "There is more to it than meets the eye," former Maharashtra chief minister Abdul Rehman Antulay said outside the Lok Sabha on December 18, 2008, about the death of Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad chief Hemant Karkare. Karkare, Additional Commissioner Ashok Kamte and Inspector Vijay Salaskar had been ambushed and killed by Ajmal Kasab and his accomplice Ismail Khan on November 26, 2008. Karkare was probing the Malegaon blasts, which had resulted in the arrests of Hindu fringe elements such as Lt-Col Shrikant Prasad Purohit, Sadhvi Pragya Thakur and Swami Aseemanand. Much of the Urdu press in India placed the blame for the attack on a diabolical Zionist-RSS nexus.
HEMANT KARKARE DURING THE 26/11 ATTACK

December 18, 2008

A.R.ANTULAY Former Maharashtra chief minister

December 11, 2010

DIGVIJAYA SINGH Congress general secretary

``

January 12, 2009

AZIZ BURNEY Group editor, Roznama Rashtriya Sahara
The control room had multiple television sets tuned into Indian TV channels, satellite telephones and computers. The handlers--Sajid Mir, Abu Al Qama, Abu Qahafa and Muzzammil--maintained constant communication with the 10 terrorists. Ansari tutored two of the LeT terrorists who had stormed into Nariman House on what to tell the Indian media in Hindi. He asked them to impersonate disgruntled Muslim youth.While doing this, he used a Hindi word prashaasan (administration). Indian intelligence agencies who tapped into the conversation were intrigued by the use of a Hindi word by a Pakistani controller. Actually, Pakistan's web of deceit had begun imploding with the arrest of Headley, the LeT scout, by the US Federal Bureau of Investigation in June 2010. He told his Indian interrogators that the Pakistan Army and ISI were deeply involved in the 26/11 attack. He was in touch with two serving ISI officers, Major Iqbal and Major Samir Ali. Headley also made the chilling revelation that every senior LeT leader was "handled" by an ISI operative. Ansari's interrogation brings fresh

22

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

``

``

CIA, Mossad, Narendra Modi and RSS are responsible for the attack. Mumbai Police killed Hemant Karkare with Army help. Constables fired at CST railway station.

``

I apologised on January 29, 2010, in the interest of the nation. But many questions remain unanswered. I still do not know why Karkare took a different route.

``

``

MUCH OFTHE URDU PRESS IN INDIA BLAMED Hindu extremists for the Mumbai outrage. They saw it as an elaborate plot to silence Hemant Karkare, the chief of the Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad.

nsari's confessions have further unravelled the secret Pakistani plot. He told interrogators of his role in teaching the 26/11 attackers Hindi. He would give them Hindi magazines and conduct conversations with them to sharpen their language skills before they left Karachi. He taught the attackers to blend into India--greet people with a proper `namaste', maintain a low profile and be polite to women. There were other aspects to this smokescreen--the terrorists were made to wear sacred red threads bought for Rs 20 each by LeT scout David Coleman Headley from Mumbai's Siddhivinayak temple. All 10 terrorists carried fake identity cards of Arunodaya College, located in Hyderabad. They also took Hindu names. Ajmal Kasab became Sameer Choudhary and Ismail Khan was Naraish Verma. An LeT operative pretended to be `Kharak Singh from India' and purchased Internet calling services from a US-based firm for $250 (Rs 10,000). The terrorists were told to communicate with their Karachi-based handlers using phones with Indian SIM cards. The LeT, according to Ansari, monitored the attack from a specially created military-style command and control centre in Karachi, which was visited by LeT leaders and ISI officials.

A

``

Mumbai ATS chief Hemant Karkare told me hours before the terror strike that he feared for his safety from Hindu extremists. He was getting threat calls.

``

There is nothing more to say, I have clarified everything. I am happy that the home minister has pressed Pakistan to admit facts relating to Jundal.

``

``

Aziz Burney, group editor of leading Urdu newspaper Roznama Rashtriya Sahara blamed Hindu extremists. `Is there any connection between the 26/11 attack and the Malegaon terror attack?' screamed a headline in the daily on November 29. `This is a joint terror operation by Sangh Parivar and Mossad' said the Urdu Times of November 30, 2008. On December 5, Roznama Rashtriya Sahara ran another story: `Who do you believe, Kasab the terrorist, or Karkare the martyr?' The paper hinted that the 26/11 attack was the work of Hindu fundamentalists and an elaborate plot to silence Karkare. `Hindu terrorists are behind Mumbai attacks' said the Akhbare Mashriq on

December 6, 2008. In September 2009, a retired Maharashtra inspectorgeneral of police, S.M. Mushrif, in his book Who Killed Karkare?, blamed the Intelligence Bureau and Hindu extremists for 26/11. The conspiracy theory was also enthusiastically bought by politicians who wanted to mine the Muslim vote. On December 6, 2010, senior Congress leader and former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Digvijaya Singh released Burney's book 26/11--RSS ki Saazish, which accused the RSS of planning and executing the 26/11 attack. Five days later, Singh claimed that Karkare had rung him up hours before he was gunned down and complained about threats and pressure from radical Hindu groups.

FEASTING ON THE HORROR

Conspiracy theorists who ate humble pie

THEN

NOW

``

There is more to it than meets the eye. There should be a probe into Hemant Karkare's killing during 26/11. I have done India proud by raising the question.

``

That was a genuine mistake. Multiple theories were floating in the aftermath of the attack, especially the one revolving around Hemant Karkare's death.

23

Cover Story 26/11 MUMBAI ATTACK
embarrassment for Pakistan. He has revealed the presence of Pakistan's ISI in the control room that the LeT set up to monitor and direct the attack. Ansari also clarified that the LeT has been unaffected by the arrest and ongoing trial of masterminds Zakiur Rehman Lakhvi and Zarar Shah at an anti-terrorist court in Rawalpindi's Adiala Jail. The organisation is still plotting fresh attacks against India. The LeT is widely believed to be a proxy arm of the Pakistan Army. Its battle against India spilled out from Jammu and Kashmir to the Indian mainland. It was designated a "Foreign Terrorist Organisation" by the US in 2001 but the Americans saw it as an international threat only after the 26/11 attack. In April this year, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced a $10 million (Rs 50 crore) bounty for information leading to the arrest and capture of LeT supremo Hafiz Saeed.

Torn bythe TAINT
Families of alleged terrorists have to live with the horror of guilt by association
abiuddin Ansari, 30, was the quintessential good son. He made his father Zakiuddin, 75, an insurance salesman, quit his demanding job and rest at home the day he started earning as an electrician after completing a diploma from the Industrial Training Institute, Beed, in Maharashtra. But there is no rest for him now. Ansari's escape from India in 2006 ensures regular visits from the police at odd hours. One of his five sisters ended up getting divorced because of his terror links. Zakiuddin is now a heart patient and has already braved two paralytic attacks. His wife, Rehana, 65, hoped that her son would turn up at her daughter's wedding in June. Now she can only won-

Z

hat rankles Pakistan is that Ansari was arrested and deported by its closest ally, Saudi Arabia. The kingdom wields almost undiminished power over Pakistan's army and political establishment. Through the deportation of Ansari, it has indicated that it will no longer provide protection for Pakistan's terrorists. Another suspected terrorist, Fasih Mehmood of the Indian Mujahideen, has been detained by Saudi Arabia for his role in the twin blasts outside Bangalore's Chinnaswamy stadium on April 17, 2010. He faces imminent deportation to India. Now that the conspiracy has been exposed, some of its original theorists have backtracked. Digvijaya Singh says he had already clarified about his post-26/11 comments. "There is nothing more to say. I am happy that Home Minister P. Chidambaram has upped the ante on the terror issue and has pressed Pakistan to admit facts relating to Jundal having trained terrorists who attacked Mumbai," he told INDIA TODAY. Antulay called his November 27 statement "a genuine mistake". "Multiple theories were floating in the aftermath of the attack, especially the

W

der about when she can see him next. In Bihar's Darbhanga district, Dr Firoj Ahmed, 61, is as clueless. His youngest son, Fasih Mehmood, last spoke to him on the phone from Saudi Arabia on May 19 six days after Saudi authorities picked up the mechanical engineer at the behest of India for allegedly being a terror agent. Fasih's cry, "I am innocent", still rattles his father. The government medical officer at Benipatti in the adjoining Madhubani district is back to smoking seven cigarettes a day. Firoj owns the biggest house in his village, which Fasih had painted only last year in September when he was there for his marriage. With wife Amra Jamal in Patna to be with their daughter-in-law, Firoj cuts a lonely

KRISHNA MURARI KISHAN

ALLEGED TERRORIST FASIH MEHMOOD'S WIFE, NIKHAT PARVEEN (LEFT)

figure. "Just think about what a father will feel in these circumstances," he says. "Fasih's arrest has broken us," says his elder brother Sabih Mehmood, 32. Employed with a leading private bank in Dubai, he has returned to India on indefinite leave without pay to support his parents. Fasih is the fourth person from Barh Samaila, a nondescript village in the Keoti block of Darbhanga district located 155 km north-east of capital Patna, to have been picked up within a period of seven months for alleged terror links. Each of these arrests led to the next. On November 22, 2011, Qateel Ahmed Siddiqui, 27, was arrested from the Anand Vihar bus terminal in Delhi for allegedly being an Indian Mujahideen (IM) operative. Gauhar Azij Khomaini, 32, was arrested a day later on similar charges, also from Delhi. A Delhi Police team brought Siddiqui and Khomaini to Barh Samaila in January to interrogate them in front of their families. The police made the next arrest from the village on May 6 when a joint police team from Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, who were operating un-

NIKHAT PARVEEN,WHO HAS FILED A HABEAS corpus plea in Supreme Court for her husband Fasih, questions the manner in which his arrest has been handled by Indian agencies.
dercover as telephone tower engineers in Barh Samaila, picked up Kafil Ahmed, 26, from his home in connection with the Chinnaswamy Stadium blast on April 17, 2010. A week later, Fasih was detained in Saudi Arabia. Kafil Ahmed, an MA (Urdu) student, taught at a public school in Darbhanga for four years. "My son has poor eyesight. He cannot even read a sentence without his glasses. He cannot be a terrorist," says his septuagenarian father Abdul Salam. Kafil has been lodged in Bangalore Central Jail since the time of his arrest. Fasih, whose grandfather Mohammad Mehmood was a freedom fighter,

REUTERS

KHWAJA MOINUDDIN, ZABIUDDIN ANSARI'S GRANDFATHER, IN BEED

was particular about praying five times a day. He donated Rs 50,000 for the renovation of the local mosque during his last visit in 2011. He had also sponsored the Haj trip of his parents last year before marrying Nikhat Parveen on September 7, 2011. Parveen, who is now shuttling between her parents' home in Patna and Delhi where she has filed a habeas corpus plea in Supreme Court for Fasih, questions the manner in which her husband's arrest has been handled by Indian agencies. "Initially, the Government repeatedly denied having got Fasih arrested when we raised questions about his whereabouts. Had the Saudis arrested him on their own, they would have convicted or freed him by now. When we stepped up the heat, the Government issued a Red Corner Notice holding Fasih responsible for the blasts at German Bakery and Chinnaswamy Stadium. They are cooking up stories," she says. After early schooling in Darbhanga, Fasih did his matriculation from Aligarh. He cleared his intermediate from Darbhanga Millat College. "His mother and maternal uncle got him admitted to Anjuman Engineering College in Karnataka," recalls Firoj. The notorious Bhatkal brothers, Riyaz and Iqbal, who founded IM, are believed to have studied in the same college. Mohammad Tariq Anjum Hasan, another key IM man arrested early this year from Bihar, graduated in civil engineering from the same college. "Please don't jump to conclusions," says Firoj. "Please don't pronounce him guilty until proven innocent."
by Amitabh Srivastava and Krishna Kumar

one revolving around the death of Karkare," he said. Antulay admitted, however, that the Hindu terror angle had momentarily deflected the nation's attention from the LeT. Mushrif now refuses to comment because the 26/11 case is subjudice but says he never questioned Pakistan's role in the attack. "If someone wants to comment on this issue he should approach the court and seek a reinvestigation," he said.

Burney's newspaper ran a front-page apology on January 29, 2010. Burney himself is, however, unapologetic and says many questions on 26/11 remain unanswered. Film producer-director Mahesh Bhatt says there is no denying Pakistan's involvement but refuses to believe the theories being floated by Indian investigators now and calls for a debate. "After the 9/11 attack, people in the US raised questions on the identity of the attackers. Nobody was

apologetic about their views," he says. Kavita Karkare, the widow of Hemant, believes recent developments have vindicated her stand that the attack was not an inside job. "I have been saying since the beginning that no Hindus are involved in it. Many people floated stories for political reasons. They fell flat," she says. Pakistan, though, remains unapologetic even as it tries to distance itself from its Indian collaborator. On June

27, just a week after Ansari's arrival in India, Pakistan's Interior Minister Rehman Malik hurriedly called for a press conference. "Now things are getting clarified," Malik said. "Who knows if there was a sting operation by somebody from India?" Malik, while defending his army and the ISI, was silent on how Ansari, an Indian citizen, managed to get a Pakistani passport and a National Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis. In the run-up to the July 4-5

foreign secretary-level talks between India and Pakistan in New Delhi, an anonymous source in the Pakistan foreign office told the mediathat 40 Indians were involved in the Mumbai attack. Clearly, one Ansari has not dampened the spirit of the world's most dangerous benefactor of jihad. Wait for the next round of conspiracy theories, written and sold by Islamabad.
with Shantanu Guha Ray, Kiran Tare, Bhavna Vij-Aurora and Mohammad Waqas

24

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

NEW

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

25

