Con troversy

PINKI PRAMANIK
understand many medical terms and legal procedures. I can imagine how confused her parents must be. She was known to be a girl from birth. How is any of this her fault?" says Shridharan Tutu, 45, a labourer from Tilakdi. The star athlete has had a rocky career with previous allegations of illegal gun possession and minor cases of theft during her stay at the SAI Hostel, Kolkata, in 2004. All previous charges--one for gun possession and two charges of theft--were eventually dropped. But the present scandal threatens to tarnish her sporting career beyond repair. A similar case of footballer Bandana Pal had come up in 1999. Pal, who played for the West Bengal's women's football team, was found to be a man. The issue came to light when Pal was not included in the team for the 1998 Asian Games in Bangkok. No formal charges were ever pressed against her. After six months of public humiliation and outcry, she gave up her career and reportedly fled to Nepal. The treatment meted out to Pramanik has attracted criticism from the sporting fraternity as well. "It's a shame. I feel sad for Pinki who has earned laurels for the country. It's a case of sexual harassment," says twotime Olympian Saraswati Saha-Dey, who won the 200m gold at the Busan Asian Games. "She may be accused of a particular crime, but why is she being subjected to this harassment?" asks Arjuna awardee Shanti Mullick. Is there a viable solution? "As far as medical controversies go, what we need is a transparent tracking system. From the day an athlete joins, a unique identification number should be generated. A complete age, sex, health and background check-up should be registered on the number. Regular tests should also be conducted. This will deter any sort of foul play and will also spare candidates from scandals at a later stage in life," says Subrata Dutta, vice-president, Indian Football Association. To have reached the pinnacle of your career and have it jeopardised is painful, he says. Ask Pinki Pramanik. 

VERDICTBEFORE TRIAL
Athlete accused of rape is humiliated by a leaked MMS and abuse in police custody
AFP

By Sonali Acharjee

aked on a bed with the camera zooming in on her genitals. Over 20,000 search queries have cropped up on Google in a day for the 29-second clip of Asian Games relay gold medallist Pinki Pramanik undergoing a gender test on July 2. On June 29, a district court in Barasat rejected her bail application and directed submission of Pinki's chromosome for a test in Hyderabad or Bangalore. Once hailed as `Purulia's Pride' for her sporting achievements and campaign against social evils, the 27-year-old relay runner now sits inside Kolkata's Dum Dum Jail awaiting the court's judgment on charges of rape and gender falsification. "When the courts have not yet given the verdict, how can individuals condemn her? Pinki was a simple girl. I have seen her since her school days. Sports was her life. This entire ordeal has been a nightmare for her parents and a tragedy for the young girl. The law guarantees people a level of respect which has been disregarded," says former Purulia MLA Nishikanta Mehta of Forward Bloc. Pinki was arrested on June 14 for allegedly raping her roommate Anamika Acharya. They lived together at the Sports Authority of India (SAI) Hostel in Kolkata. Assumed to be a man by the police, Pramanik has not been allowed to avail of a woman's cell and women police escorts. She was forced to undergo non-consensual gender tests on June 14 and subjected to abusive handling by male policemen. The West Bengal Human Rights Commission (WBHRC) has directed the home, health and police departments to inquire into the alleged `inhuman torture' of Pinki. "A complaint has been submitted alleging inhuman torture both in jail and police custody," WBHRC Chairman Justice Ashok

N

NATH (LEFT) WITH HUSSAIN

RUMEE NATH

PTI

Private Lives,Public Rage
Congress MLA and her second husband accuse two ministers of stirring trouble for them

O

PRAMANIK OUTSIDE BARASAT DISTRICT COURT

PRAMANIK HAS NOT BEEN ALLOWED TO USE AWOMAN'S CELLAND WOMEN POLICE ESCORTS. SHE HAS BEEN FORCED TO UNDERGO NON-CONSENSUALGENDER TESTS.
Kumar Ganguly said in a letter to the three departments on July 3. Dr Laila Das, who has been the scientific officer of sports medicine at SAI, Kolkata, for 23 years, says the issue needs to be handled with care. "No doctor or hospital can conduct such a test without the consent of the patient. Second, to broadcast a person undergoing any sort of testing should be a punishable offence. And last, one must remember that we are dealing with a human being," says Das. While tests for general fitness and health are performed regularly, gender testing is not part of the medical agenda at the sports authority. "Gender is usually determined through chromosome and hormonal tests. It is an extremely sensitive and confidential procedure. You are questioning someone's identity and sense of self," explains Tamal Kanti Ghosh, medical supervisor at SSKM Hospital, where Pramanik was tested. Pramanik comes from a tribal family based in the village of Tilakdi, 400 km from Kolkata. Despite the public humiliation, Pinki's neighbours swear by her character. "Everyone in this area has a lot of respect for her and her family. We are poor people. We don't

n June 26, during a public meeting at Hailakandi in Barak Valley, Assam Public Health Engineering Minister Gautam Roy said, "Why should young Hindu girls marry Muslim boys? Why should young Muslim girls marry Hindu boys? Is there any dearth of bridegrooms among co-religionists? Any young boy or girl who has an inter-religious marriage must be boycotted by the village and should be bashed up." Three days later, a mob of 100 people barged into the Nakshatra Hotel in neighbouring Karimganj district, where Congress MLA Rumee Nath, 33, and her second husband, Zakir Hussain, 29, were staying, and thrashed the couple. Nath, who represents Barkhola constituency in Cachar, another important district in Barak Valley, and Hussain locked themselves up in the bathroom, but the mob broke open the door. The police reached the spot only an hour later. Television cameras clearly showed that there was an attempt to strip Nath, who is reportedly pregnant. She was slapped and kicked on her face and abdomen. Her fault? The Hindu MLA had converted to Islam to marry her Facebook friend `Jackie' Zakir on April 13. She has not yet divorced her first husband Rakesh Kumar Singh, a doctor by profession. Roy, however, denies any role in this attack against Nath and claims that his statement was twisted by the

media. "I was only warning parents against conversion, just to facilitate marriage. The incident happened in Karimganj, which is not my district. Rumee does not represent Karimganj. What was she doing there?" the Barak Valley politician told INDIA TODAY. Roy condemned the attack, but added that it was only a reflection of public sentiment. "Rumee's twoyear-old daughter has been crying for her mother. But she is spending nights in hotels with another man. People don't expect such things from an MLA," he says. Hussain claims that the hotel is controlled by Minister of State for Border Development Siddique Ahmed, another Barak Valley strongman. On July 2, Karimganj Deputy Commissioner Debeswar Malakar ordered SDO (Sadar) Shanti Singh to inquire into the attack and submit a report within 14 days. The three personal security officers of Nath were suspended due to dereliction of duty. Nath now wants Congress President Sonia Gandhi to come to her rescue, as she believes her political rivals have "ganged up" to destroy her career. "Only six persons have been arrested, even though many others could be identified from TV visuals," she says."I won't comment if these two ministers are involved in the attack or not but their comments on my second marriage have definitely created trouble for me," says Nath. by Kaushik Deka

58

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

