Na tion UTTAR PRADESH
amajwadi Party (SP) chief Mulayam Singh Yadav is reknowned for his U-turns but now it seems he has competition from his son Akhilesh. On July 3, the Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister announced in the Assembly that MLAs who did not have a car of their own would be allowed to buy one using their MLA Local Area Development funds. This immediately led to a furore both on the floor of the House and outside, with indignant civil society activists and the media questioning his decision. A day later, he changed his mind, announcing: "I take back the decision because the media did not interpret it in the right manner. And our MLAs also said they don't want to use their funds to buy cars." The decision comes in the wake of another controversial rollback barely a fortnight ago. On June 17, the state labour department had issued an order asking all shops and malls to close by 7 p.m. for the next fortnight in a bid to battle the power crisis--the demand for power in the state has risen to a record high of 12,500 megawatt (MW) this summer, while supply is a mere 8,000 MW. With traders up in arms, the Opposition calling it a "Tughlaqi order" and stalling Assembly proceedings, Akhilesh shelved the plan to save 1,500-1,800 MW power in urban areas and withdrew the order within 24 hours. SP state spokesman Rajendra Chaudhary tried to put a spin on it, saying it only shows the government is "democratic". The government's indecision was evident from Day One itself. On March 15, the day Akhilesh took oath as Chief Minister, Arvind Kumar Singh `Gop', Bhagwat Sharan Gangwar, Aruna Kori and Rajendra Singh Rana were made ministers of state. Three days later, they were promoted to ministers of state with independent charge. A senior SP leader points out that `Gop' was rewarded for not deserting the party despite being close to former leader Amar Singh and being instrumental in the party doing well in Barabanki in the Assembly elections. He says Kori is the only woman minister and Gangwar the only Kurmi

S

GUJARAT

Keshubhai Baits Modi
BJP veteran quits party, urges party workers not to support the Chief Minister
he war between Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi, 61, and his bête noire Keshubhai Patel, 83, turned openly ugly on July 2 when Patel urged BJP workers to "uproot those who believe in no-repeat theories". The reference was to Modi's tendency to not repeat candidates, especially in civic polls. Only two days earlier, former Gujarat chief minister Suresh Mehta had

T

AKHILESH YADAV AT A`JANATA DARBAR' IN LUCKNOW
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Mehta and Keshubhai plan to reduce Modi's strong base in urban areas as they believe he is weak in the state's rural areas. Elections will be held in Gujarat in December 2013. Patel says he will not renew his primary BJP membership as his ties with the party have ended. The octogenarian leader has turned his blog into a launchpad for making vicious attacks on Modi. In June he wrote, "It will be

front could divide the votes to his advantage. Second, he believes his performance will speak for itself. Third, a recent survey has shown that Modi is very much ahead in the race. The survey was done in June by the Ahmedabad-based Talim Research Foundation, which is run by independent researchers. It showed that BJP will come back to power in the state with a sound majority. As many as 46 per

REGIME OF ROLLBACKS
The Akhilesh Yadav government is fast earning a dubious reputation for going back on its decisions
leader in the list of ministers and hence the promotions. But the SP leader can't explain why this logic did not apply when they were sworn in. A similar indecision is apparent in transfers and postings as well. On March 28, the government posted senior IAS officer Fateh Bahadur as principal secretary (religious affairs) and Navneet Sehgal, then secretary to the chief minister, as judicial member in the Revenue Council, Allahabad. However, two days later the government decided to swap Bahadur and Sehgal's new assignments. On March 29, senior IAS officer Sanjay Agarwal was made principal secretary in the Chief Minister's Office. But within 24 hours, Agarwal was asked to return to his earlier post of principal secretary (medical and health). The perception is fast gaining ground that the 39-year-old Chief Minister is not being allowed to make his own decisions by his uncles Shivpal Yadav and Ram Gopal Yadav and senior SP leader Azam Khan. Leader of Opposition Swami Prasad Maurya rubs it in: "There are three to four chief ministers in the Government. That explains these numerous U-turns."
by Ashish Misra
Photographs by SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

KESHUBHAI WROTE,"IT WILL BE BETTER IF MODI GOES TO DELHI AS THAT WILL RELIEVE GUJARAT OF HIS BURDEN." MODI HAS REFRAINED FROM REACTING TO KESHUBHAI'S PROVOCATIONS.
KESHUBHAI PATEL (LEFT) AND NARENDRA MODI

SAMAJWADI PARTY STATE SPOKESMAN RAJENDRA CHAUDHARY SAYS THE FREQUENT U-TURNS ONLY SHOW THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS "DEMOCRATIC".

hinted that they were thinking of setting up a third front under the leadership of Patel. Mehta's hint followed a June 29 meeting of Patel's loyalists, which concurred that as a party BJP has lost all vigour as it "has surrendered to the diktats of Modi and was not willing to listen to anything against him". Under the banner of Parivartan Lok Jagruti Abhiyan, Patel will address eight public meetings in Ahmedabad, Vadodara, Surat and Rajkot, which have 50 of the state's 182 constituencies.

better if Modi goes to Delhi as that will relieve Gujarat of his burden." In another diatribe, the former chief minister wrote, "BJP workers have been turned into bonded labourers. They are being treated as untouchables while meetings are being held with industrialists in five-star hotels." So far, Modi has refrained from reacting to Patel's provocations. He has even ensured that the Gujarat leadership of the BJP ignores the former chief minister's verbal assaults. The Chief Minister has his reasons for doing so. One, he believes that a third

cent of the respondents from 41 key constituencies supported BJP to Congress's 24 per cent. The rest said they would decide as the polls draw closer. Of the 46 per cent who wanted BJP back in government, as much as 84 per cent said Modi's performance, based on good governance, was very good. State BJP Secretary Bharat Pandya says, "We don't want to counteract negativity with negativity because we want to play the politics of development based on positivity." Modi could not have said it better himself.
by Uday Mahurkar

40

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

