SIMPLY DELHI

Trends
MEETA AHLAWAT

At your doorstep
CHECK OUT SOME OF THESE GREAT HOME DELIVERY OPTIONS IN TOWN

Country kitchen
Prima Kurien, who calls herself a "compulsive cook" is passionate about food and that reflects in her cooking. Kurien, a Syrian Christian from Kerala's Kottayam district has familiarised Delhiites with a variety of authentic Kerala dishes and this is the closest you can get to sampling home-cooked Malayali food. Among the hot sellers are her chicken and mutton biryanis, avial--mixed veggies in curd and ground coconut, appam and stew among others. The only non-Malayali dish on Kurien's menu is the Goan pork and chicken vindaloo. Place your order at least 24 hours in advance. Price Rs 375 onwards per dish (Serves three) Tel 9811820074

BY REWATI RAU AND EKTA MARWAHA

Baked temptations
Ridhima Khanna's phone never stops ringing, as orders for birthday parties, get-togethers and gifts pour in. A passionate baker, she started baking at the age of ten and there has been no looking back since. Khanna's melt-in-the-mouth cupcakes with exotic toppings have become the talk of the town ever since she opened her kitchen to Delhiites two years ago. With more than 20 flavours on offer, she customises orders to create a cupcake of your choice. We particularly like her red velvet, nutella, and simply chocolate flavours. Place your order at least a day in advance. Price Rs 900 for a dozen cupcakes Tel 9953393808; facebook.com/addicted.freshlybaked
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

MEETA AHLAWAT

Spread it on
Fancy trying a banana rum jam? Or maybe a mango-jalapeño jam? Apeksha Jain makes these and more unusual jams and delivers them to your doorstep. Also, the jams she makes are completely natural and have no preservatives. Using mostly seasonal fruits, Jain ensures the freshness in her jams. The flavours you can choose from include apple-cinnamon-butter and kiwi-orange-whiskey among others. Place your order two to three days in advance. Price Rs 360 for 300 grams Tel 9650077622; facebook.com/thegourmetjar

Vegge delight
After continuous news reports on the quality of our vegetables and the chemicals/pesticides they come with, IT proffessional Nitish Vij started his own little set up where he cultivates vegetables using bio fertilisers. He started off with a small kitchen garden, and went onto leasing a plot of land near his home in Modi Nagar. Now, Vij is supplying farm fresh vegetables to many parts of Delhi, at a price cheaper than the market and at your doorstep. Along with vegetables, you can also buy unpolished wheat, rice and barley. Future plans include dairy products. First time customers may have to wait a day or two for their order, regular customers may order anytime. Delivery is available across Delhi at no additional charge. Price Depends on the vegetable, but claims to be cheaper than the local vendor's price Tel 09368216293; freshvegstore.com
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

The natural way
You can give your lifestyle a complete makeover by just one phone call. Here's how: Started by Daisy Malik in December 2010, The Roots organic store houses everything organic under one roof. Take your pick from alfa alfa powder, wheat grass powder and more. Also available is a wide range of baby food including mashed vegetable mixture, raagi and wheat products. Apart from the edible range, Malik

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

also stores personal care items like body washes, anti ageing oils, cleansing milk and anti wrinkle creams. If you want to flaunt organic wear, order some socks, under clothes, night suits or yoga mats from her. Malik has tied up with different companies all over India and abroad for sourcing these products which all have international certifications for being organic. Price Rs 15 onwards Tel 9811019811

