Na tion KARNATAKA

AMother Listens to Her Co nscience
French consulate official Pascal Mazurier's wife knew he was repeatedly abusing their baby. Now that she has spoken up, she will fight all the way for justice.
PTI

did not act earlier, and says that she thought she was being paranoid and did not want to be considered the husband-doubting wife. "I need to learn to unlove him. I am the mother of three children and I hope justice can be served to them," she says. Jones was finally forced to act after the child complained of pain while passing urine and stool in May 2012. The child told her in words and actions that her father was sexually abusing her. Jones took her daughter on June 6 to Enfold Trust, an organisation that works on such issues, where Dr Shaibya Saldana examined the child. The doctor gave a preliminary report of sexual abuse. As Jones waited for the formal report, the child's nanny told her that Mazurier had taken the child into a bedroom and locked the door for a couple of hours on June 13. Jones immediately took the child to doctors at a private hospital. "Dr Madhuri, paediatrician at the Bangalore Baptist Hospital, examined my daughter and both Dr Madhuri and Dr Nalini, a gynaecologist, took vaginal and anal

B K RAMESH

MAZURIER BEING TAKEN TO HOSPITAL FOR A MEDICAL EXAMINATION, IN BANGALORE

MAZURIER HAS BEEN SENT TO JUDICIAL CUSTODY FOR 14 DAYS AND SUBJECTED TO A DNA TEST TO OBTAIN EVIDENCE IF HE HAD ABUSED HIS DAUGHTER.
swabs for further laboratory tests. The doctors indicated that there were also signs of anal gaping," Jones states in her complaint. On June 14, the lab results came. "They found that the swab tested positive for sperm. They found signs of forceful penetrative sexual assault in the vagina and anus. They also found the hymen broken," the complaint adds, requesting the police to register cases of rape and unnatural sexual acts against Mazurier. Jones and her daughter are now under police protection and being counselled at NIMHANS. Mazurier was kept by the French

By Sowmya Aji

n a horrific case of suspected paedophilia, French consulate official Pascal Mazurier, 39, allegedly repeatedly raped his daughter from age two to her present age of three years and ten months. Her Indian mother, Suja Jones, 37, kept mum all this while for fear of being considered paranoid. Sources told INDIA TODAY that the other two children of the couple, both boys, aged seven and two, might also have been abused. The police case registered in Bangalore, however, has

I

been limited to the girl child, who has been examined by three sets of doctors, including some from a government hospital, and clear evidence of rape has been found. The case has traumatised Bangalore and brought a flood of email and supportive messages from all over the world to Jones, after she finally mustered the courage to register a police complaint against Mazurier on June 14. The Frenchman has been arrested by the Bangalore police and sent to judicial custody for 14 days, while a DNA test has been conducted on him to obtain conclusive evidence whether he

had abused his daughter. Jones's statement on the issue to the High Grounds police station in Bangalore reveals what appears to be clear evidence of her daughter's abuse by her husband since the baby was two years old: "Around April 2010, when I was pregnant with my third child, my daughter, who was then about two years, would make statements to the effect that Pascal was hurting her on the genitals/private parts. A couple of times I came across redness on the genitals. When I questioned my husband, he would claim that the soreness/redness was caused

ACTIVISTS PROTEST IN FRONT OF THE FRENCH CONSULATE IN BANGALORE

due to the child playing on the slide." Jones's explanation for not taking the child seriously then, as stated in her complaint, is: "Since I was pregnant, I did not pay much notice to what my daughter was saying. Again, after the birth of my son, I noticed that when my daughter, who was sleeping, was picked up by my husband Pascal, the child started saying that she did not want to be hurt on her private parts. When I again questioned my husband Pascal, he brushed it aside." The mother is distraught that she

consulate on their premises from the day the complaint was registered, but was arrested on June 19 after the Ministry of External Affairs and the French Embassy stated that as chief of joint chancellerie, he did not enjoy diplomatic protection. Jones's family members, an uncle and a sister from Ernakulam in Kerala, have arrived to support her, but her father-in-law, Jacquez, only sent her an email stating she should have confronted her husband rather than file a police case against him. "I am educated and yet it took so long for me to come out with this. Other women also need to come out with such doubts, whether they are true or not ," says Jones. Jones was working as a travel agent in Kolkata, where she was born and brought up, when she met Mazurier, a French consulate employee, in 2000. They fell in love and got married in Port Saint Marie, France, on October 20, 2001. But things went downhill from 2005--the year her eldest son was born, after Mazurier began subjecting her to domestic violence. Since then, she has been attending counselling sessions to deal with it. "My husband obviously needs extensive therapy," she says. Her lawyer, Pramila Nesargi, told INDIA TODAY: "We will fight the case here in India and also take it up in France. French law is very strong on the issue of child abuse. The children and Suja will also get better compensation and support under French law." Jones has also written to the French Embassy seeking financial support. The French government not only paid a salary to Mazurier but also gave an allowance to his family all these years which he would put in a joint account with his wife. Soon after her complaint, he reportedly transferred the money to a bank account in France, which Jones cannot access. "She has also written to the home and external affairs ministries to ensure that her husband does not fly out. We are also filing another petition in the court to ensure that the custody of the children remains with her all through," says Nesargi. 

42

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

