Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

Arm yourself with some basic facts before boarding an aircraft. Both the journey and the destination can be hazardous to your health.

FLY SMARTAND SAFE
Smooth Flight
Close contact in cramped, crowded aircraft may facilitate the transmission of germs and diseases from person to person, or through contact with contaminated surfaces.A US study confirms the presence of germs in aircraft, bathrooms and tray tables--from Norovirus to E. coli, that cause vomiting, diarrhoea, cold and flu.

WATER FOR IMMUNITY
At altitudes of 30,000 to 35,000 ft, at which most commercial airlines fly, you are likely to lose a lot of moisture from your body. Apart from the atmosphere, the recirculation systems of airplane cabins dry the air, compromising the body's natural defence system. And if you are already congested from allergies or a cold, the problem is even more acute. Drink as much water as you can before and on the flight and carry nasal saline sprays to keep the delicate membranes inside your nose irrigated.

APP UP FOR JABS
Healix Travel Vaccinations is a free iPhone and iPad app that tells you what vaccinations you need in which country, apart from other travel advice to make sure that your journey is safe.

YOGHURT Before Boarding
Yoghurt is cultured with lactic acid, with its beneficial probiotic bacteria that strengthen the digestive and immune systems. Studies show how a cup of low-fat yoghurt a day reduces susceptibility to colds by 25 per cent and boosts immune system resistance. So eat yoghurt every day for a few days before you fly. Have it as an in-flight snack, if possible, or buy a parfait--the frozen dessert that contains yoghurt--at airport coffee shops.

70 million
passengers fly on domestic air routes in India and 30 million fly out of the country annually.

DISEASE ALERT
Urban Indians with high disposable income are flying down to exotic foreign locales. But it pays to be up-to-date on health alerts and vaccinations before boarding the flight.

MEASLES On the rise in East Europe, France, UK and Southeast Asia. You may be exposed to the germs even on airplanes or at airports. DENGUE Most common cause of fever among travellers returning

from the Caribbean, Central America, and South and Central Asia. There's an alert against dengue in Singapore. INFLUENZA Beware if you are travelling to Southeast Asia this month: There is a pandemic influenza alert on in Macau.


Source: World Health Organization & Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, June 2012; International Air Transport Association (IATA), 2012

Compiled by Damayanti Datta
JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

NEW

