Nation

UTTAR PRADESH
Mulayam might claim credit, but sources in UPPCL say this practice of procuring power from other states on credit, which the SP chief resorted to as chief minister between 2003 and 2007 and which Mayawati followed from 2007 to March 2012, is one of main reasons behind the current crisis. Proof of this was evident on June 18 when the Himachal Pradesh government declared that Uttar Pradesh owes it Rs 180 crore and it would supply more power only after the realisation of dues. A UPPCL official adds, "We have to pay dues of about Rs 3,200 crore to various states. They have refused to give us power anymore." Politics has also affected plans to increase power generation in the state. The Akhilesh government has scrapped power projects worth Rs 6,168 crore in Karchana, Meja, Aanpara and Lalitpur, foundation stones for which were laid during BSP rule, and declared that it would come up with other power projects. Meanwhile, the state reels from darkness after sunset. Lucknow and its outlying areas suffer power cuts of about eight hours daily. Kanpur, a hub of leather industries, has electricity for about 14 hours in a day. Noida, Greater Noida and Ghaziabad residents get 10 to 16 hours of power supply. The rural hinterland is the worst off. "We are getting five to six hours of power daily. There's no rain and we have to plant paddy. What will happen if we don't have power to draw water from tubewells?" asks Brijesh Govind Rao, 40, a resident of Ramkola in Kushinagar. "Although the Chief Minister has said that industries should be given priority, our focus is also on farmers and rural areas," assures Waqar Ahmed Shah, the state's labour minister. Shailendra Dubey, secretary-general of the All India Power Engineers Federation, sums up the situation: "The crux of the matter is lack of vision of successive governments, non-maintenance of existing power projects, high-handedness of the private companies involved in tariff collection, increased demand in summer and the corruption of a section of officials and consumers who steal power." 

Lights Out in Akhilesh's UP
The ruling Samajwadi Party blames Mayawati for the state's electricity crisis
By Piyush Srivastava

RAJASTHAN

BACK TO SQUARE ONE
The escape of a key witness complicates the police probe into the murder of Bhanwri Devi
n yet another instance of the Rajasthan Police's ineptitude in the sensational Bhanwri Devi case, a key witness, Kailash Jakhar, seen as instrumental towards nailing the high-profile accused, has escaped. The murder of Bhanwri, a Jodhpur-based auxiliary nurse, in September 2011 had shaken the Ashok Gehlot government after two Congress leaders, MLA Malkhan

n Uttar Pradesh, even a crippling power crisis isn't above politics. Quickly forced to rescind its June 17 order that all malls, shops, IT/BPO firms and other establishments in the National Capital Region would be shut by 7 p.m. daily for the next fortnight, the Akhilesh Yadav-led Samajwadi Party (SP) government is looking to shift the blame for inadequate power supply on the policies of former chief minister Mayawati. "The Chief Minister doesn't want to hear that 10 power generation units in the state are down with snags, creating a shortfall of 1,800 megawatt (MW). He gets annoyed when we tell him that while the average daily demand is 12,000 MW, it goes up to 13,200 MW in summer. In fact, he gets angry at every explanation," says an Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited (UPPCL) official who attended a meeting called by Akhilesh on June

I

18, the day the government withdrew its 7 p.m. closure order. The message is clear: The government, which came to power on the promise of power supply for 20 hours daily in rural areas and 22 hours in urban areas, won't talk about improving power generation and distribution. Instead, it is hunting for `political angles'. SP chief Mulayam Singh Yadav dug up one such `political conspiracy' at a meeting in Lucknow on June 17, telling party workers that there was

"Power worth Rs 6,000 crore was purchased on credit from others during BSP's rule. Now the burden is on us to pay the dues.
MULAYAM SINGH YADAV, Samajwadi Party Chief

power theft of up to 40 per cent in the state and some officers loyal to the previous government were conspiring to aggravate the power crisis. "The BSP (Bahujan Samaj Party) chief minister (Mayawati) didn't care for the cleaning and repair of machines of the power generation and distribution units. Power worth Rs 6,000 crore was purchased on credit from others during BSP's rule. Now the burden is on us to pay the dues," Mulayam said. The SP chief then brought the late V.P. Singh into his line of fire. "My government wanted to set up a 25,000 MW power plant (the Dadri power project) in Ghaziabad in 2005. But a former prime minister organised protests and scuttled the plan. I procured electricity from West Bengal and Karnataka during my rule and ensured uninterrupted power supply. But the previous government spoilt everything," he added.
THE GOVERNMENT WITHDREW AN ORDER ASKING MALLS TO SHUT DOWN BY 7 P.M.

I

Bishna Ram's testimonies, given soon after their arrest on January 4, that the police were able to recover Bhanwri's ashes and her wrist watch from a canal in their village Jalora. CBI was hoping to implicate Maderna and Malkhan by linking their aides to Jakhar and Bishna Ram. Bhanwri had made CDs taping her sexual encounters with both the politicians and was allegedly black-

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

AMIT KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

POLICE BELIEVE MADERNA AND MALKHAN HAD MOTIVE TO GET BHANWRI KILLED.
KAILASH JAKHAR, WHO ESCAPED FROM POLICE CUSTODY

Singh Bishnoi, 52, and former minister Mahipal Maderna, 58, were arrested. Midway through the trial, a gang of 15 armed assailants stormed the premises of the Jodhpur bench of the Rajasthan High Court on June 6, where Jakhar was brought to face trial in another case, and `rescued' the 23-year-old after a shootout. Jakhar's testimony is crucial in the case. The CBI chargesheet states that he and another accused, Bishna Ram, had been asked by Sahi Ram Bishnoi, an aide of Maderna, to murder and then destroy Bhanwri's body. In fact, it was on the basis of Jakhar and

mailing them. CBI believes the duo had enough motive to arrange her abduction and murder. Apart from Jakhar, Maderna and Malkhan, 13 others have been arrested in this case. CBI's case is weak for now. Both Jakhar and Bishna Ram deny killing her, claiming Bhanwri was already dead when her body was handed over to them for disposal by Maderna's aide Sohan Lal Bishnoi and two others. On their part, Sohan Lal and his cohorts claim that Bhanwri was alive when they handed her over. Jakhar's escape only complicates the plot further. by Rohit Parihar

46

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

