Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

TOO MUCH DOOM AND GLOOM
India's economy will thrive when innovative entrepreneurs beat crony capitalists
By Dhiraj Nayyar

CHURNING THE EARTH: THE MAKING OF GLOBAL INDIA
byAseem Shrivastava and Ashish Kothari Penguin Price: RS 699 Pages: 394

JUGAAD INNOVATION: A FRUGALAND FLEXIBLE APPROACH TO INNOVATION FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
byNavi Radjou,Jaideep Prabhu and Simone Ahuja Random House Price: RS 499 Pages: 317 BETWEEN THE COVERS Left-wing critiques like Churning the Earth fall short bylaying all the blame of India's ills at the door of private capital. Jugaad is a perfect riposte to Churning the Earth.It is also a riposte to the inflexible world of big business,in India and abroad,which maybe losing out the crucial innovation race to smaller, nimbler competitors.

t can be no one's case that India is anywhere near achieving its full economic potential. The real debate is whether the glass of India's economic progress is half full or half empty. The narrative of Churning the Earth by Aseem Shrivastava and Ashish Kothari falls firmly into the second, pessimistic category. In fact, it doesn't even concede that India's glass is half full. It entirely dismisses the rapid economic growth achieved over the last two decades, arguing that "the benefits of this unprecedented economic growth can never trickle down... it will keep enriching the already rich". It is unfortunate that the authors take such an extreme left-wing stand. They seem to overlook the fact that the middle class has grown rapidly--from the rungs of the previously deprived--in the last two decades. They seem to also ignore how even the poorest have gained from economic reform, in the form of easy access to mobile phones for example. Of course, when it's not being mindlessly ideological, the book raises serious concerns about India's economic growth story. The authors raise questions about crony capitalism. It is hard for any sensible citizen not to be concerned at the unholy nexus between the state and private sector players in certain sectors. The question of the fast depletion of natural resources raised prominently in the book is one that has not been considered seriously enough by the policymakers. The book has an interesting portion on the acute water problem--an issue that has occupied newspaper headlines in recent

I

weeks. Left-wing critiques like Churning the Earth fall short by laying all the blame of India's ills at the door of private capital. On the contrary, the reason why India has developed as far as it has, is because of the private sector. Jugaad Innovation, written by Navi Radjou, Jaideep Prabhu and Simone Ahuja, is a brilliant treatise on how India's private sector has increasingly begun to "do more with less", in full acknowledgement of the scarcity of resources and a market which has limited purchasing power. A real page-turner, Jugaad is a perfect riposte to Churning the Earth. It is also a riposte to the inflexible world of big business, in India and abroad, which may be losing out the crucial innovation race to smaller, nimbler competitors. The book lays out the business principles of jugaad innovation and backs them up with case studies. It has a section of India's most famous jugaad venture--the Rs 1-lakh Tata Nano. But the interesting stuff is what you haven't read about. While Churning the Earth hits out at soft drink manufacturers such as Coke and Pepsi for wasting groundwater, Jugaad writes about how Pepsi's India operations have worked out a technology that can save paddy farmers 30 per cent of their water consumption. The authors have examples of jugaad from other emerging markets--like the M-Pesa mobile money transfer scheme in Kenya-- where entrepreneurs are forced to make to do with constraints unlike their better endowed western counterparts. The book is a treasure trove of solutions to precisely the kind of real problems flagged by Shrivastava and Kothari in their book. If anyone can fill the glass of India's economic story, it will be non-crony innovative entrepreneurs, not the leviathan state or well-meaning but ineffective NGOs. 
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

NEW

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

