Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

ROMANCING THE REPUBLIC
Kalam shows why he is such a role model for anyone hoping for a life in public service
By Kaveree Bamzai

TURNING POINTS: A JOURNEYTHROUGH CHALLENGES
byAPJ Abdul Kalam HarperCollins Price: RS 199 Pages: 182 BETWEEN THE COVERS As a guide for living,the bookcouldn't get better. As APJ Abdul Kalam says in an interviewquoted in the book: "Don't pretend to be a candle, be a moth."That's reassuring in an age where everyone wants to glow.

f APJ Abdul Kalam didn't exist, India would have had to invent him. At a time of out-oftouch dynasts and out-to-lunch bureaucrats, he represents the best of aspirational India--a resolute work ethic and unquestionable integrity. It doesn't hurt that in an atmosphere of doom and gloom, he is unfailingly optimistic. And he has no distractions. No children to find jobs for, no empire to build, and as a lasting legacy, can anything beat helping to build a nuclear bomb? As he says in the preface, "my story echoes the concerns, anxieties and aspirations of many Indians. Like them, I started my life from the lowest step in the ladder." From senior scientific assistant to president, it's really a modern day fairy tale. Turning Points: A Journey Through Challenges is billed as a sequel to Wings of Fire and largely covers the years after 1992. It keeps the same, simple and unvarnished style of addressing readers directly and works well as an account of his years as president, when he tried to redefine the role of First Citizen. Much of the book is devoted to housekeeping details of Rashtrapati Bhavan--how he installed virtual conferencing, ensured immediate access to information from governments and Planning Commission, renovated the presidential train, and revamped the Mughal Gardens. But there are some wonderful cameos. Take Field Marshal Sam Manekshaw, whom he meets on a flight. He asks him his age, and when he replies, Manekshaw tells

I

him: "You are a bachcha." Or the time he made bitter rivals Lalu Yadav and Nitish Kumar shake hands with each other in front of a crowd, much like naughty schoolboys. Or when he met Nelson Mandela at Robben Island, and lent him his shoulder for support. There is much to chew on his thoughts on water and energy. There are details of his initiative PURA (Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas), which needs to be revived and his Vision 2020 for India, which needs to be fulfilled. Devotees of recent political history will be disappointed that there is not more on why Sonia Gandhi waited for three days to stake the Congress's claim to form the government in 2004, or what he felt about Chief Minister Narendra Modi when he visited Gujarat after the riots, or the pressures on him when he returned the Office of Profit Bill. There's only a passing mention of a conversation he has with Samajwadi Party chief Mulayam Singh Yadav and his former aide Amar Singh on the 2008 trust vote on the Indo-US nuclear deal, where he appears to have persuaded them to support UPA. But as a guide for living, it couldn't get better. As he says in an interview quoted in the book: "Don't pretend to be a candle, be a moth." In an age where everyone wants to glow, it is reassuring to know we still have the capacity to admire someone who believes in service and sacrifice. We know at least one person who must have certainly purchased an advance copy. Yes, that's you, Mr Mukherjee. If Kalam redefined the president's role in nation-building, Pranab Mukherjee will be expected to reshape its relevance in the nation's politics. We can't wait for him to get started. 

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

