ASSAM

PORTRAITOFMINISTER AS RABBLE-ROUSER
By Kaushik Deka

Gautam Roy's speeches range from `irrelevance' of Gandhi to `relevance' of same-religion marriages

t's 9.30 p.m. on July 7. Assam Public Health Engineering Minister Gautam Roy, 65, is watching DY365, an Assamese news channel, at room no. 501 of Guwahati's Nakshatra Hotel, owned by his wife. The channel is beaming visuals of his visit to Kamakhya temple earlier in the day. "Filthy swines. I can't even visit a temple peacefully because of these journalists. Next time I go to the loo, they will chase me there," screams Roy. Then he breaks into laughter as he sees the temple priest being interviewed. "Thanks to me, he is on television. Who would have cared for him otherwise?" Journalists don't hound the Congress minister without reason. He often makes statements that shock. At a public meeting at Tezpur in May, he thundered: "It's no use following Mahatma Gandhi now. My father was a Gandhian. He won only one election. I don't follow the Mahatma. I won six elections." He added, "I have seen politicians singing paeans to the Mahatma at public meetings. They are getting nowhere. I tell them to follow the right path." Roy has represented Katlicherra in Hailakandi district since 1985; his father, Santosh Kumar Roy, was elected from the same constituency in 1972. Asked if he made those comments, Roy says: "They quoted me out of context. Where do you find Gandhi today? Only on currency notes. I don't chase money. Thanks to my wife's hotel and my factory that manufactures electric poles, I earn Rs 50 lakh every month. I live like a king. So I don't need to sell jobs or cut deals with contractors." Roy also justifies his inflammatory statement at Hailakandi on June 26, urging people to thrash young couples

I

ROY
GITIKA TALUKDAR

"It's no use following Gandhi now. My father was a Gandhian. He won only one election. I don't follow the Mahatma. I won six elections."

"Why should Hindu girls marry Muslim boys? Why should Muslim girls marry Hindu boys? Is there any dearth of grooms in their own religion?"

"Filthy swines. I can't even visit a temple peacefully because of these journalists. Next time I go to the loo, they will chase me there."

GAUTAM ROY, Assam Public Health Engineering Minister

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

Na tion
opting for inter-religious marriages: "Why should Hindu girls marry Muslim boys? Why should Muslim girls marry Hindu boys? Is there any dearth of grooms in their own religion? Any young boy or girl opting for an inter-religious marriage must be boycotted and bashed up." Roy's comments allegedly prompted a mob to assault Congress MLA Rumee Nath and her Muslim second husband Jackie Zakir three days later in Karimganj district. "I did not instigate violence against Nath. A Hindu boy had eloped with a Muslim girl in my constituency. The boy was later thrashed by the girl's family. I was asking parents to discourage inter-religious marriages because they create communal tension," says Roy, adding in the same breath, "Who is Rumee Nath? She was finished the day she eloped with another man without divorcing her first husband." Suddenly, his phone rings and he shouts at the caller. He calms down gradually and ends the call with a smile. "It was Rumee. She wanted some money. I keep helping her. After all, her father is a friend of mine. I feel bad for him. In fact, I had given Zakir a job." A Congress MLA says Roy is trying to project himself as the saviour of Hindus in the Barak Valley "to counter RSS's inroads into the region". It helps that his bête noire is Minister of State for Border Development Siddeque Ahmed, who represents Karimganj South constituency. "I don't want to waste my time talking about Ahmed," says Roy. When a reporter asked him about Ahmed at Kamakhya temple, Roy said, "Don't take such names in a Hindu temple." The Barak Valley strongman does not want to talk about another person-- his son Rahul, 38, former Congress MLA from Algapur in Hailakandi district. "He is in bad company. That's why he lost the 2011 elections," says Roy. But he is proud of his daughter Sutanuka, 27, a student at the London School of Economics, who doesn't take any money from her father and asks him to give it to her "greedy" brother. "I don't smoke, drink or womanise. Where do I spend my money?" asks Roy. Perhaps, on the hats and sunglasses he wears even indoors. "Don't I look smart in them?" 

MYSTERY UNFOLDS
JUNE 21, 2012

Tak misleads police, then admits to killings
Asif Sheikh, Laila's other stepfather, killed Laila and her family.

Parvez Tak, Laila Khan's stepfather, is arrested by the Jammu and Kashmir Police.

JULY 5, 2012
Tak is handed over to Mumbai Police.

JUNE 26, 2012
Tak tells police that Laila and her family are in Dubai. He says an aide of Dawood Ibrahim helped them get fake passports.

JULY 8, 2012
Tak admits to Crime Branch that he killed Laila, her mother Shelina, Laila's three siblings Azmina, Zara and Imran, and cousin Reshma on February 9, 2011.

JULY 2, 2012
Maharashtra DGP K. Subramanian hands over investigation to Crime Branch, although Tak is still in the custody of J&K Police.

JULY 10, 2012
Crime Branch finds six skeletons at Laila's farmhouse in Igatpuri and recovers the knife and iron rod Tak used for the murders.
INDIAN EXPRESS

JULY 4, 2012
Tak tells Jammu and Kashmir Police that
(FROM LEFT) LAILA KHAN WITH HER SIBLINGS ZARA AND IMRAN; LAILA'S FARMHOUSE IN IGATPURI; HER MOTHER SHELINA

LAILAKHAN

SKELETONS EXPOSE POLICE HAM-HANDEDNESS
Actor Laila Khan and her family were missing for 17 months. Police found six skeletons, allegedly of the family, at her farmhouse only on their third visit.
By Kiran Tare

O

n July 10, Mumbai Police discovered six skeletons in the backyard of starlet Laila Khan's Igatpuri farmhouse, just 140 km from Mumbai. It took the police 17 months to find them despite two prior visits to the farmhouse. Laila and five of her family were missing since February 2011. The police were not alerted when a fire destroyed parts of the house in June 2011 and furniture from the farmhouse found its way to homes nearby. They did not get suspicious even when they found one of Laila's two Persian cats, whom she took with her everywhere, abandoned at the farmhouse.

The Jammu and Kashmir Police took the initiative to trace the main accused, Parvez Tak, 30, Laila's stepfather, after her car was found in Tak's father's garage in Kishtwar, Kashmir. They traced him to Nepal and lured him back with the promise of a job. Tak told the Kashmir Police that Asif Sheikh, second husband of Laila's mother Shelina, killed Laila. However, when the Mumbai Police interrogated him, Tak admitted he and his accomplice, Shakir Hussain Wani, killed them. Wani, the caretaker of Laila's farmhouse, is absconding. Tak told Mumbai Crime Branch officers that he killed Laila, 29, her mother Shelina, 50, Laila's sister Azmina, 31, twin siblings Zara and Imran, 22, and cousin Reshma, 23, on

February 9, 2011, at Laila's farmhouse. He said he felt humiliated because Laila and Shelina would ask him to serve water to guests and drive their cars, a Honda City, Mitsubishi and Scorpio. He allegedly felt cheated after Shelina announced her plan to give power of attorney of her property to Sheikh and settle down in Dubai. Joint Commissioner of Police (crime) Himanshu Roy said Tak claimed to have killed Shelina first, after they had an argument over her property. "Shelina died on the spot. After that Tak first killed Imran and Zara who had come looking for them. Then with Wani's help, he killed the others," Roy said. Police believe Tak was driven by greed. Shelina, Laila and Azmina owned a flat and a garment shop in Oshiwara, a flat in Mira Road and the Igatpuri farmhouse. The overall worth of these assets was around Rs 6 crore. The skeletons will be authenticated only

after the DNA tests. "We have asked forensic experts to take DNA samples of Laila's father, Nadir Shah Patel, and Shelina's sisters and match them with the DNA of the skeletons," Roy said. The report is expected by July end. Surprisingly, the Oshiwara police went to Laila's Sunshine Apartment to investigate the disappearance only in September 2011, six months after her father filed a missing person complaint. The police station is barely 100 metres away from the apartment block. Even though Patel's sister Albana Patel and Shelina's sister Meher Akhtar informed the police in August 2011 that Shelina had not contacted them since February, the police did not suspect foul play. In September 2011, Meher requested that they carry out a search at the farmhouse. The police overlooked the request. Not just that. In December 2011, Rakesh Sawant, producer of Laila's 2008 film Wafaa, also lodged a missing person complaint. The police sent him back saying they had taken note of his complaint. In January, Laila's father alleged that Sheikh and Tak had conspired to kill the family. The police did not take any action. The police were roused from slumber only when the media ran stories

speculating about Laila's possible connection with terror organisation Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT). A Mumbaibased tabloid reported Laila was in Dubai and her Mitsubishi car was used in the bomb blast outside Delhi High Court in September 2011. The Inspector General of Police of Jammu region, Gareeb Das, denied the reports. However, Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) took cognisance and sent a team to Kashmir in search of Laila and Tak. They did not find a terror angle but because of their action, Laila became the talking point of the media and subsequently the police had to launch a hunt for her by late March this year. Former Mumbai Police commissioner M.N. Singh defends the force and says the police do not take a missing person complaint regarding an adult seriously unless it raises suspicion of foul play. "The police are already burdened. They cannot chase each and every missing person. In Laila's case, the whole family was together with Shelina's socalled husband. They had left home on their own and there was no reason to believe they might have been killed," he told INDIA TODAY. Singh, however, admitted the media played an important role in tracing Laila. "Tak was a wanted accused in other cases. He came on the radar in Laila's case only after the media named him as an accused." Normally, the police forward a missing person complaint to the missing persons bureau, which issues lookout notices. The police search hospitals, mortuaries and even their lock-ups for the missing people. If anyone is found, relatives are informed. According to data available with the missing persons bureau, on an average 28 people go missing in Mumbai every day. The recovery of the skeletons has shattered Laila's grandmother Kaneez Fatma, 85, who lives in Mira Road, on the outskirts of Mumbai. "Why did Parvez kill my little children? What was their fault?" she cried. "Parvez told us he was very religious and did not like his `wife' and `daughters' acting in films. We believed him," says Albana. All Laila's cousin Mehnaz Nazim can say is that the family will need a lot of time to recover from the trauma. 

40

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

NEW

NEW

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

