Na tion PRESIDENTIALRACE
PTI AFP

P.A. SANGMA

PRANAB MUKHERJEE

Experience vs Flair
Pranab Mukherjee banks on history as Sangma goes hi-tech in the race to Rashtrapati Bhavan
t's new age versus tradition. Both presidential candidates, Pranab Mukherjee and P.A. Sangma, have launched their campaigns for Raisina Hill in characteristic style. Sangma's campaign is hi-tech and colourful with a website, glossy brochures, newsy press conferences and even glimpses of him beating a drum in Madhya Pradesh with the state Chief Minister, Shivraj Singh Chouhan, dancing to his tune. In contrast, the cornerstone of Mukherjee's campaign is gravitas, as he tours each state canvassing support. In addition, both have sent out letters of appeal to each MP and MLA. Mukherjee's note--as is typical of the man himself--goes into the historic importance of the office. "This office

I

has been held by the very best of that great generation that constituted the founding fathers of independent modern India," he writes. He traces his own political lineage, stating that "I was schooled in politics by the propoor commitment of Mrs Gandhi". But there is a sub-text here that could be his first warning to the Congress. "The president stands above party politics. Given an opportunity, it shall be my endeavour to protect the values of this office: Integrity, impartiality and promotion of sarva dharma sambhava." Even before he is elected, Mukherjee has made it clear that he is not going to be a rubber stamp. In contrast, Sangma's appeal has more bling. He has sent out a brochure

listing his achievements along with his appeal. His website has a catchy tag line: From Garo Hills to Raisina Hill. Sangma is offering his tribal credentials, pointing out that he is a Garo tribal of Christian faith from Meghalaya. He also elucidates how he is best suited for president by pointing out how as Lok Sabha speaker, he pushed for a parliamentary Committee on Ethics. As a member of Team Sangma put it, "A vote for Sangma is a vote for social justice." The website is reminiscent of the one L.K. Advani had put up in 2009 when he was the BJP's candidate for prime ministership. Mindful of the fact that his daughter Agatha is still a minister in the UPA Government, Sangma is careful not to operate from her home. He has taken a room in Delhi's Vithalbhai Patel House and the press conferences are held at the lawns of BJP leader and Lok Sabha member H.N. Ananth Kumar's home. His `dirty tricks' department is being handled by Janata Party leader Subramanian Swamy, who is coming up with an allegation a day against Mukherjee to attempt his disqualification from the race. First the SwamySangma duo alleged that he held an office of profit as chairman of the Indian Statistical Institute. When Mukherjee released his letter resigning from the post on June 20, they claimed that the signature on the letter was forged. Swamy then said Mukherjee was holding two other offices of profit, as vice-president of Birbhum Institute of Engineering and Technology and chairman of Rabindra Bharati Society. Both institutes have clarified that Mukherjee resigned well before he signed his nomination for president. Sangma is backed by BJP and other parties such as the AIADMK and the Biju Janata Dal. Mukherjee is the UPA's official candidate and has support from such NDA allies as Janata Dal (United) and Shiv Sena. Mukherjee's campaign is largely being handled by himself, with Parliamentary Affairs Minister Pawan Kumar Bansal providing the logistics. With Mukherjee's victory almost a given, the only surprise will be in the margin. And whether he manages to charm Mamata Banerjee. by Priya Sahgal

38

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

