Cin ema NEWACTORS

THE OUTSIDE RS
By Nishat Bari

Six unknowns who came in from the cold and have turned up the heat in Bollywood. Watch out for more of these rising stars.
ner's refusal to make clothes for him for the film festival, what plays heaviest on his mind is that his work could suffer due to the sudden attention. "I get scared now that my concentration will be affected and ruin my work." Perhaps that's why he chooses to live with only his younger brother Shamaas Nawab in Mumbai while the rest of his family, including wife and baby daughter, live in the village. If Siddiqui is the lead of Gangs of Wasseypur 2, his co-star and love interest in Gangs Of Wasseypur, Huma Qureshi, 26, is his emotional backbone. "It's the stuff that dreams are made of," she says excitedly from the Goregaon,

it began with TV A History honours graduate from Gargi College, Delhi, she began with TV ads. Her brother Saqib Saleem was the main lead in 2011's Mujhse Fraandship Karoge. what an idea Featured in an ad in 2009 for Idea Cellular with Abhishek Bachchan. cameo queen Leaves
an impact in the shortest time. People are raving about her 20-minute appearance in Gangs of Wasseypur.

huma qureshi, 26

N

awazuddin Siddiqui, 37, entered Bollywood back in 1999 with a 50-second role of a criminal in Sarfarosh. He shot for the bit scene in Delhi where he was studying theatre at the National School of Drama. It took him 13 long years of constant rejections and minor parts to burn up the screen as Sardar Khan's drug-addled son Faizal Khan in Anurag Kashyap's Gangs of Wasseypur and stun audiences from Cannes to Kolkata. Now as he readies for the release of Gangs of Wasseypur 2 on August 8, he knows his life has changed forever. Within a fortnight of returning from a rapturous premiere of Gangs of Wasseypur at Cannes, he had read 30 scripts. With eight other films waiting for release, the actor from Budhana in Uttar Pradesh is busy criss-crossing India, shooting near Ahmedabad one week, then at Jamnagar days later, doing film promotions in Delhi, hopping across to London for a few days, then back again to Mumbai to begin work on yet another film, leaving him all of five free days in July. He's not complaining. "I was idle for a long time before that," he says, referring to his long years out in the cold. He made an impact as Asghar Yusuf Mukadam, Tiger Memon's secretary in Kashyap's Black Friday, the film on Mumbai's 1993 bombings. The movie got him recognition but no roles. "I got fed up of people saying I am a good actor. No one gave me work." In 2010, Peepli [Live] became a hit and his role of Mr Khan, an arrogant and foul-mouthed Intelligence Bureau officer in Kahaani earlier this year gave him mass recognition. In between a standing ovation at Cannes and a desig-

in the pipeline Gangs Of Wasseypur 2, Luv Shuv Tey Chicken Khurrana, Ek Thi Daayan and Nikhil Advani's untitled action film. Also a three-film deal with Balaji Telefilms.

richa chadda, 26
theatre first A History honours graduate from St. Stephen's College, Delhi, she trained under Barry John and toured widely as a theatre actor. stage debut
An extra in a play Aur Kitne Tukde about the negative impact of the Partition on women. She was 15 then.

nawazuddin siddiqui, 37
farm to film A student
of National School of Drama, Delhi, he hails from a farming family in Budhana, UP. His family is not quite sure what Cannes is but knows he has been honoured for his star turn in Gangs of Wasseypur.

jill of all trades Can
pull off feisty roles like the mouthy dancer Dolly in Oye Lucky! Lucky Oye! and the fiery Nagma Khatoon in Gangs of Wasseypur.

VIKRAM SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

watch out for her latest as a spoilt girl in Mira Nair's short film series, and Bharat Ratan's Tamanchey, a romance between two criminals, opposite Nikhil Dwivedi. Has also signed a drama with a big production house.
MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

first appearance As a criminal in the 1999 Aamir Khan-starrer Sarfarosh with screen time of 50 seconds. man of many parts He can take on each new character so completely that he looks different in every film. more of him Talaash,
Chittagong, Dekh Indian Circus, Lunch Box, Miss Lovely, Liar Dice.

Mumbai, sets of supernatural thriller Ek Thi Daayan with Emraan Hashmi. There is Nikhil Advani's untitled action film after that, besides Sameer Sharma's Luv Shuv Tey Chicken Khurrana, a romantic comedy about food and family opposite Kunal Roy Kapoor. There are also reports of a three-movie deal with Balaji Telefims. Not bad for a girl who was working at Saleem's, a chain of Mughlai restaurants run by her father in Delhi, months before she packed her bags and left for Mumbai in 2008. Her father gave her a year to pursue her acting dreams or return home. She's remained

52

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

53

Cin ema NEWACTORS
in Mumbai but food is still in her blood, she says--an honest confession from a regular size actor in an industry obsessed with being stick thin. Qureshi has skipped the proverbial Bollywood scramble, bagging her very first television ad for Idea with Abhishek Bachchan. Of the 15odd ad campaigns she has done so far, the one she shot with Aamir Khan for Samsung got her the first film. "It was Anurag Kashyap's debut ad as director and it got me Gangs Of Wasseypur," she says. The only difficulty was making the decision to move to Mumbai and feeling homesick enough to make monthly visits to her family for nearly a year. Her father may have been disappointed that both Huma and her brother Saqib Saleem, who was the lead in Mujhse Fraaandship Karoge, chose to become actors but he was very proud of her when they went together to see Gangs Of Wasseypur at a multiplex in Delhi. The family outMANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com
DABBOO RATNANI

yami gautam, 25
nothing official She was studying to be an IAS officer when a chance audition led to a role in a TV soap. The Chandigarh girl gained recognition for portraying Leher Mathur Vajpayee in the TV series Yeh Pyar Na Hoga Kam. She has done films in Telugu, Tamil and Malayalam. royal debut Was Princess Bhairavi in TV soap Raajkumar Aaryyan in 2008. child's play Though a Punjabi girl with roots in Himachal Pradesh, she convincingly played Ashima Roy, a Bengali girl in Vicky Donor. coming soon Allu
Sirish's debut movie Gauravam in Tamil and Telugu. Has also signed a Hindi film.

ayushmann khurrana, 27
moving up The Vicky Donor star is from Chandigarh. He has a master's in mass communication from Panjab University. He began as a radio jockey for Big FM before moving on to MTV as a video jockey and later anchoring shows like Extra Innings. roadie first Began screen career on MTV Roadies 2, which he won. the attraction He has the
boy-next-door look with dazzling dimples. Plus, he can compose and sing his own songs.

forthcoming movies
Rohan Sippy's untitled romcom and Shoojit Sircar's Hamara Bajaj.

ing became a public event, with people presenting her flowers and asking for autographs after the screening. In a world of super-groomed star children, the film industry's newest graduates may be short on glamour but they have a lot more: Character, talent and confidence. Take Ayushmann Khurrana, whose Rs 5-crore Vicky Donor, directed by Shoojit Sircar, made Rs 45 crore at the box office. The actor's own demand has soared ever since, at a pace that he sometimes cannot match. He is running fever as he walks into Vicky Donor producer and actor John Abraham's Bandra office and heads straight for the couch to lie down, raising his head minutes later to flash his dimples and assure everyone he is fine. The 5-7 interviews every day immediately after the film's release has come down to an average of one a day now but there are always events to go to in Dubai, Hyderabad, Singapore, Delhi. And there's the IIFA awards and Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa. "I am a very laidback person from Chandigarh where people don't really work so

54

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

NEW

Cin ema

NEWACTORS
script was different. "There is no baggage behind new actors, no pre-expectations; everything is new. That is what people are looking for and new actors bring a novelty to the role," he says. Richa Chadda, another fresh face in Bollywood, has been doing theatre in Delhi since she was 15. She came to Mumbai in 2008 with Barry John and Baghdad Ke Ghulam, a play he was the lead in. The play fetched her a role in Dibakar Banerjee's Oye Lucky! Lucky Oye!. "A lot of people liked my work in the film but after Gangs Of Wasseypur (where she played Nagma Khatoon) the quality of work I am being offered has changed. A-grade banners, good directors and reliable independent filmmakers are now approaching me," she says. Mira Nair's international short film series is one of those offers and Chadda plays a really spoilt girl who wants everything her way, which ruins relations in her family. She is also excited about a "really big banner film" that she has recently signed but will not breathe a word about it other than that it is "huge". Chadda may have only one other film, Tamanchey, between Oye Lucky!... in 2008 and 2010 when work started on Gangs Of Wasseypur but she continued acting for theatre. What has changed with Nagma Khatoon is respect. "People respect me a little more as an actor now." There are also those for whom acting was a surprise leap of faith. Parineeti Chopra, 24, was on her way to becoming an investment banker after a degree in business, finance and economics from Manchester Business School in the UK. Yami Gautam, 25, "always a good student", was studying to become an IAS officer. Acting happened by chance when a relative sent her pictures to a few production houses and she landed a role in a television series. Making a Hindi film debut with family friend Khuranna turned out to be another surprise. Even Khurrana studied journalism as Plan B. But the darkest clouds hovered over Siddiqui, who almost gave up and went back to his village in Uttar Pradesh. "The only reason I didn't was because I did not know how to do anything else." Now he doesn't need to. 

parineeti chopra, 24
gene junction The Ambala girl is Priyanka Chopra's cousin and was a publicist for Yash Raj Films before landing a three-film deal with them. She has a degree in business, finance and economics from Manchester Business School, UK. all about love First appeared as the lovestruck Dimple Chadda in Maneesh Sharma's 2011 film Ladies VS Ricky Bahl. as good as it gets
She is a complete natural. Shone as a brash gun-toting Zoya Qureshi in Ishaqzaade.

under wraps Will announce a film in mid-July which could be her third project with Yash Raj.
COSMOPOLITAN/SURESH NATARAJAN

much. I am not really used to this and trying to cope." Even though he was already a popular face on television having hosted Extra Innings for IPL 3, India's Got Talent and Just Dance, he worked for just eight days a month until Vicky Donor happened. Now, Khurrana also has to handle sometimes embarrassing attention. Like the time he was in a Malad mall with his mother and a girl began screaming `Ayushmann, I want your sperm'. There may be more such demands as he moves on to Rohan Sippy's untitled romantic comedy, a love triangle with Kunal Roy Kapoor

and a new girl, and another film with Shoojit Sircar, Hamara Bajaj, about a small town actor named Sanjay Bajaj who is a tourist guide at the Taj Mahal and goes on to become a star. The first film was important and Khurrana's ecstatic it worked. "I needed a film where the subject was the hero and takes the responsibility. I am not a star kid and not from the industry. The quirkiness of the subject ushered the audience into the theatre, not me," says the son of an astrologer. Unusual scripts are a big factor in creating space for new actors. Sircar needed to cast fresh faces because the

56

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

NEW

