Cover Story MOBILE APPLICATIONS

Children & Teens
Apps could be the best thing to have happened to education since the book

Analyse your sleep patterns for a better wake-up. Avoid traffic jams. Learn mathematical concepts. Catapult birds at pigs. Or tune your guitar. Whether it's utility or entertainment, where there's a need, there's a mobile phone application.
By Aditi Pai and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

@School (Free and Paid)
iOS By Multiple sources
Teaches you just about anything from algebra to geometry, even games to sugarcoat hard-to-swallow lessons.

Sounds (Free)
iOS By Macmillan Education
Tells pronunciation of words using phonetics. Also teaches how to read phonetics.

Ted (Free) iOS & Android ByTed Conferences Collection of the best from Ted Conferences, teaching anything from music to business mantras. Scientific Calculator (Free)
Windows ByAugenth Inc Can be used for basic arithmetic calculations as well as exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions.

PAVITLUTHRA 15
Student, AHMEDABAD USES BBC news app,Viber

Attano (Free and Paid)
iOS & Android ByAttano Media and Education Gives users access to e-books with a strong focus on India. From pre-school to high education courses, there are books for everyone.

I update the software every two hours. I have over 200 friends on my BlackBerry Messenger. We discuss apps and gadgets all the time.

f there's one thing all children unanimously hate, it's picking up after themselves. All that changed a little, once the ChoreMonster app arrived on the scene in June. The app documents a list of tasks. Parents can monitor how well the children perform by giving them points as rewards. The "positive reinforcement" is so good that, says ChoreMonster's CEO and co-founder Chris Bergman, parents are ready to try it out to discipline kids. Like Tina Parekh, 31, from Mumbai: "I'd like an app to discipline my three-year-old son. Maybe technology will do what I couldn't. I can't wait to try it." Today, apps help you do anything-- from conquering obsessive compulsive disorders to even fixing your relationships. ThumbKiss can help you in a longdistance relationship. When both partners caress the same spot with their thumb on the phone screen, it vibrates, just one of the many features of Pair, an app that creates a lovers' timeline where you can share messages, photos, sketches and notes with your better half. Ayurvedic Tips app can assist you in
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

I

Cover Story

MOBILE APPLICATIONS

drinking the glass of bitter neem juice every day. Track the delicate, handblown glass vase you ordered on Ziegler Track as it travels from Murano to Mumbai. For those who want some fun and music on their smartphone, the Guitar Tuner app can help you strum the right notes. Wee Mail helps moms-to-be track the changes in their bodies throughout pregnancy. "Apps are making our life easier," says actor Imran Khan, 29, who has at least three apps on his phone at all times--Sleep Cycles (analyses your sleep patterns for a better wake-up), Flight Track Pro (tracks live flight itinerary status and flight maps) and Waze (helps you avoid traffic jams on city roads through live updates). You literally have the world within your palm's reach, on your favourite gizmo. Gadgets today are moving beyond the talk-chat-SMS-email routine and opening up new work and play opportunities for Indians. It doesn't matter whether you are a science student, a health freak, a wellness junkie, a closet DJ or a millionaire-in-the-making, if there's a need, there's an app. "While apps may not make you smarter, they give you access to many

RAMANI SWAMY 66
Company Director, CHENNAI USES News apps,Cryptic Crossword app,Golf Rules app on his cellphone

With access to these apps, your phone becomes an appendage. Technology makes life simpler and you're always learning.
H K RAJASHEKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

useful services at any time and place. It's a multi-purpose use of a phone, like a Swiss Army knife. I like calling it the digital Swiss knife," says Raj Singh Bhandal, managing director, 2ergo Group, a Delhi-based company that designs apps used for brandbuilding. Taking the utility aspect further, Lowe and Partners was among the first companies to use customised apps in India for core employee transactions like leave and attendance

Health & fitness
An app can be the personal trainer you could never afford

management. "It covers all the functionalities present in a format amenable to a mobile device. We also have a few niche apps catering to specific business unit needs like campaign execution," says Pravin Savant, CTO, Lowe and Partners. Beyond utility-based apps are those that de-stress and entertain, infusing a dash of fun into the busy urban lives. If you want to have some fun on your smartphone or tablet, try catapulting birds at pigs (Angry Birds), slicing fruits (Fruit Ninja), tweaking pictures (Instagram) or playing pictionary with someone in another continent (Draw Something). "Games like Angry Birds help you give vent to your stress and frustrations; it's calming and entertaining," says Poonam Mahajan Rao, 31, a Mumbai-based politician. Actor and Kolaveri Di singer Dhanush, 28, has an iPad and had a BlackBerry till a few days ago when he traded it for a new Samsung Galaxy S3. "The apps I use are more for fun--I check cricket and football scores on the Score app, interact with my fans on the Twitter app and keep in touch with friends on Whatsapp. I also play games on my phone when I'm bored--Angry Birds and Temple Run are my favourites and my kids love them too." So, be it for some fun and games or a helping hand at work, apps have become an integral part of our lives. In June 2012, the App Store for Apple

TOP OF THE CHARTS

1.Angry Birds By Rovio (Free & Paid)
With over 1 billion downloads, this multi-platform slingshot game is undoubtedly the most popular one around. The latest version, Angry Birds Space, clocked 10 million downloads in just two weeks. The birds will soon feature in a movie and are set to have a theme park of their own.

2.Facebook By Facebook
(Free) No surprises here. The Facebook app is so popular among mobile apps that many phone-makers now bundle it along with the in-built apps.

3.Skype by Skype Software S.a.r.l. (Free)
Skype lets you make free voice and video calls to anyone else on Skype, and low-cost calls to mobiles or landlines.

RunKeeper (Free)
Android By FitnessKeeper Inc.
An app that helps in tracking, measuring as well as improving fitness. It uses GPS to calculate the distance run while it also keeps tab on time, pace, calories, heart rate and path taken.

measure your blood pressure. Shows result in coloured icons to indicate when your blood pressure values are normal, high or low.

NIKHILGILL 25
Engineer, DELHI USES RunKeeper to keep track of his training routine

4.Google Maps by Google
(Free) If you are smart enough for your smartphone, chances are you haven't asked for directions since you downloaded this app. Works anywhere in the world.

First Aid (Free)
Android By Health Team Uses illustrations, videos and short texts to tell you what to do in an emergency. Shows symptoms and treatments for heart attacks as well as shock and wounds.

Instant Heart Rate Pro (Rs 50)
Android ByAzumio Inc
Lets your phone measure your heart rate. All you have to do is place the tip of the index finger on the mobile phone's camera for a couple of seconds. Instantly, a real-time heart rate chart will appear on the display screen.

iBP (Rs 50) Android By Leading Edge Apps Uses a separate blood pressure monitor and wireless scale to accurately

NatureSpace (Free) iOS By Holographic Audio Theatre From rainforests to cozy beaches, this app has sounds from all dreamscapes to ensure you sleep well. The sounds play in loop and there is a sleep timer which will switch off the sounds after a designated time.

I take off for a run either in the morning or late evening. It keeps tabs of the time I put in, my elevation and my pace.

5.Twitter byTwitter (Free)
Most people now update their Twitter accounts from smartphones, so this app has also become a standard in even entry level phones.

NEW

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

Cover Story

MOBILE APPLICATIONS
Today's apps have broken free of devices--whether it's an iPhone, an iPad, a BlackBerry phone or a Samsung tablet, you can get any app. You can download them either free or for a price starting at Rs 50, depending on the complexity of the application (and the dollar-rupee exchange rate). This year, the App Store from Apple has already clocked 30 billion downloads while Google Play has crossed the 10-billion mark. And we Indians are a huge part of that market--an ASSOCHAM study quoted by Deloitte says the overall mobile valueadded services (VAS) market in India was estimated at $122 billion (Rs 6,71,000 crore) in 2010 and is expected to grow to $482 billion (Rs 26,51,000 crore) by 2015. However, apps constitute only a part of the mobile VAS market. ABI Research says global mobile app revenue for 2011 was $8.5 billion (Rs 46,750 crore) and is expected to grow to $46 billion (Rs 2,53,000) by 2016. You needn't be a tech whizkid to be a gadget geek. Lakshman Swamy, 35, a Chennai-based real estate professional, says life without apps would be slower... even boring. The apps on his Samsung Galaxy Note help him immensely with his work. "These apps help you perform better at the workplace. It's not only about making your life more efficient. It's about enhancing the efficacy of your work," he says. Similarly, Prem Sainathan, 25, a business developer from Chennai, uses apps to store large files (Dropbox), make notes (Evernote) and manage documents (Zoho). "Whenever I need anything particular, I just go to Google Play. There's a pretty good chance there will be an app for it," he says with a grin. Google Play is where you can find and download apps, games and widgets. So, what makes an app a hit? Convenience, innovation and word-ofmouth publicity. "There is a good uptake for apps, especially those which are free. People are ready to experiment, download and play with them," says Bhandal, who downloads at least three apps every week. Virat Singh Khutal, 32, CEO of the Indore-based Twist Mobile, which has created many popular apps available for Nokia phones, believes that emotions play a role in selection of apps. "The sensibilities in some countries are the same. Some apps popular in India are also big hits in countries like Mexico and Turkey, but they may not do well elsewhere," he says. And it's not just the adults who are evolving through these apps. Today's tech-savvy children use tablets to learn mathematical concepts, Shakespeare's sonnets and biology. The Mughals go to war on screen, water evaporates into steam and Picasso's paintings stand in their regal glory, all on the gadget. "It's amazing the sort of things they know at this age through the vastness of apps. They know the name of body joints and their functioning, something I seem to have unlearnt since science sessions back in Class II," says Nandini Singh, 33, a Delhibased mother of two. Most apps go beyond textbook theory, which makes them effective learn-

iOS had around 6,50,000 apps while Google Play (Google rebranded and merged its predecessors Android Market and Google Music services) had around 6,00,000 apps for Android devices. BlackBerry and Windows too have their own apps.

Professional
If you need help with work, just turn to an app Evernote (Free) iOS,Android By Evernote
Designed for note-taking and archiving. Helps you remember and act upon ideas. You can clip or save a webpage to view it later on all the computers, phones and tablets you use.

OIESHI SAHA 17
Student, KOLKATA USES iPad apps of various newspapers and magazines

I am preparing for SAT and law entrance examinations, so it helps me have information about current affairs on my fingertips.

Werdsmith (Free) iOS By Nathan Tesler
A "portable writing studio". Aspiring writers can start jotting down their ideas. Chapters can be created with word goals and the app will tell you how much progress you have made.

MyTaxIndia HD (Free) iOS,Android By Quintet Solutions Pvt Ltd Just enter your taxable income, investments under various heads, house loan interest and other savings and this app will tell you how much income tax you will have to pay this fiscal. Calculations are based on the latest tax slabs.

Scan Page (Free) iOS By Ricoh Innovations After capturing the image, it allows users to select the document area they wish to scan and gives an option of auto-clean up. The auto-clean up converts the captured image to look like a scanned one. Images can either be saved on the device or exported via email, Dropbox, Evernote or Google Docs. Exgis Expense & Mileage Tracker ( Rs 270)
BlackBerry By Exgis Inc Made for those who need to keep a constant eye on their travels and expenses. Can record list of clients and projects. This app can also record a vehicle's mileage in seconds.

SUBIR HALDERwww.indiatodayimages.com

22

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

NEW

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

23

Cover Story MOBILE APPLICATIONS
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

WEIRD APPS
Bowel Mover Pro Price Rs 50 Compatible with
iPhone and iPad This app tracks all that you eat, the fibre and water content in your food and how it ultimately affects your bowel movements. iDied

AMITBHALLA 28
Sales Professional, DELHI USES Shazam as it identifies the song by matching the audio clip and giving you all the details

PRICEY APPS
1.iVIP Black (Rs 55,000) iOS,By iVIP Ltd
This "premium lifestyle app" lets iPhone users receive VIP treatment wherever they go, with top-end reservations and seats.

Price Rs 330 Compatible with
iPhone and iPad This app has a database of 400 bizarre ways in which people have died--freak accidents, diseases or "just plain stupid". Ugly Meter Price Free

So many times you come across tracks playing in a coffee shop or bar, which you just love! I find them all through Shazam.

2.BarMax CA& NY(Rs 55,000) iOS,By BarMax LLC
Helps law students in New York and California prepare for their bar exams with lectures and 24x7 support.

3.Mortgage Pro Enterprise (Rs 55,000) iOS,By SINO Dynamic Solutions Ltd
ing tools. "Technology extends learning in the same way as Lego blocks and other art materials and exposes children to animals, landscapes, objects, activities that they may not experience in person. Children can also save, revisit and share their real-life experiences with their classmates," says Prafulla Mathur, 29, founder and CEO of Quepplin, a company that creates mobile applications. Today's schoolchildren increasingly use technology even for homework and are benefiting from the helpful educational apps on tablets and smartphones. Oieshi Saha, 17, a Class XII student at La Martiniere for Girls in Kolkata, has turned to her trusted iPad to prepare for exams. "I am preparing for SAT and law entrance examinations, so it helps me keep information about current affairs on my fingertips. Plus I can make notes, highlight information and save them in whatever format I please," she says. Similarly, Salonee Rajdev, 18, a student of MBBS in Vadodara, carries a medical dictionary on her smartphone at all times. The use of technology and mobile apps in education is commonplace in the West and is making learning more fun for Indian children. Schools have woken up to the reality of `techie' children and this has made way for iPads and tablets in classes. Bangalorebased Priya Krishnan, director of KLAY This is an instant mortgage comparison app created exclusively for the Japanese financial market.

Compatible with
iPhone, iPad and Android phones It makes its users believe that "they are uglier than they think". So, the app clicks a photo, scans facial details and presents you with a rating on a scale of 1 to 10. Nobody is called beautiful on the app. Pimple Popper Price Free

4.SongBook DS (Rs 55,000) iOS,By Bookshelf Apps
Lets music fanatics control multiple networked music players at once.

Utility
Some tasks are better done by an app. Why track and pay your bills when someone can do it for you?

Warrantify (Free)
Android By Warrantify OY
With this app, you need not collect and store all bills and warranty receipts. Simply scan and store the receipt and add details such as shop name, validity and amount paid.

It turns your phone into a handy little sound level meter.

Prep school, uses iPads and digital tools for her students. "Technology is all-pervasive for children today, therefore it is imperative that schools adapt and use some of these technologies, especially given that some of these mediums make the learning process more effective," she says. Similarly, Mumbai's elite Podar School gradually introduced technology such as iPad, which teachers feel is not just a static textbook, but rather a tool for creativity. "Technology is a great motivator. It has strengthened the traditional student-teacher bond," says the school's principal Anvita Bir. Even textbooks have gone the eway, fitted with features that keep an eye on deadlines and map a child's learning pattern. What makes them more readable is that they integrate audio and video snippets with text and throw in interactive elements like dictionaries, graphs and spot assessments, making education more compact. "They are a natural follow-on to the current trend of digital education being introduced in classrooms," says Soumya Banerjee, 44, founder and CEO, Attano, that sells e-textbooks for students from KG to higher education. So, if Happy Maths (Rs 15) helps pre-schoolers solve simple number problems, Mathematical And Statistical Techniques (Rs 125)

Compatible with Android
phones and iPhone You find pimples on five different faces and then pop them. Similar to real life, if your technique goes wrong, you end up with a scab. Nose Candy Price Rs 105

BillsReminder (Rs 105)
Android By HandyApps
Reminds you that a payment is due ahead of time. Key in the details about the bill, due date and amount and, if needed, click a copy of the invoice. Then select the date on which you wish to receive a notification for the payment.

Organize HD Free iOS By eXtensible Architectures This app lets you plan projects and keep track of their progress. The app stands out for its simplicity. It also lets you add photos, videos or audio files to the plan to help remember what you were up to in the first place. Zite Free iOS ByZite,Inc Zite is like having your own magazine. Once users pick their favourite news sections, this news aggregator packages it in an easy-to-read format. Zite just gives a teaser and opens the source website if users want to read the full story.

SRIKANTH SIDDI 39
Banker, CHENNAI USES News apps,BB T ravel,Rail Y atra,mobile banking apps, Justdial and Dictionary.com

Compatible with
Android phones Want to sniff cocaine without getting caught? This app allows you to virtually snort the drug. The phone vibrates as you reach the highest level of intoxication.

Decibel Meter (Free) Symbian By Pico Brothers Install Decibel Meter to measure the sound level in the surrounding area.

I have around 15 apps in my BlackBerry. They help me get any information I need while on the move.

24

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

NEW

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

25

Cover Story
INDIAN APP MAKERS

MOBILE APPLICATIONS

Fun
Entertainment with apps is not limited to music or YouTube videos

VIRAT KHUTAL, 32, CEO of Twist Mobile
They are the brains behind the latest arcade puzzle, Zulux, Psycho Hunter, a game which identifies your personality type and Color Effect.

DJ Mixer Pro (Free)
iOS By Musicsoft Arts
Mixing two tracks and adding effects or changing the tempo is child's play for this app, which can also be used as a music player that lets you tweak songs and play DJ.

draw something which the opponent has to guess. The better you draw, the more points you win.

"Making apps is more to do with the emotions of people.Consumer preferences are different in every country. We prefer to tread the middle path."
SHILO SULEMAN, 23, ILLUSTRATOR Khoya
Khoya is an iPad app based on an Indian fantasy story book for children, written by Avijit Michael and illustrated by Shilo Suleman. It has a touch feature and has sounds and graphics as they exist in real life.

Vodio (Free)
iOS ByVodio Labs Ltd
A one-stop shop for viral videos, Vodio can put all your video channels in an easy-to-flip-through 3-dimensional wall interface.

Comics Head (Rs 50) iOS, NextWave Multimedia Inc Make a comic about an event of your family or college life with this easy to use app. Comics Head can make you an illustrator par excellence in the space of minutes. No skills needed. Some sense of humour might help though. FatBooth (Free) Android By PIVI & Co Have friends whose lean looks you are jealous of? Just click a photo using the app and enlarge parts of the face as you want. Great for posts on social networking sites.
other gadget yet to be invented? A recent survey states that 90 per cent of parents around the world admit to using gadgets to keep their children occupied. Radha Misra, professor of communication media for children, SNDT Women's University, Pune, says that technology should be balanced with physical activity. "Children need to spend a lot more time playing outdoors and in unstructured play. But we also realise the amazing learning potential that specific types of media can bring to children and their education when used in moderation," she says. However, Dayita Dutta, vice-principal of the Welham Girls' School in Dehradun, avoids the use of readymade software on campus. "Technology is a great tool but it is not a master," she says. With apps being the teacher, friend, guide and assistant all rolled into one, it's no wonder that India is hoping to live appily ever after.
with inputs from Nandagopal Rajan, Nidhi Singal, Ayesha Aleem, Devika Chaturvedi, Hitani Kaur, Tithi Sarkar, Shravya Jain

Draw Something (Free)
iOS By OMGPOP You can play this tension-free and goal-free game with contacts or let the app find an opponent for you. Once you find someone, you have to gets you first-year Commerce studies at the click of a button. The fingerprints on your iPads show how even toddlers know apps better than the alphabets. They love conversing with Talking Tom, an animated cat that repeats everything you say. Kolkata's three-year-old Kaavin Raja cracks jigsaw puzzles and learns language with read-along apps on her parents' iPad. Annie Mathew, head of alliances, Research In Motion India, says smartphone consumption in India is growing at a significant rate. "The adoption of smartphones is largely driven by the availability of applications on the device," she says. A consumer apps study conducted by Nokia shows that 58 per cent of smartphone users believe that apps truly benefit their lives. The most popular apps are social networking (40 per cent), music (36 per cent), business (28 per cent), utilities (21 per cent) and games (21 per cent). Will children start learning too much, too soon? Will they ever leave the comfort of their rooms equipped with smartphones, tablets and some

"With Khoya,it is possible to see what touch can do to a story.It's about finding an Indian identity in an international world."
SUJAI G. PILLAI, 36, FOUNDER HumThum
Education Support Services

Acclaimed as the Best New App by Silicon India, HumThum Education app establishes itself at the local level by creating separate websites for each area based on the pin code.

"Our websites can teach people how to networkvia maps and even master spoken English without the handicap of a peculiar accent."
JEETU GOLANI, 34,AND ERLE PEREIRA, 36, CHIEF DEVELOPERS of eBrainPool
This futuristic app will enable people to work and play together by sharing apps across platforms. In its testing stage, it will be launched in a few months.

"You could workon the image processing hardware capabilities of a Linuxlaptop near you on your Windows-based phone."
26
INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

NEW

