GLOSSARY

GOING GREEN
>>
With scores of celebrities crowned sexiest vegetarians year after year, there is plenty of morale boosting for the green way of life. Now, there is a new vegetarian wave that's sweeping through Bollywood.

YOGEN SHAH

KAUSHIK ROY

Poorna Jagannathan is waiting anxiously for her Hollywood

CLEAN BREAK
It was a clean-shaven Anurag Kashyap who found his way to the success party of Gangs of Wasseypur in a Bandra lounge bar. Even the moustache was gone. It turns out that wife Kalki Koechlin had convinced him to get rid of his usual facial fuzz. Was the exodus of goons in the film a reminder that her hubby would look perfectly in place? Either way, smart move.
KASHYAP

film Thanks For Sharing to release later this year. At the same time, she is doing her bit to turn us into a healthier, more humane lot. She has joined People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) in their Go-Veg ad campaign to encourage more people to turn vegetarian.

Vidya Balan, Sonakshi
Sinha, Gwyneth Paltrow and Eva Mendes will share their favourite vegan recipes in The Bolly Holly Vegan Cookbook, that's expected to hit the stands in 2013. Being put together by Poorva Joshipura, head of PETA India, the cookbook will have the dishy stars churn out exciting stuff.

>>

SINGH (CENTRE) WITH HIS MOTHER AND IPL CHAIRMAN RAJEEV SHUKLA

Akshay Kumar turned vegetarian to play Lord Krishna in Oh My God, the film adaptation of Bhavesh Mandalia's Gujarati play Kanji Viruddh Kanji. His mother Aruna Bhatia asked him to take the step. Directed by Umesh Shukla, the film is about a man struggling to believe in the existence of God.
FOTOCORP

IT'S ALL IN THE FAMILY
Shatrughan Sinha's son Kush Sinha, 29, is all set to make his directorial debut. Kush, who assisted filmmakers Sanjay Leela Bhansali in Saawariya and Abhinav Kashyap in Dabangg, has decided to cast his sister Sonakshi and twin Luv in his yet-untitled venture. In 2008, his plans of acting alongside Esha Deol in fellow assistant director Apratim Khare's film fell through. We hope sister Sonakshi proves a lucky charm for her older brother.
KUSH SINHA

62

INDIA TODAY  JULY 23, 2012

>>

THE BIG COMEBACK
Cricketer Yuvraj Singh, 29, has taken his own battle with cancer a step further, with an initiative to help others suffering from it. Through the Yuvraj Singh Foundation, he has launched the initiative YouWeCan, to spread awareness about the disease."I can fully empathise with the pain and difficulties faced by a cancer patient," he says.

FIRST LOOK OF THE WEEK
A STILL FROM JOKER

QUOTE
OF THE

WEEK

I AM SUCH A FREAK THAT I NEED A PARTNER TO REMOVE MY MAKEUP, TO FEED ME,AND HELPME WEAR MY SHOES. I EVEN NEED A PARTNER TO WAKE ME UP IN THE MORNING.
VEENA MALIK,ACTOR

Q& "My bikini will be the least A discussed point of Cocktail "
Deepika Padukone, 26, is all set to sizzle in her next film Cocktail. From working with superstar Rajinikanth to reconciling with former boyfriend Ranbir Kapoor, Padukone talks about her forthcoming projects and her love for love stories. Q. Are you worried about the focus on your look? A. Once people watch the film, I'm confident that the bikini look will be the least discussed point of the film. Q. How was it like to work with Rajinikanth in Kochadaiyaan? A. I was anxious when I first met him on the sets. His child-like passion for work is really contagious. Q. Does the constant scrutiny of your relationship with Ranbir Kapoor bother you? Is it affecting your work in Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani? A. Yes it does, but I am aware that I can't avoid it. As far as work is concerned, all our energies are focused on making a successful film. Speculation about our relationship isn't important. Q. Which other genre of films would you like to work in? A. I am drawn to love stories, but I'm not deliberately looking at a different genre. Q. Do you think you have grown as an actor? A. For someone who started a life in a new city and industry, I believe I have done quite well.
FOTOCORP

PLAYTIME

FASHION UNCUT
Shirish Kunder's sci-fi drama Joker, starring Sonakshi Sinha and Akshay Kumar, will release on August 31. In the run-up to its first theatrical release scheduled for July 13, the filmmaker shared a few stills of his second directorial project on Twitter. The pictures seem to have been inspired from Aamir Khan's 2001 epic drama Lagaan. Kumar, dressed in a khadi vest and dhoti with a gumcha tied around his head, and standing with his cavalry of men and women, reminds us of the classic pose by Bhuvan and his team in Lagaan. Hope the aliens are not the only point of difference in the film.

Fashion designer Wendell Rodricks is out to set the record straight with his memoirs--The Green Room. There is promise of plenty of tell-alls about RODRICKS the catfights and squabbling that go on in the fashion world in between pages of the chronicles of his life, work and achievements. His second book, after a coffee table book Moda Goa, will be launched on August 7 at the Lakme Fashion Week in Mumbai.This season may turn out to be a lot more interesting after all.

KHURANA

Akarsh Khurana, 32, who has penned the screenplays of films such as Krrish, U Me Aur Hum and Kites, is all set to make his acting debut in Bejoy Nambiar's David. Son of veteran film and theatre actor Akaash Khurana, he has popular plays such as Afsaneh: Bai Se Bioscope Tak, Blackbird, A Special Bond and Aabodana to his credit.
by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege

JULY 23, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

