Nation MAHARASHTRA

Money Down the Drain
Companies owned by BJP MP and MLC derail Rs 13,000-crore irrigation project
quality of work. "There were cracks all along the canal. The condition of the canal is very poor and the state government has decided to reline the canal system. The progress is very slow and action needs to be taken on urgent basis," Jha stated in his report submitted to the PMO in April. INDIA TODAY possesses a copy of this report. Bhangadiya claims the cracks are a result of natural phenomenon. "Every canal in Maharashtra has developed cracks. Punish me if I am guilty but do not ignore the practical difficulties while completing the project," he said. The contract for concrete lining of the second canal of the project was awarded to a joint venture of Ajay Sancheti's company Shaktikumar M Sancheti Limited and S.N. Thakkar Private Limited, in 2006-07. Jha noticed cracks there too. "Repairs need to be attempted after the cause and behaviour of the cracking is understood, for which thorough investigation is essential," he remarked. Despite repeated attempts, Sancheti was unavailable for comment. In June, Bhangadiya, who started as a survey contractor, defeated Rahul Puglia of the Congress by 203 votes to become an MLC from ChandrapurGadchiroli-Wardha constituency. In what reflects a nexus across political lines, Bhangadiya got tacit support from Congress ally NCP, which controls the water resources department. In 2011, BJP's Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly Eknath Khadse had raised the issue of corruption in the irrigation department and alleged a government-contractor nexus. He had even lodged a written complaint against Bhangadiya with Governor K. Sankaranarayanan. It seems the BJP, in its eagerness to expose corruption in the Congressruled Maharashtra government, has forgotten the rot within. by Kiran Tare

(CLOCKWISE FROM LEFT) CONCRETE LINING WORK OF THE CANAL HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE OF SUBSTANDARD QUALITY; AJAY SANCHETI; MITESH BHANGADIYA

he most expensive irrigation project in Maharashtra, the Gosikhurd project in Bhandara district of Vidarbha region, was launched in 1983 but still lies incomplete. Over Rs 13,000 crore--Rs 6,000 crore given by the Centre and Rs 7,000 crore by the state government--has already been spent on it. Only 60 per cent of the work has been completed. An investigation by INDIA TODAY has found that Mitesh Bhangadiya, a newly elected member of the Maharashtra Legislative Council, and Ajay Sancheti, a Rajya Sabha member, both from Nagpur and belonging to BJP, are responsible for the shoddy work in two crucial canals. The work for building of canals was awarded by Vidarbha Irrigation Development Corporation to companies owned by Bhangadiya and Sancheti. The main dam is ready but the water cannot be transported because of the substandard work in building the canals, leaving almost 193 villages in the project's area dry. The Gosikhurd irrigation project is being constructed on the Godavari

T

river basin. It was declared by the Union Government as a national project in February 2008. The project is proposed to be completed by March 2014 after a series of delays due to problems in land acquisition and inadequate funds. Three districts-- Nagpur, Bhandara and Chandrapur-- will benefit from this project and 2.50 lakh hectares of irrigation potential will be created once the dam is functional. Three committees appointed by the state as well as Union Government have blamed Sancheti and Bhangadiya for "substandard work" and recommended blacklisting Bhangadiya. Engineers of the Nashik-based Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute (MERI) stated in a 2010 report that the work done by Bhangadiya's firm, M.G. Bhangadiya Company, was not of good quality. A report by the state government-appointed A.H. Mendgiri Committee in June 2010 also agreed with the findings of the MERI report. An inspection by Central Water Commission Chairman R.C. Jha in March also exposed the inferior

36

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

