HEALTH by DAMAYANTI DATTA

DISCOVER THEIR OLYMPIC SECRETS
In London, athletes will vie for that 1/100th of a second to win or lose. It's not just form or fitness. The new science of human body will help performers in their quest for gold. PURPLE,THE COLOUR OF HEALTH
A favourite with athletes this time, because it ups aerobic exercise performance by as much as 2 per cent.A daily glass of the nitrate-rich purple juice added to the usual training programmes increases stamina by hiking up the level of nitric acid in the body, which reduces the energy requirements of muscles. So athletes can exercise with less oxygen.

Science of Human Endurance
If the 20th century was all about learning human physiology, training, and nutrition, this is the century of harnessing science to understand the limits of human endurance. For London 2012, athletes are trying to perfect their act with the help of biomechanists, recovery experts, and statistical analysts.This is how science is helping them to push closer to perfection.

A FIX-IT SUIT
British gymnasts are grabbing headlines because of their vibrating suit, MotivePro. Developed by Birmingham researchers, it makes real-time updates of practice sessions, allowing athletes to perform with inch-perfect accuracy. MotivePro attaches small sensors to the wearer's skin, so that every stretch and movement sends tiny impulses to a computer connected to the suit, analyses the data and sends it to athletes and their coaches.

CHILLAFTER THE DRILL FIND YOUR FAULTS
Jumping into an ice bath after a heavy practice session is finding favour with athletes. Hard practice can batter the body by producing waste products such as lactic acid in muscles, tendons, tissues, nerves and bones.The icy water forces blood vessels to tighten and drains the waste products. Excessive lactic acid build-up causes muscles to function poorly. Computer scientists, sports biomechanists and physiologists are studying every minute detail of an athlete's form during practice. Their techniques are taken by highspeed motion-capture cameras. Athletes and coaches gather with scientists and analyse the videos to understand how they run, sprint or swim and how to better their technique. An Optojump measures the exact location and duration of an athlete's every step, something that would not have been visible with normal video analysis.

SWIM FASTER,WITH ALITTLE HELP
History might be made in the 50-metre pool at London's Aquatics Centre.With hundreds of madlyspinning discs on the lane dividers, it is one of the most technologically advanced pools ever built. Designed by A&T Europe S.p.a., the discs in the pool will eliminate ambient water energy that impedes a swimmer's motion and slows them down.

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

69

