UP FRONT

BIBEK DEBROY

THE HYPOCRISYOFPREACHING
T
he US president was guarded. He hasn't directly criti- how about liberalising immigration provisions and relaxcised India's investment climate and its deterioration. ing visa requirements? President Obama might argue He was quoting members of the US business commu- these are historical legacies and he has tried to roll protecnity, to the effect that there are restrictions on FDI, specifi- tionism back. For two reasons, this is non-sequitur. First, cally retail. But that difference between citing and reciting even before becoming president, Obama's voting record is nit-picking. Barack Obama wants India to open up. Why was hardly pro-free trade. Second, even after becoming should India liberalise? Presumably because liberalisation president, US protectionism has increased, especially after is good for growth, employment creation and poverty 2007. Let's ignore protectionism vis-à-vis China (tires, solar reduction, so runs the argument in later sections of the in- panels, poultry, exchange rates). In general, there have terview. That's a liberal economist's position and there can been the 2009 American Reconstruction and Recovery Act be no quarrels with it, on cross-border movements of goods, (and related legislation), so-called Buy American proviservices, capital and labour. The liberal economist will also sions, National Export Initiative of export-led job creation, argue protection benefits inefficient domestic producers, at American Clean Energy and Security Act, Employment the expense of consumers (who may also be intermediate American Workers Act, Dairy Export Incentive Programme consumers). Therefore, on balance, liberalisation leads to and financial support to the auto sector and this is welfare gains. The argument would have been convincing only illustrative, not exhaustive. Ipso facto, there is a had it come from a country that practised what it preached. case for India to liberalise, though FDI (especially in retail) On each of those four heads of goods, services, capital is a small component of the reform canvas. However, and labour, one can document instances to demonstrate there isn't much of a case for a US president to lecture that US is hardly the paragon of virtue it professes to be. India, directly or indirectly. That lecturing agenda is best "For centuries England has relied on protection, has car- reserved for the domestic US constituency. President Obama might argue US policies are in conried it to extremes and has obtained satisfactory results from it. There is no doubt that it is to this system that it owes formity with WTO agreements. At one level, that's an irreleits present strength. After two centuries, England has vant argument. First, the classic liberalisation argument found it convenient to adopt free trade because it thinks isn't based on any quid pro quo. Unilateral liberalisation that protection can no longer offer it anything. Very well brings welfare gains, period. Even if India doesn't liberalise then, gentlemen, my knowledge of our country leads me to FDI, there is a case for US to open up. Second, if one brings in believe that within 200 years, when America has gotten WTO, reciprocity is built into negotiations, through the 1948 GATT deal. Why should India liberalise unout of protecting all that it can offer, it SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com less it gets something in return? And Doha too will adopt free trade." This was a WTO negotiations have fundamentally been former US president, Ulysses Grant. Much held up because of developed countries' later, in inter-war years, there was the (US and Europe primarily) reluctance to Smoot-Hawley Tariff. liberalise agriculture. Third, even when US The costs of such protection have been policies have been held to be violative of documented for US. But perhaps WTO, US hasn't been that keen to change President Obama was trying to tell his policies and disputes with EU and China dear friend, Dr Manmohan Singh, that one can be cited as evidence. "No, we will not should learn from past American misgo back to an economy weakened by outtakes. Given the 1964 book on India's sourcing. No American company should be export trends that the Indian PM auable to avoid paying its fair share of taxes thored, he would have empathised with by moving jobs and profits overseas." No, costs to developing countries of protection that wasn't Ulysses Grant. That was Barack in developed countries. Unfortunately, on Obama in his 2012 State of the Union each of those four heads of goods, servspeech. And to quote again from the ices, capital and labour, US mistakes speech, "I will go anywhere in the world to aren't history and one can cite countless There isn't much of a open new markets for American products." instances. How about steel and agriculcase for a US president ture in goods, or the movement away from to lecture India, directly But that doesn't mean US markets will be opened to foreign products. That's where tariffs to non-tariff barriers, anti-dumping or indirectly. That the hypocrisy is. duties, countervailing duties, export sublecturing agenda is best sidies and environment? On services and capital, how about liberalising FDI norms reserved for the domestic Bibek Debroy is professor at the US constituency. for US domestic civil aviation? On labour, Centre for Policy Research, Delhi

10

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

