FOTOCOP

RAJ (RIGHT) ACCOMPANIES COUSIN UDDHAV THACKERAY OUT OF LILAVATI HOSPITAL

MAHARASHTRA

TRUCE WITHIN PARIVAR
n the morning of July 16, when son Uddhav Thackeray was admitted to Mumbai's Lilavati Hospital at Bandra (West) with chest pain, the first thing Shiv Sena chief Bal Thackeray did, INDIA TODAY has learnt, was make a phone call to estranged nephew, Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) President Raj Thackeray. "Uddhav has been admitted to Lilavati. There is no elder person to take care of him. You go there. I want to see you together again," the tearful Sena chief told Raj, then on his way to Alibaug, 70 km from Mumbai, to attend a training camp for his party's councillors. Raj turned around and rushed to the hospital with wife Sharmila and mother Kunda to attend to his Dadu (elder brother), as he calls Uddhav, fuelling a desire for reconciliation among MNS workers. As Raj opened the door of Room No. 604 of Lilavati Hospital, Uddhav held out his hands. "How are you?" he

Bal Thackeray calls Raj to son Uddhav's hospital bed, fuels hopes for a reconciliation
asked. A smiling Raj replied, "I'm fine. Get well soon." It was their first conversation in three-and-a-half years, during which they had spared no opportunity to attack each other. Raj then accompanied Uddhav to the cath lab, where an angiography showed Uddhav has three arterial

O

THE LOST WORLD
How the cousins became estranged November 2005 Raj resigns from Shiv Sena following differences with Uddhav. March 2006 Raj launches Maharashtra Navnirman Sena. November 2008 Raj visits Balasaheb at Matoshree to return two books. April 2009 Uddhav calls Raj traitor; Raj dubs Uddhav inefficient. February 2010 Thackeray calls for reunion; Raj indicates his willingness.

blockages. Doctors advised him to undergo bypass surgery. Though discharged the same day, Uddhav is expected to return for more treatment. "Raj was a great source of energy for Uddhav, who was depressed and tense," a source at the hospital said. Later, Raj drove Uddhav and his wife Rashmi in his black Mercedes E-Class to Matoshree, their Bandra (East) home. The cousins received a grand welcome. Raj discussed Uddhav's future course of treatment with the family for half an hour, drank coffee, and then left for Alibaug. The news of Uddhav's ailment spread like wildfire. Among the first to reach his side were MNS MLAs Pravin Darekar and Vasant Gite. Uddhav, who is known to dislike meeting MNS workers, granted them an audience. "I'll get well soon and we'll fight each other again," Uddhav told them, says a source. Then, after a pause, he continued, "For how long will it go on? Won't we come together?" leaving the MNS MLAs emotionally shaken. Uddhav's ailment could be the "long desired" turning point in the state's politics, feels a senior MNS MLA. "Political differences separated them, but Uddhav's ailment has brought them closer. We have good relations with both. If they reunite, we'll be happy," he said. In March this year, MNS leader Bala Nandgaonkar had said in the Assembly that had Shiv Sena and MNS been together, the Congress-Nationalist Congress Party combine wouldn't have won the state polls. Shiv Sena's Sanjay Raut was more cautious. "Nothing political should be read in this. Blood relations are always thicker than politics," he said. The idea of reconciliation first gathered steam when Bal Thackeray said in February that the doors of his house were still open for Raj. Raj too showed a willingness to join hands, with a promise. "If you take one step forward, I'll take a 100 steps forward," he announced at a rally in Worli soon after. Bal Thackeray has taken his step forward. It's now Raj's turn to keep his promise. by Kiran Tare

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

37

new

