GLOSSARY
KHAN

TIME FOR TAKE-OFF
It's birthday month for the women of Bollywood. But instead of risking possible interruptions to parties in Mumbai, they are celebrating with foreign getaways and super secret celebrations with former boyfriends.

SAINI

ROLE REMODEL
South Indian actor Flora Saini, 34, made a disastrous debut opposite Sonu Nigam in Rajat Mukherjee's Love in Nepal in 2004. Eight years later, she has landed a rather unconventional role. She will be one of the panel members of the Censor Board of Film Certification. Saini, who has acted in south Indian films with actors such as Vijayakanth, Prabhu, Karthik, Balakrishna, Venkatesh, Jagapathi Babu and Rajasekhar, is tightlipped about her new role.

SHARMA

YOGEN SHAH

HAIRY TALE
Not only is Aamir Khan getting leaner for his role as a gymnast in Dhoom 3, he even went for a close-crop haircut. However, arriving at that dark brown shade tinged with gold, was a long-winded affair that took four days to perfect. He does look different, but it's a good thing that he doesn't have longer hair, for that could have taken a month.

Priyanka Chopra Was a busy girl as she turned 30 on July 18, working on Krrish 2, her first music album, as well as promotions for Barfee. Perhaps she needed to recover from the disaster of Teri Meri Kahaani, which is why we hear she headed to Ibiza in Spain to celebrate her birthday with friends.

Katrina Kaif Was meant
to have a working birthday on July 16, dubbing all day for Ek Tha Tiger.The fact that she would sneak off for a quiet celebration at Salman Khan's home with his family was not what the paparazzi expected. But catch her they did, in a brand new Audi SUV gifted by the actor.

Mugdha Godse Knows
how she will celebrate her 26th birthday on July 25-- partying in Madrid. Her last film Will You Marry Me? vanished soon after it released earlier in the year, and her next venture, Afra Tafree with Govinda, doesn't quite quicken the pulse.All the more reason to take a break.

QUOTE
OF THE

WEEK
"I CAN'T SLEEP. I GO TO BED ATABOUT 11 O'CLOCK IN THE NIGHT, BUT I JUST DON'T END UP SLEEPING BEFORE 3 O'CLOCK IN THE MORNING BECAUSE I AM REALLY EXCITED AND NERVOUS."
SARAH JANE DIAS ON HER UPCOMING FILM KYAA SUPER KOOL HAIN HUM

OF THE

WEEK

We belong to a time of instant gratification, but it is only perseverance and commitment that takes us the distance. We can and we will." --Dia Mirza,Actor

FLIGHT BLUES
Actor Kim Sharma's experience at Mumbai's Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport was anything but pleasant. The 32-yearold model-turned-actor was stopped by customs officials for not declaring goods worth Rs 4 lakh. Sharma was boarding a chartered flight to Kenya with her husband Ali Punjani, a Kenyan businessman of Indian origin. She had to shell out Rs 50,000 for carrying undeclared branded items.

Q& "I am A expecting
to be punished, humiliated and ripped apart"

Sherlyn Chopra, 28, has emerged the winner in the battle for who wears the least, having bagged a Playboy cover. Fresh from her shoot in Los Angeles, US, India's first-ever adult model has high hopes from her nude shoot. Chopra speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. How did the Playboy deal happen? A. In May, I had sent my pictures and written to Hugh Hefner, the chief creative officer of Playboy Enterprises, expressing my desire to be on the cover. I was surprised to get a handwritten note from him in the affirmative. Q. How was the shoot? A. It felt like a paid vacation. We would start makeup and hair by late morning; have a few drinks and indulge in frivolous conversation to loosen up, and then start shooting. Q. What reactions are you expecting? A. It will be naïve of me to expect love from all. I am expecting to be humiliated, punished and ripped apart, but that will not affect my plans for the future, which will be ground-breaking.

A NEW LEAGUE
Tim Sebastian, 60, is popular for his tough interview sessions on BBC's HARDtalk and The Doha Debates. Now, the award-winSEBASTIAN ning British television journalist will make his debut on Indian television. Sebastian will be moderating the show The Outsider. It airs from August.
by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege

NAIR

MULTI-TASKING
In between helping run a Parisbased social media consultancy firm, Avedya, Prashant Nair, 34, has managed to find time to make a feature film, Delhi In A Day. Though born in Chandigarh, Nair has lived in Europe, Africa and North America, before heading to Purdue University, US, for a degree in engineering. His film is about a rich Delhi family and how the arrival of a British guest upsets the order of things.

70

Photographs by FOTOCORP

Q. Do you see more opportunities opening up? A. In India I am not sure who would approach me, but henceforth I will only do quality work-- be it films, reality shows or adult movies. I hope this will open up avenues in Hollywood as well.

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

71

