GLASS HOUSE

HOLY HIGH
mar Abdullah is in high spirits these days. Being applauded by a spiritually evolved soul no less than the Dalai Lama must feel good. "Young, energetic and visionary" , is how the celebrated monk described the 42-year-old Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister on July 14 while on a weeklong visit to the Valley. "When I visited the first time, Sheikh Abdullah was here, second time Farooq Abdullah was here and now, Omar Abdullah," the Dalai Lama said, warming up to his host on a visit to the Badamwari Hawal Tibetan Public School in Srinagar. Omar was reportedly overwhelmed but for once, the tweet-a-minute Chief Minister decided against posting the endorsement for the world to see.

O

FIDDLING IN FINANCE

T

he Prime Minister may have missed his first opportunity to show decisiveness at the finance ministry. The process to select a successor to Chief Economic Adviser Kaushik Basu, who is leaving office at the end of July, is stalemated like many other decisions in Government. The selection committee headed by C. Rangarajan insists on putting Raghuram Rajan's name at the top of the list. It's another matter that the Chicago professor has still not made up his mind. The other candidates in the running are old World Bank hand Ajay Chibber and Arvind Panagariya, a protégé of Manmohan Singh's friend-turned-baiter Jagdish Bhagwati. Manmohan can't make up his mind.
YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

BACK TO SCHOOL
khilesh Yadav, 39, went to Dholpur on July 16 as chief guest at his alma mater Military School's golden jubilee celebrations. He remarked that the ceiling fans creak just like they did 22 years ago when he was a student. The Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister then dropped in at Dholpur Palace to say hello to friend and BJP MP Dushyant Singh, 39, son of former Rajasthan chief minister Vasundhara Raje. "He is like an elder brother to me. We remembered our days in Parliament and Dholpur," Singh said.

IN THE PINK OF HEALTH
Chidambaram was certainly not prepared for this. Much to his chagrin, Information and Broadcasting Minister Ambika Soni kept addressing him as `health minister' during a press conference at the culmination of the Northern Zonal Council meeting in Chandigarh on July 13. She went on until the sniggers from reporters in attendance reached her ear."I'm so sorry!" she apologised profusely to a somewhat distraught but nonetheless amused home minister.

A

P

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

CHIDAMBARAM

SARI FOR THE TROUBLE

YADAV (LEFT) AND SINGH

I

MAMATA
YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

n cash-strapped West Bengal, they are calling it Didi's sari magic. The Trinamool Congress government, led by Mamata Banerjee, has signed a pact with oil marketing companies to sell saris produced by state handloom units at petrol pumps across the state. While weavers are buoyed, reluctant oil companies have no option but to comply. Will the sari rush mess up the sale of oil and gas? That's the buzz across gas stations in Kolkata. Bengali women are notoriously fussy when it comes to choosing saris. Who will manage the crowds?

12

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
QUID PRO QUO
MUKHERJEE (LEFT) WITH THACKERAY

B

ibi Jagir Kaur, the former Punjab Cabinet minister who was sentenced to five years of hard labour on March 30 for forcing her teenage daughter to undergo an abortion, continues to lead a cushy life in jail. As `guest of honour' at a felicitation function inside the Kapurthala Jail on July 15, she presented siropas (traditional short turbans) to a number of prison officials including Jagjit Singh, Punjab's inspector general of jails. Singh was the inquiry officer who had repudiated allegations that Kaur was getting VIP treatment inside jail. Convenient.

UPA'S NEW MR FIX-ITS
fter Pranab Mukherjee's exit, there is a search for troubleshooters in UPA. Earlier, crisis management was divided between Ahmed Patel and Mukherjee but now Patel has been playing a more pro-active role. For managing UPA allies, he has enlisted the services of his loyalists, Parliamentary Affairs Ministers Rajeev Shukla and V. Narayanasamy; Shukla, in particular, has a cross-party goodwill that extends from SP to NCP, BSP and even JMM. Currently, the duo is busy working under Patel's supervision to ensure that there is no slip on the numbers for UPA's candidates during the presidential and vice-presidential elections.

A

FOTOCORP

MUTUAL ADMIRATION SOCIETY
here was unusual bonhomie between Pranab Mukherjee and Bal Thackeray when they met on July 13 at the latter's home in Bandra, Mumbai. Mukherjee thanked Thackeray for his support for the presidential bid, while the Shiv Sena chief praised Mukherjee for his contribution to politics. But the conversation was mostly non-political, with Mukherjee more interested in discussing cartoons with Thackeray.

T

JOKE
OF THE WEEK

BIBI KAUR IN KAPURTHALA JAIL

Facebook with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh Sonia Gandhi logs in, Mamata Banerjee pokes, Digvijaya Singh spams, L.K.Advani stalks, Narendra Modi trolls, Rahul Gandhi says join Orkut.

`OUTSIDE' SUPPORT

SANGMA

T

hough NDA presidential candidate P.A. Sangma calls Nitish Kumar his "intimate friend", the Bihar Chief Minister chose to be away from Patna when the former Lok Sabha speaker arrived on July 14 to solicit support. Nitish was in Bettiah and returned to the state capital only after Sangma had left. Political analysts believe Nitish chose the wise way out of an embarrassing photo-op with Sangma. In June too, Sangma's calls to the Chief Minister went unanswered. The presidential contender, however, said he still expects a "miracle".

"Khaps should take decisions that do good to society. If anything is in the larger interest of society, there is nothing wrong."
AKHILESH YADAV

MILKHA SINGH

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister

"Police is not like an ATM machine which can be present at the crime scene the moment one inserts a card."
J.N. CHOWDHURY Assam DGP

"Although it is my desire that we fetch gold, I know it will be no less than a miracle if we do it in London."
MILKHA SINGH on India's dim chances of winning an athletics medal

with ASIT JOLLY, PRIYA SAHGAL, KIRAN TARE, SHANTANU GUHA RAY, AMITABH SRIVASTAVA, ROHIT PARIHAR, DHIRAJ NAYYAR

14

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

