GLOSSARY
YOGEN SHAH

BATLIWALA

PERFECT VISION
Miriam Batliwala, 60, lost her eyesight at the age of 12. However, that didn't come in the way of her pursuing her interests. Batliwala has penned a book called InSight, which chronicles the hurdles she has had to overcome. She has learnt dancing, playing the piano, and is a yoga instructor. "I have tried to not let my disability dampen my enthusiasm and eagerness to experience everything in life," she says confidently.

FASHION LOWS
Esha Deol is all set to tie the knot with her businessman beau Bharat Takhtani on June 29. We didn't see dad Dharmendra or brothers Sunny or Bobby at her sangeet ceremony, but cousin Abhay Deol did turn up with girlfriend Preeti Desai in tow. So did a few others, who perhaps would have done better to stay at home.

Ranveer Singh came
in looking like someone's uncle, dressed in a black and blue pathan suit, with a moustache he has grown for his forthcoming film Lootera. We would have preferred to see him in his naughty boy avatar from Band Baaja Baaraat.

Anushka Manchanda,
who is 5'9" tall, towered over everyone in a heavy turquoise sari. Too much tan skin and orange lips also did not make a pretty picture. Baby, stick to western clothes, please.

YOGEN SHAH

FOTOCORP

Ahana Deol has briefly dabbled in fashion designing, but it didn't show at all during her elder sister's sangeet ceremony. Dressed in a glitzy blue anarkali with a green dupatta, she looked like a much-toocheerful Christmas tree.

Masaba Gupta,
we suspect, dressed in a hurry. Her shocking pink sari was coupled with a golden printed blouse. Add to that shoulderlength gold earrings. Too much, all together.

QUOTE
OF THE

"THERE IS NO RULEBOOK FOR PARENTING.YOU JUST DO WHATYOU FEEL IS RIGHT. EACH PARENTWILL DISCOVER THINGS ON HIS OWN."
AMITABH BACHCHAN,ACTOR

BOWLED OUT
From cricketer to politician and now from dancer to actor, Sanath Jayasuriya, 42, wears many hats. He has impressed us with his gig on the dance reality show Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa.With a cameo for Na Bole Tum Na Maine Kuch Kaha on Colors TV, the former Sri Lankan all-rounder has taken his stint in Indian television a little further.Jayasuriya is part of a birthday surprise for a little boy called Aditya who is a cricket aficionado. Sweet!
JAYASURIYA
FOTOCORP

CLASS APART

Q& "I would love to play a A romantic hero in a film"
Sonu Sood, 38, is busy promoting his film Maximum. On a high since his success in Bollywood films and in the South, he is now preparing for his role as Dawood Ibrahim in Shootout at Wadala. Sood speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. You are known for your negative roles. How was it like to play a policeman in Maximum? A. It's a great challenge to play a different character. I got to explore another side of myself. Q. In Shootout at Wadala you play Dawood Ibrahim. How are you preparing for the role? A. I am reading books and going through reports on the Internet. I have also visited certain areas in Mumbai which would be relevant to the film. Q. Why are you doing more films in the South than in Mumbai? A. Southern films made me popular as an actor. A lot of good projects are coming my way. Q. Will we ever see you as a romantic hero? A. I wish. I would like to play a romantic hero in a film, with all the dancing and singing. Q. How has the journey been since you started your career in 1999? A. For an outsider from the small town of Moga in Punjab, it feels great that I have been able to carve out a space for myself.
FOTOCORP

DAVIS

WEEK

OF THE

WEEK

Just love the fact that Poonam Pandey has more followers than me. Attagirl, go ahead and drink wine in your underwear. More power to you! --Pritish Nandy

CROWNING GLORY
Thanks to Himangini Singh Yadu, 23, India's dry spell of 12 years at the international beauty pageants has finally ended. Yadu was crowned Miss Asia Pacific World 2012 at the competition held in Busan, South Korea, on June 16. She had earlier won the I Am She 2010 title, started by actor Sushmita Sen's I Am Foundation. A computer applications graduate from the International Institute of Professional Studies, Indore, Yadu was also trained at the Armed Trained Police Centre in Indore. What next? Bollywood?

YADU

British actor Warwick Davis, 42, is not following the league of other international stars who are eager to make a name in Bollywood. Davis will make his debut in a Bhojpuri film, Chingari, in which he plays a journalist. It is a remake of the 2004 Hindi film Insaaf. Davis, who has acted in Star Wars: Episode VI-Return of the Jedi and as Griphook in the Harry Potter series, was roped in by Bhojpuri producer Shrey Srivastava to act in the film.
by Prachi Rege

YOGEN SHAH

FOTOCORP

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

63

