Soc iety MOVEMENTTHERAPY

DELHI

Tripura Kashyap 48

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN'T DANCE?
Dance helps people improve mental, spiritual, physical and emotional well-being. Professionals trained in movement therapy tell you how it's done.
By Mona Ramavat

Projects Director,Bhoomika Creative Dance Company
TRAINED IN contemporary dance. Studied movement therapy in Wisconsin, US. WORKS WITH people from de-addiction centres, special schools and therapists.

Our bodies have immense potential for creative movement.

elt like ice cream... slowly," is the cue. In response, participants begin to slump and find unhurried ways of melting, like ice cream. This is no regular dance class; in fact, this is no dance class at all. Delhi dance movement therapist Tripura Kashyap uses movement, including dance, to help her students discover their internal rhythm. The result: Release of pent-up emotions, a greater awareness of one's body and a deeper body-mind connect. Kashyap, 48, has been involved with movement therapy for over 20 years and shared her insights in her book, My Body My Wisdom. "Our bodies have immense potential for creative movement but most adults confine them to functional movement," she says. Movement therapy is founded on the premise that movement and emotion are directly related and it benefits mental, physical, emotional and spiritual health. Here, dance works as a physical medium and therapists encourage the flow of natural, unstructured movement and work off the client's moves rather than have them follow the instructor's. Kashyap draws from dance and other elements like yoga, tai chi, kalaripayattu (a martial arts form from Kerala) and theatre for a session. Thirty-five-year-old software professional Neeta Sharma discovered her more assertive side after a few sessions. "She had a problem with saying `no'. I helped her with movement exercises specifically geared towards resisting. Eventually the same exercises

M

tions can be profound. If one word were to describe breast cancer survivor Baku Abrol's state of mind today, it's freedom. After the stress of the surgery and the treatment, the 54-year-old Mumbai entrepreneur decided to attend Patel's classes. "It had a positive effect on my mental state. I even went on to do things I had wished for but had not tried, like skydiving," says Abrol. Patel recently concluded a pilot research study on the effects of movement therapy on lung disease patients under the guidance of Dr Farokh Udwadia and Dr Khyati Mehta at the Breach Candy Hospital, Mumbai. "We were able to prove the efficacy and success of movement therapy on patients with lung disease," she says. Her most recent work was with the Rajasthan Royals IPL team. John Gloster, the physSANJAY RAMCHANDRAN

MUMBAI

Dilshad Patel 33
TRAINED IN movement therapy from New York.Trained as a neuro-linguistic programme practitioner. WORKS WITH senior citizens, street children, prisoners, sports professionals and people with medical conditions.

Harnessing movement for therapy stems from the belief that body and mind are connected.
SANJAY RAMCHANDRAN

BANGALORE

Brinda Jacob-Janvrin 37
Founder, The Studio for Movement Arts & Therapies (SMArT)
TRAINED IN Kathak and contemporary dance.Trained in dance therapy from UK. WORKS WITH HIV/AIDS-affected people, children with special needs, teachers, special educators and autistic children. She holds general classes too.

Issues like body image are addressed in cases of people who've been abused.

were done with her saying `no' simultaneously. Her body aided her mind in developing a more assertive attitude in a psychosomatic way," says Kashyap. For 33-year-old Mumbai movement therapist Dilshad Patel's sessions, music acts as a catalyst but is not necessarily an element. "With senior clients or terminally ill patients, chairs may be used as props. With children, a therapist may use a stretch cloth, bean bag, balls, or balloons to encourage movement sequences," she says. Improved self-confidence, shedding of inhibitions and clearer expression

are benefits that people with physical or mental disabilities experience through movement therapy. "It brings about harmony since movement integrates emotions, thinking and action, releasing layers of guilt, fear, inhibitions and suppression," says Bangalore movement therapist Brinda Jacob-Janvrin, 37. She incorporates dance, drama, pilates, yoga and meditation in her sessions. "Issues like body image are addressed in cases of people who've been abused. Movement therapy helps them reconnect with their bodies in an

empowering way," she says. Although Odissi dancer Sanchita Bhattacharya, 45, has had no formal training in movement therapy, she uses Indian classical dance to work with special children in Kolkata. "I was exposed to the ideas of energy, chakras, kundalini at a young age," she says. She recalls a session in which a fiveyear-old boy with a motor dysfunction condition couldn't lift his arm. "But after a couple of sessions with Odissiinspired movements, he was able to move his arm, very slowly," she says. The impact on body, mind and emo-

iotherapist of the team, describes Patel's ability to identify movement patterns and to correct individual problems as "significant which has direct application in injury prevention and overall performance." Among the biggest challenges is the mushrooming of overnight `selftrained' movement therapists, says Kashyap. "It's a serious therapy and can't be taken casually. Greater awareness is needed for movement therapy to be mainstreamed in India." But applied the right way, movement therapy can be immense and fulfilling. I

54

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

55

NEW

NEW

