Na tion HIMACHALPRADESH

THE TAPE TRAP
hen Virbhadra Singh, 78, drew a gleaming sword from its scabbard to celebrate 50 years in politics on June 23, the fivetime chief minister of Himachal Pradesh had more than an inkling he would need every weapon in his arsenal to stall what lay in store for him. Trouble came barely 48 hours later as a court framed charges of corruption and criminal conspiracy against Singh and his wife Pratibha. On June 26, he quit his current position as a Union Cabinet minister. "I don't want to embarrass my party and my Prime Minister," he stated. He insists the charges are a "fabrication by my political rivals, the BJP government headed by Prem Kumar Dhumal and the Himachal Pradesh Police." The June 25 arraignment stems from a 2009 state vigilance bureau probe of a controversial audio cassette ostensibly recorded towards the end of his second term as chief minister in 1989. Investigators contend that the voices on the tape are of Singh and Pratibha discussing illegal monetary transactions with Mohinder Pal, the state's then director of industries. The recordings were made public in the form of audio CDs by Singh's political adversary and former Congress minister Major Vijay Singh Mankotia, 71, in May 2007, following which the Dhumal government launched a confidential probe in 2008. Finally an FIR was lodged against the veteran Congressman and his wife on August 3, 2009. The original tape contains nine distinct snatches of conversation that, public prosecutor Jiwan Lal Sharma claims, have been corroborated through witness testimonies and is "clinching evidence". Shimla Special Judge (AntiCorruption) B.L. Soni's 32-page order detailing "sufficient grounds" for proceeding with a trial, specifically cites two instances of corruption, in one of which Singh and Pratibha allegedly

Corruption charges against Virbhadra Singh may well deprive Congress of its lone mass leader in the state

W

VIRBHADRA SINGH ADDRESSES THE PRESS AFTER RESIGNING FROM THE UPA GOVERNMENT

accepted a bribe of Rs 5 lakh to clear a cement plant by Gujarat Ambuja Limited. The other relates to an overdue effluent treatment plant at the Mohan Meakin Brewery in Solan. With Assembly elections lined up this October, the judicial indictment comes as a huge setback for Singh and the Congress party considering the fact that he is the lone mass leader the party has in the state. Their fingers tightly crossed, Singh's loyalists are hoping that voters will see the charges as a conspiracy hatched by the BJP government. Besides his obvious appeal among voters, supporters gain sustenance from their conviction that there exists no real evidence against Singh or his

wife--the audio cassette has been declared "inadmissible" by the court on grounds of its uncertain origins and authenticity. There is a shadow over two key witnesses' testimonies too. Wary of the consequences of past indecisions, Sonia Gandhi and her advisers have put off taking a final call on Singh until the high court pronounces a decision on his petition seeking quashing of the case. But at 78 years old, for Singh, it is about re-establishing his honour and reputation."I will fight it out," he declared after quitting. After defeats in Punjab and Uttar Pradesh and a narrow win in Uttarakhand, Sonia may have little choice but to stick with him. by Asit Jolly

46

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

