UPDATE

SAFE AND WARM HOMES FOR LEH FLOOD VICTIMS
A RECONSTRUCTED HOUSE IN PHYANG

CARE TODAY

A N I N D I A T O D A Y G R O U P I N I T I AT I V E

CARE TODAY thanks the donors who contributed towards reconstruction efforts

Photographs by SEEDS PROJECT TEAM

A RECONSTRUCTED HOUSE IN MERU

are Today Fund (CTF) received Rs 84,72,754 as do- Multi-cultural Outreach Trust. Two of the three houses belonging to the soldiers of nation in response to its Leh Flash Flood Relief Fund appeal in 2010. Out of the donation, Rs 11,37,660 the Ladakh Scouts Regiment have been reconstructed was used for the following activities: Rs 2,50,000 was used and occupied by their families. The third house is in an to establish 10 child-friendly spaces in partnership with advanced stage of completion. Ten passive solar houses have been completed and Save the Children, an NGO, to support children who have been affected by the tragedy; Rs 3,20,710 was used to re- handed over to the families by SEEDS. The houses have pair the severely damaged kitchen block of SNM Hospital been constructed using material that is locally available. in Leh; Rs 4,66,950 was utilised to establish two insulated Disaster risk reduction measures have also been incorpowarehouses at Umla and Kungyam villages in partnership rated. Features such as a Trombe (solar) wall on the with Pragya, an NGO; and Rs 50,000 each was given to two southern side will help these houses trap and retain heat during the day and use the same to keep the houses warm girl children for their education. From the balance of Rs 73,35,094, the CTF used at night. This is possible due to abundant sunlight that is Rs 56,26,924 to help in the construction of 13 houses and available even in the peak of winter, when temperatures a community centre and procuring furniture for may dip to as low as -20 degrees Celsius in this region. Thick external walls and rooftops that six schools. Housing reconstruction aid have been insulated using local has been given to three soldiers of the The houses have technology, will help retain the warmth. Ladakh Scouts Regiment through a been constructed Five of these houses are situated in tripartite agreement involving their using material Phyang, one of the worst-affected villages, regiment. Reconstruction of houses of 10 that is locally two are located in the suburbs of Leh, two poor families has been undertaken in in Meru and one in Gya, both far-flung vilpartnership with the Sustainable available. Disaster lages in Ladakh. Environment and Ecological Development risk reduction With the construction of these houses, Society (SEEDS), while construction of a measures have also 10 families now have access to safe and community centre has been taken up in been incorporated. warm houses, even in winter. partnership with Ladakh Arts and

C

For further inquiries, please contact C. Balaji Singh at 011-23314216/23355007 or email balaji.singh@intoday.com

