Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

COUNTRY SUPPER & CONSERVATISM
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

C

ertain catchphrases linger, and they carry within them the motto and motivations of a political age. Churchill, the ultimate word player in power, provided many memorable ones. The iron curtain speech still sustains its majestic resonance: "From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the Continent." Four decades later, in 1987, Ronald Reagan, less poetic and cowboyishly brusque but nevertheless the Great Communicator, would come out with his own oneliner addressed to history rather than the Soviet leader: "Mr Gorbachev, tear down this wall!" As if further cementing the truism that we live in an age of pastiches, the defining phraseology of politics has become unbearably quotidian--and occasionally darkly humorous. Certainly so in London, the capital of parliamentary democracy, where the phrases that cry out the characteristics of conservatism as pursued by David Cameron are: "country supper," "we are in this together," and "Yes, He Cam!" Strangely, none of them is uttered by Dave in Distress, but all are about him. The copyright belongs to Rebekah Brooks, disgraced diva of the Murdoch-owned News International, whose publications, ranging from the quality Times to the tabloid Sun, control the largest print share in British media. In political London, the words have acquired a life of their own as epigrams of a conservative crack-up. I was tempted to call the Leveson Inquiry, installed by Cameron himself on the ruins of the shamed News of the World and the phone-hacking scandal, the biggest ethics circus in London. Then there was something humbling about the sight of so many pachyderms of British public life--among them the prime minister and his predecessors, cabinet ministers and editors-- baring their soul in front of Lord Justice Leveson, whose job was to suggest a mechanism on how

to guard the guardians (the media). The prime minister was asked: Did you meet Rebekah Brooks every weekend? He said: "I might be able to go back and check, but I don't think every weekend. I don't think most weekends. But it would depend..." Then Brooks' text message to him was read out: "I do understand the issue with the Times. Let's discuss over country supper soon... I'm so rooting for you tomorrow, not just as proud friend but because professionally we're in this together. Speech of your life? Yes, he Cam!" Cameron was not prime minister when he got this message from his powerful friend. The exchange took place in 2009, on the eve of his speech at the Conservative party conference, and a week after the Sun endorsement. For the next few days, op-ed pages would use select words from that text as a severe verdict against the wayward elitism of the toff. A bit unfairly, I would say. As the prime minister defends himself, is it such a big crime for a politician struggling for the highest post to lobby for support from media groups? In the blood-letting arguments of British political journalism, the issue is something else. You can't miss a subtext of class envy and anti-Murdochism even as the disgruntled Brahmins of Conservatism rage against the country supper elite's private play with the young leader's political slogan, "we are in it together". That said, for an outsider, especially for someone from a country that copied the Westminster model most effectively, the Leveson Inquiry tells a different story, an inspiring one. We too know a thing or two about Faustian deals between media and politics. But can we ever imagine our Prime Minister, or his colleagues, making a public confession on one of those countless scandals before a tribunal? Elsewhere, silence and evasion are still grounds I for guilt in the powerful.

YOU CAN'T MISS A SUBTEXT OF CLASS ENVY AND ANTIMURDOCHISM EVEN AS THE DISGRUNTLED BRAHMINS OF CONSERVATISM RAGE AGAINST THE COUNTRY SUPPER ELITE'S PRIVATE PLAY WITH THE YOUNG LEADER'S POLITICAL SLOGAN, "WE ARE IN IT TOGETHER" .

S I G N P O STS
GUTTED in fire, the 200-year-old Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jeelani

Shrine, popularly known as Dastageer Sahib, in downtown Srinagar, on June 25. The fire, which started in the dome due to a short circuit, engulfed the whole building. EXPELLED by CPI(M), upcoming leader Prasenjit

Bose, for opposing the party's support to Pranab Mukherjee for president. NAMED Delhi, as the most competitive city in India, in a new Economist Intelligence Unit research report.

DASTAGEER SAHIB

DIED Veteran administrator, economist and HUSSAIN diplomat Abid Hussain, in London on June 21. Hussain had played an important role in India's economic and trade reforms.

16

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

NEW

