Na tion VICE-PRESIDENTIALELECTION
ANSARI

TIME TO REDIALOLD FRIENDS
Congress will have to lean on SP, BSP, and RJD to get Hamid Ansari a second term as vice-president
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Devesh Kumar

Numbers Game
Total strength of the electoral college for the post of vice-president is 786

he only way UPA can get its candidate elected as vice-president is by reaching out to Samajwadi Party (SP), Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) and Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD), which extend outside support. Present incumbent Hamid Ansari's term draws to a close on August 10, and BJP seems determined to force a contest. Unlike the presidential election, the fate of which is determined by an electoral college comprising elected members of the Lok Sabha and the state assemblies, the vice-president, who is also chairman of the Rajya Sabha, is elected by members of both Houses of Parliament in accordance with the system of proportional representation--by means of the single transferable vote in which voters list the candidates in order of their preference. The total strength of the electoral college for the election to the vicepresident's post thus adds up 786 (Lok

T

Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha Halfway mark

543 243 393

UPA tally in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha (including Trinamool Congress)

Lok Sabha (LS) Rajya Sabha (RS) Trinamool Congress
Supporting parties

272 106 28 (19 LS; 9 RS)

SP BSP RJD LJP Left

30 (21 LS + 9 RS) 36 (21 LS + 15 RS) 6 (4 LS + 2 RS) 1 (RS) 38 (24 LS +14 RS)

Sabha 543, Rajya Sabha 243). In order to bag the post, a vice-presidential candidate will have to get at least 393 votes. While UPA's strength, on its own, barely crosses the halfway mark in the 543-

member Lok Sabha, it is hopelessly outnumbered in the Rajya Sabha, where the Congress and its alliance partners together have a tally of only 106. UPA's combined tally in the two Houses of Parliament adds up to only 378. The numbers become more precarious if the Trinamool Congress upsets the calculations of the UPA's election managers by deciding to back the Opposition nominee. While Mamata Banerjee's party enjoys the support of 19 MPs in the Lok Sabha, it has nine members in the Rajya Sabha. The UPA strategists, under such circumstances, will have no option but to enlist the support of parties such as SP, BSP, RJD and the Lok Janshakti Party. As past experiences have shown, SP and BSP will extract their pound of flesh from the Congress leadership before deciding to back its candidate for the post of vice-president. SP and BSP have 21 members each in the Lok Sabha. They have nine and 15 members respectively in the Upper House. While the Congress has indicated

that it may not be averse to the idea of backing Ansari for a second term, its ally, the Nationalist Congress Party, is said to be toying with idea of fielding M.S. Swaminathan, the father of India's green revolution. SP chief Mulayam Singh Yadav, on his part, is reportedly pushing his cousin, Ram Gopal Yadav, for the post. All India Congress Committee General Secretary Digvijaya Singh, in an interview to a news channel on June 17, favoured the proposal of granting a second term to Ansari. The Left, which had backed his nomination on the eve of his first term, will agree. Then the contradictions will begin. Mamata will not. A section of NDA had initially floated the name of Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal for vice-president, but the Akali veteran turned down the proposal. Former finance minister Jaswant Singh is lobbying vigorously to be chosen as the BJP-led NDA's candidate but these are early days. "NDA has not been consulted by UPA so far on the issue. There will, in all likelihood, be a contest for the post," says Akali Dal leader Naresh Gujral, adding, "I am, however, hoping that UPA will show some grace and discuss it with the Opposition. After all, the vice-president will also run the Rajya Sabha. He has to enjoy the goodwill of all sections." BJP chief spokesman Ravi Shankar Prasad adds: "The entire situation arising out of the presidential election has given enough food for thought to strategise for the vice-presidential election, keeping in mind UPA's strength in the I two Houses of Parliament." R E S U LT S

MAHARASHTRA

The Fire Escape
Some files destroyed in the June 21 Mantralaya flames could have implicated scam-tainted politicians
confidential March 19 report by the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA) had blamed former Maharashtra chief ministers Vilasrao Deshmukh and Sushilkumar Shinde for flouting rules in the allotment of MHADA land to 27 influential individuals between 1999 and 2004. A file of the report, in the possession of the principal secretary of Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan, was lost in the June 21 fire in the Mantralaya in Mumbai. The fire, which killed five people, also destroyed files related to the Rs 300crore scam in Pune on government land allotments during 1995-2004. Four floors of the seven-storey Mantralaya were gutted in the fire. It may have been caused by a short circuit in the information technology department on the fourth floor. The upper floors housed the home, urban development, forests, revenue, relief and rehabilitation, energy, education, higher and technical education, housing, and cooperation departments. The offices of Chavan and his deputy, Ajit Pawar, are on the sixth floor. Documents related to policy decisions on the proposed ChurchgateVirar elevated rail corridor, the proposed Navi Mumbai airport, and action to be taken against 21 officials

A

THE FIRE AT THE MANTRALAYA IN MUMBAI

MANDAR DEODHAR

arrested while accepting bribes were gutted. According to an estimate by a highly placed official, nearly 10 lakh of the 15 lakh files have been destroyed. Chavan said the government is trying to retrieve data from the burnt hard disks of the computers. "The data has also been stored in servers outside the Mantralaya," Chavan said. Sunil Karelia, a hardware engineer, says it is possible to retrieve data from the hard disk depending on how badly it is burnt. The government hopes it can retrieve the data because every file has to be cleared by the finance department. The department, situated on the third floor, escaped the fire. A joke went viral soon after the blaze: "Prithviraj Chavan wanted a paperless administration. Mantralaya has no papers now." by Kiran Tare NEITHER OF THEM

To gauge popular perception,the India Today Group has launched the PickYour President campaign. The results of the online and SMS poll after the presidential candidatures were finalised.
ONLINE POLL RESULT SMS POLL RESULT

PRANAB MUKHERJEE

P. A. SANGMA

39.36 42.86

38.3 14.28

22.34 42.86

For the week ending June 27, 2012; figures in percentage

44

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

45

