Spo rt

TENNIS

`WHYSHOULD I BE BAIT?'
Tennis ace Sania Mirza takes offence to AITA's callous disregard for her commitment to the sport and nation in the run-up to the Olympics
Vardhan. "This kind of blatant humiliation of Indian womanhood needs to be condemned even if it comes from the highest controlling body of tennis," she declared. AITA maintains its selection is based on merit. Sania has been most upset by the demand by Leander's father Vece, a former hockey player and national selector, that she give a written assurance about playing mixed doubles, included in the 2012 edition for the first time since 1924, with Leander. "It is demeaning for me, Vishnu Vardhan and Leander that a written assurance to play with him was sought," she said, adding, "I am committed to play with any person that my country feels I am good enough to partner. There should never be a question on this, although if asked, I am entitled to have my preferences." Bhupathi is clearly her choice. His sports management firm, Globosport, was also instrumental in helping her bag early endorsements, though that is now completely controlled by her father Imran Mirza, a cricketer in his younger days, who apparently drafted the 1,017-words-long statement on how her selection was a joke. Either he or his wife, Nasima, travels with Sania on the gruelling tennis circuit. Sania has been India's No. 1 women's player for nearly a decade, both in singles and doubles. Her career best singles ranking of 27 in the world is bettered only by Vijay Amritraj (16) and Ramesh Krishnan (23) in the men's circuit among modern-era Indian tennis players. But then, what else can she expect from AITA, which either forgot or deliberately refrained from sending her a congratulatory message when she won the French Open with Bhupathi.
by Amarnath K. Menon

SANIA MIRZA
AP PHOTO

A

s an Indian woman in the 21st century, what I find disillusioning is the humiliating manner in which I was put up as a bait to try and pacify one of the disgruntled stalwarts of Indian tennis. The manner and the timing of the announcement reeks of male chauvinism--I am offered as compensation to partner one of the feuding champions purely in order to lure him into accepting to play with a male player he does not wish to play with," said Sania Mirza, 25, about her delayed inclusion in the Indian team to the London Olympics. She was responding to her inclu-

sion by the All India Tennis Association (AITA), after two weeks of controversy about the men's doubles pair, as a fallout of which AITA demanded a written assurance that she would pair with Leander Paes, 39, instead of Mahesh Bhupathi, 38. Sania and Bhupathi have lately become a formidable mixed doubles pair, winning the French Open in May, her second Grand Slam win overall. AITA thought fielding Sania with Leander in mixed doubles would sweeten the bitter pill it was handing out to Leander: Forcing him to play with the lowly ranked 24-year-old Vishnu

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

57

