BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

NEITHER MERE NOR LITERATURE
he oldest toss-up in the long history of argument within ism.' This strategy attempts to shrug off blame by seeking parthe aesthetic fraternity is whether art imitates life or life ity with India. It doesn't hold up. If Pakistan is also a victim, tends to mirror the convulsions of human imagination in why does its government protect and finance Hafiz Saeed? But benign, benevolent or malignant aspects. The answer is prob- the power of repetition is hypnotic, and it is amazing how even ably six of one, and half a dozen of the other. It is rare, though, some senior Indian ministers buy into a fragile duplicity that to see facts snubbed as fiction, and then return from a two-year even Pakistan's closest ally, Saudi Arabia, implicitly rejects. The Saudis have done what Pakistan has refused to do: Act against residence in a graveyard to haunt the world with questions. On February 25, 2010, Pakistan's Foreign Secretary the known masterminds of 26/11. The arrest of Ansari is as dramatic, and consequential, for Salman Bashir achieved his 15 seconds of fame when, on television, he dismissed the Indian dossier on Hafiz Saeed and our region as the death of Osama bin Laden was for America. his terrorist outfit Lashkar-e-Toiba as "mere literature". It was Islamabad's establishment is dealing with the fallout with its softly spoken and elegantly phrased, but the sneer was unmis- usual stoic obduracy, but behind the façade it must be feeling takable. Not every Pak foreign secretary is rewarded after the pain of a devastating blow to the gut. For this chapter of retirement. Bashir's predecessor Riaz Mohammad Khan, "literature" has been written in Riyadh. Why has Saudi Arabia chosen to cooperate with whose professional record was impeccable, was farmed out into the thin shrubbery of memoirdom. Bashir, who angered India on an issue that defines the very core of India's Indians, arrived in Delhi on June 20 to take over as his coun- problems with Pakistan? Ansari went to Saudi Arabia as Riyasat Ali, on a fake try's high commissioner. It is either his bonus for phraseology, Pakistani passport, fully confident that Saudi Arabia was or someone in Islamabad has an explosive sense of humour. A literary critic like Bashir should, however, recognise as safe as Pakistan, since he had the protection of ISI, his poetic justice. The first file on his desk in Delhi is going to mentor and probably his employer, ever since he fled India be on Syed Zabiuddin Ansari, an Indian from Beed who to fulfil his terrorist dreams from Pakistan. Ansari is singing became a confidant of Hafiz Saeed, helped train the squad before the Indian police now, but there is not a detail that that hit Mumbai on November 26, 2008, and then directed would not have been squeezed out already by Saudi authorities before they handed him to India. operations from a control room in SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Saudis knew, therefore, that Ansari Karachi for three days as Lashkar terwould implicate ISI officers like "Major rorists wrought havoc. Iqbal" and "Major Sameer Ali", who One person knows the difference have been named. The Saudis knew between fact and fiction: Ajmal Kasab, they were destroying the last veil of a the fortuitous survivor of that barbaric much-masked Pakistani operation gang. Reports from his Mumbai prison when they handed Ansari to India. say he fell into deep contemplation Saudi Arabia did not do this merely upon hearing of Ansari's arrest. because Ansari is India's enemy. It did Ansari is not a reluctant fundamenso because Riyadh understands what talist. He did not need waterboarding or Islamabad will never admit; that Ansari indelicate forms of persuasion during is also Saudi Arabia's enemy. That interrogation. He was happy to expand Ansari hates India, or distorts Islam to the arc of facts and add flesh to details. breed fanatics, does not make him any Every interrogation, whether of David more acceptable to Saudis or their ruler, Headley in America or Ansari in India, King Abdullah, who is also Custodian of fetches the same answer: Pakistan's ISI the Two Holy Mosques. This is proof, if was heavily involved. proof were needed, that anti-Indian terBashir's "literature" has grown from a tome to a shelf to a library. One can ap- That Ansari hates India does not rorism does not have the sanction of the make him any more acceptable highest authorities of Islam. preciate his dilemma. Pakistan's buKing Abdullah's decision may not reaucrats are not paid to blame ISI, and to Saudis or their ruler, King immediately reverberate in formal its ministers would quickly lose their jobs Abdullah, who is also Custodian if they did. They must either deny, or deof the Two Holy Mosques. This is diplomacy, but it changes, dramatically, strategic assumptions and will shift the flect. The first is flat; the second can proof that anti-Indian terrorism flow of undercurrents. Riyadh is and splice into different directions. Kashmir does not have the sanction of will remain a friend of Islamabad, but is the old staple, thinned by overuse. A in the crucial war against terrorism it new variable has surface appeal, but lit- the highest authorities of Islam. has become a partner of Delhi. tle depth: `We too are victims of terrorI

T

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

70

