BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

POWERLESS IN OFFICE
ime heals, but, regrettably, rather more so in proverbs Congress has almost systematically degraded its ranks to the than in politics. Time is rarely on the side of govern- point where even its chief ministers do not quite measure up ments in desperate need of it. When the ship of state be- to a home ministry's needs. They could have looked towards gins to leak, time, being a rascal, punctures a few extra holes Sharad Pawar, of course; but Congress culture forbids anyin the hull. Any pragmatic captain knows that a limping ship thing but second class jobs to those who keep it in office. Congress did have one excellent option. Power would must return to port or sink. But political captains tend to be counterintuitive. Loath to surrender control of the steering have been the perfect portfolio for Rahul Gandhi. The wheel, they head straight for icebergs in the hope that some failure of his predecessors was precisely the kind of space for him to display administrative mettle, and set up his claim miracle will save the crew and passengers. The evidence against illusion is compelling. Do the math for leadership of the country. Someone has persuaded from the news floating in the air, and I am discounting the Rahul Gandhi that he can become Prime Minister of India impact of Anna Hazare since conventional Delhi wisdom if he dips his toe in the water now and then, in front of dismisses him as a has-been. I would not be too complacent exulting television cameras, without actually going through about his silent impact, but let us leave this to one the bother of learning how to swim. It is not easy to govern India, or even broad parts of it. side. Examine the obvious. If UPA had either opted for or been forced into a general Young Akhilesh Yadav is discovering that chief ministership election in, say, March this year, Congress would probably requires something more than a broad smile after being have won 11 out of Assam's 14 Lok Sabha seats. After sworn in. The price of poor administration is steep, and the massacres and calamities of July, it will be lucky to win extracted quickly. Rarely has any stock plummeted as three. Time has stolen seats of an already embattled party, fast as that of Akhilesh Yadav in Uttar Pradesh. He has not revived its spirits. A train accident in Nellore reminded been in office for only some 20 weeks, so he has a chance the country that it does not have a minister for railways, at to recover, but that will not be easy. You have to rule with least one who sits in office. The massive blackout which both hands, think upon your feet; and work around the was reported across the world, but was invisible to clock. Governance is about managing people, and the first Congress spokesman Manish Tewari, generated widespread thing they want is undivided attention. Then they want anger. Every story, from disparate corners, is threaded decisions, particularly those that affect life and death, such as security during communal tension. by one fact: Governance has collapsed. The last phase of the UPA Prime Minister Manmohan SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Singh can't help looking helpless. Government will begin when the He has a problem he cannot quite Prime Minister shifts from helpless discuss in public but does surely to hopeless. He has not quite made admit in the privacy of his drawing the transition, since he thinks there room: The Congress has run out of is some hope left in his Pakistan talent. He did not promote power visit in late November. Asif Zardari minister Sushilkumar Shinde to the used Ajmer Sharif as a cloak; relihome ministry on the very day of gion is Dr Singh's excuse as well. the blackout because he has some Sentiment is no bad thing, but macabre sense of humour. He did cosmetics do not heal wounds. so because he has no other option. They are ephemeral. The bubbles Shinde is perhaps the only Cabinet that swarmed across front pages minister left with both the experiwhen Dr Singh became finance ence and maturity to glide calmly minister for a month have evapointo this office. His has been a quiet rated. If any animal spirits were rebut remarkable journey from conleased, they are not yet visible. stable to the man in executive When Dr Singh returns from Someone has persuaded Rahul charge of India's police forces. Pakistan, he will have a year of Some of the names circulating in real time left, if he is allowed to Gandhi that he can become Prime Delhi for finance and home before complete his full term. Six months Minister of India if he dips his toe in Chidambaram and Shinde were are always hostage to a general the water now and then, in front of given the jobs, are too embarrasselection. One wonders what UPA exulting television cameras, without ing to repeat. There was a time can achieve in one year that actually going through the bother when there were enough Congress was beyond its capacity in the stalwarts to fill two Cabinets. But previous four.  of learning how to swim.

T

AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

