GLOSSARY RUN FOR COVER
What does Mallika Sherawat do when everybody else starts shedding their clothes as well? It's quite simple. She gets into an extra large T-shirt with actor Vivek Oberoi, one that spells `screwed' in large and bold letters. And just so that you don't miss the point, they skipped their bottoms as well. The stunt will probably not do much for their film Kismat, Luv, Paisa, Dilli, or their careers, but that T-shirt may have just spelt their fate. What were they thinking? Or not.
LEONE (RIGHT) WITH WEBER

PERFECT MATCH
Sunny Leone had husband Daniel Weber in tow when she returned to India for the premiere of Jism 2. While she is known for doing what she does, he has been an adult star himself, going by names such as Ariel King and Dirrty. He was a guitarist in a band called The Spyderz, before producing films such as Roleplay and Sunny's Slumber Party. Now, a lead vocalist and guitarist in the four-member rock and roll band, The Disparrows, he makes adult films for the couple's adult film company, Sun Lust Pictures. Quite a pair.
"NOW I AM LOOKING TO MORE WELL-WRITTEN ROLES,WHERE THE WOMAN'S CHARACTER IS PROPERLY FLESHED OUTAND PERFORMANCE IS GIVEN IMPORTANCE. BYTHAT I DON'T MEAN IT HAS TO BE AWOMAN-CENTRIC FILM." --Asin, Actor

Q& "I had refused Kahaani Ghar Ghar Kii A and Bade Acche Lagte Hain thrice"
Sakshi Tanwar, 39, and her Bade Acche Lagte Hain co-star Ram Kapoor became television's most talked about couple after consummating their marriage on air, earlier in the year. Months later, the year-old show goes into a five-year leap to rescue falling TV ratings and Tanwar goes from being Priya Kapoor to Pooja Sharma. Separated from her husband, she relocates to Dubai, where she runs a bookstore. Tanwar speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. What has changed with the leap in the show? A. Priya is stronger, but also much more vulnerable, as she has a child to raise by herself. Q. What about your new look? A. We wanted a contemporary working woman, yet someone who would not pay much attention to clothes, as she has a five-year-old daughter to raise. Q. What's your equation with Ram Kapoor? A. Fabulous. He is great fun to work with. We've never worked together before, but seeing our chemistry, people felt we had. Q. Ekta Kapoor and you go back a long way. Do you still have disagreements? A. Balaji is like family now. Whenever I disagree with her, the show does well. I had said no to Kahaani Ghar Ghar Kii and Bade Acche Lagte Hain thrice.

FOTOCORP

QUOTE
OF THE

WEEK

IN JEMIMA'S SHOES
Saeeda Imtiaz, 27, may need more than her newly acquired blonde mop to step into the shoes of Jemima Khan, former wife of Pakistan cricketer-turned-politician Imran Khan. The US-based Pakistani model's debut film, Kaptaan, is a tribute to Imran by filmmaker Aman Khan. Having grown up in Long Island in the US, Imtiaz has her work cut out, to convincingly pull off Jemima's British accent, with intimate scenes thrown in for good measure.

ROMPING IN STYLE
Bollywood's leading women may be clued in to the latest international fashion, but that doesn't mean that all of them can pull off their jumpsuits and rompers

SHERAWAT (RIGHT) WITH OBEROI
FOTOCORP

Sonakshi Sinha has a lot going for her lately. Sadly, the Mango ditsy jumpsuit that she wore to the DVD launch of Rowdy Rathore is another story. By wearing her belt so high, she attracted attention to parts of herself that had gone unnoticed. She would do well to remember that western silhouettes aren't always kind to the voluptuous.
There really isn't much that does not look good on Deepika Padukone. Her brief outfits and the bikini act in Cocktail may have got people talking, but for the success party of the film in Mumbai, she turned up fully covered in a blue silk jumpsuit. Sonakshi, take some pointers.

Kareena Kapoor loves her
T-shirts and jeans, and Manish Malhotras, but she pulled a surprise at the trailer launch of Heroine in a vivid red Emanuel Ungaro jumpsuit, paired with gold sandals and a cuff. As long as she keeps dressing up like that, there won't be much to complain about, while the country debates her wedding dates and locations.

IMTIAZ

HORROR MEETS SENSUALITY
Raaz 3 promised to deliver all the trappings of a Vikram Bhatt film-- skin and sex, with a dash of horror, and the posters do not disappoint. What we have is a red-eyed Emraan Hashmi, even if he is only partially visible, and Bipasha Basu in her lingerie, being pawed all over by grotesque, long-nailed hands, against a spooky blue-grey background. This is as exciting as it could get, and we haven't yet seen it in 3D.


OF THE

WEEK

Even after 65 years, politicians promise us paani, makaan and bijlee. And we continue to believe in them. Jai Ho!
--Aupam Kher, Actor
Photographs By YOGEN SHAH

PADUKONE

Sophie Chaudhary must have been in a hurry when she put on the black and white Armani Exchange jumpsuit. But we can see why she opted for the busy print--to distract us from her messy hair and makeup. Her last film, Daddy Cool, and music album were both years ago, so she has time now to put herself together.

KAPOOR

CHAUDHARY

POSTER OF RAAZ 3

Compiled by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege
AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

62

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

63

