Cin ema

TOLLYWOOD

THIS SUPERHERO CAN FLY
With a housefly for a hero,Telugu smash hit Eega raises the bar for special effects in Indian cinema
t has been billed as India's answer to A Bug's Life and Bee Movie on technical wizardry. But at heart, Eega is a Kafkaesque metamorphosis with a Tollywood twist: Hero (played by Nani) serenades heroine (Bindu, played by Samantha), who plays hard to get; in comes the villain (played by Sudeep); villain murders hero, who is reborn as a housefly and exacts sweet revenge. A simple and straight love triangle transforms into a visual spectacle of a fly pestering and tormenting the villain, ruining his sleep, and ultimately distracting him on the road to force a fatal accident. Oh, and even as the revenge story plays out, Eega (Telugu for housefly) lifts weights, wears goggles and even goes out on a date. Director S.S. Rajamouli was thinking of doing a short film in 2010 after Magadheera in 2009, which grossed Rs 76 crore, the highest in the Telugu film history, and Maryada Ramanna, another hit grossing Rs 34 crore, in 2010. "The idea of an insect-based film crossed my mind," he says, recalling that his father, well-known story writer and director V. Vijayendra Prasad had first shared the story idea with him when he was an understudy in the 1990s. When Rajamouli developed the idea into a story and fleshed out the fly's character, he broached it to producers D. Suresh Babu and Sai Korapati and met with instant approval. "The story

I

SUDEEP WITH THE FLY

was in genre of Steven Spielberg's Jaws (1975). We realised that it was time we in India made such animation films," says Babu. Choosing the cast and technical team was not difficult. Except for the cinematographer, it was all first choice. "I had done the complete characterisation before choosing the cast, unlike in my earlier films," says Rajamouli. The producers knew that creating the fly and blending computer graphics with story-telling would prove costly, but money was not the problem. What Rajamouli or the producers did not imagine was that it would take 14 months instead of the planned four to create their superstar. Getting Eega to emote proved daunting. Several versions of Eega models had to be made and scrapped. Generating the relevant computer graphics posed newer challenges. A quick-paced screenplay demands that the bizarre conflict between the ruthless villain and the avenger fly has riveting sequences: Sudeep had to suffer its wrath, as it danced, played pranks and intimidated with its slender arms to convey its feelings without uttering a

word. Cost overruns followed as the Hyderabad-based Makuta Graphics had to turn to animation consultants in Russia, China, Armenia, UK, US, Iran and Israel, as some of the special effects could not be generated in Hyderabad, even though nearly 90 per cent of the film was shot in the city's Rama Naidu Studios. Consultants were also flown in to put Makuta's 30-man team of animators and visualisers through a special training programme on acting theory and create insect formats for cinema. Even as Eega in Telugu, Naan Ee in Tamil and Eecha in Malayalam released at 1,198 cinemas on July 6, grossing Rs 65 crore, Rs 15 crore and Rs 2.5 crore respectively, the producers have announced a 3D version. The cash registers are still ringing for the film, made on a budget of Rs 30 crore. Its Hindi remake, Makhi, directed by Rajamouli himself, will also hit the screens before the year-end. "This is poised to be the first film to collect Rs 100 crore in Telugu alone," says filmmaker Ram Gopal Varma.
by Amarnath K. Menon

AUGUST 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

