AnimPACTFeature

www.augusthue.in

BEST OF BISTROS
Our selection of the best restaurants and pubs in Delhi, especially for you; to lift yoo up; to cool you down; to get you into the groowe for that special day of yours'. Let ys guide you to the tutinotf haiens you never knew four city had. Whether you are looking for a hip place to hang, some simply exquisite chow or a rocking venue to let it all loose, we hove got it all. So sit tight, let the fun begin and be swept off by the awesome combinations for your taste buds and four party mood that these joints offer. Just make sure you are prepared to make the best of this summer bunking out at these eateries and party places and get transported to a world that you will definitely find in keeping with your mood and taste.

Make

ewent

EVENTFUL!
Culinary perfection for your special day. Indoor or Outdoor, Corporate or Social, BBQ or Black Tie. With us, planning your event becomes a pleasure And all at a reasonable price, that's sure to leave you smiling!

Where Health meets Taste!
ugust Spice, a chain of casual dining and i delivery restaurants in Delhi NCR, has been Icreating ripples on the 'Leisure & Lifestyle1 firmament of the city ever since the opening of their flagship restaurant at Shalimar Bagh in north Delhi, followed quickly by its south Delhi Avatar at the Capital's cultural hot-spot - Dilli Haat (I.N.A.) about a year ago. Breaking away from the patterned old guard of the so-far unorganized sector, August Spice came as a breath of fresh air to the more adventuresome Delhi palate, and captured the imagination of thousands of aficionados of gourmet food within no time. Combining the finest of traditional Indian delicacies with the best of the World cuisine to turn out a happy fusion which the owners of August Spice like to term as Modern Indian Cuisine. Equipped with a fully modern, HACCPcertified production facility, they are able to regularly churn out high quality stuff in a blend where health meets taste, and nutrition is another name for the rich aroma every dish here is imbued with. The head chef informed that all food coming out of the facility is produced under highly controlled environs, utilising the latest knowhow and tools of the business, thus ensuring that only the best product reaches the consumer when he orders, free from the harmful effects of bacteria or micro-organisms. The promoters of August Spice settle for nothing less than 'perfect and hence are proactively involved in each stage of the production process. Shouldering their efforts is the highly motivated team of chefs, food analysts and qualified professionals who hand-pick the best ingredients that go into producing the savory dishes. Take for instance their usage of cooking medium; at August Spice, the standard oil used is Canola oil, known worldwide for its lowest level of fatty acids. Hardly surprising that praises like "Incredibly Delicious", "Truly Nutritious", "Heavenly Taste", "Rare combination of Taste & Health" are just a few of the many superlatives bestowed by legion of August Spice patrons avowed to come back again and again. Latest in the chain is the outlet in the up-market Saket, one of the most happening places in Delhi down south, located right across the road from MGF Metropolitan mall on the Press Enclave Road. Home deliveries from the outlet have been very well received by the most demanding of the Elite custom in and around the service area. With the Dine-in area soon to be thrown open to the public, the guest will be spoilt for choices, with the mouth-watering array of delectable offerings ranging from Roomali Rolls to Grilled Sandwiches, Pizza N Pasta meals, and a variety of other Veg/Non-veg main-course dishes to choose from.

BANQUET

EVENTS
CATERING
+91 11 4944 9966 +91 98998 63444
interact@augusthue.in

Symphony Celebrators Private Limited
D -11 Udyog Nagar Rohtak Road New Delhi

AUGUST
HUE vi

AiimPACTleanin;

INDIA KA OIL?

I
DILLI KA OIL?

tapas world
he foodielicious Delhites can now look forward to fine dining at the Tapas World, . World Cuisine Restaurant & Bar at Defense colony Delhi. The well planned multi cuisine restaurant & Bar features a beautiful lounge sitting with a combination of Royal Golden and silver theme, which is best used to create a cherished ambience. The extensive World-Cuisine food menu that is served in Tapas World, consists of sumptuous starters, salads and the main course, sweetly rounded off with dessert. "We came up with the idea of a World Cuisine Restaurant & Bar because we felt it is perfect for a city like Delhi where people recognize fine dining. We want people to keep coming back often to enjoy the sumptuous dishes dressed in a unique way. We not only cater to both vegetarian and non-vegetarian customers, but also to the customers on diet who want to enjoy delectable food without taking in excess of calories. We at Tapas world serve cuisines like Thai, Oriental, Lebanese, Japanese, Chinese and European delicacies etc." Says Manav Malik, owner of Tapas World. "Whether you want to enjoy in a group or just want to enjoy an intimate twosome in a soothing & stunning surroundings, Tapas World is perfect place to be in. You can look forward to memorable a la carte meals at lunch and dinner in a cozy ambience followed by mouthwatering food. The bar serves a wide range of cocktails, mock tails and liquor to raise your spirits. Go ahead, give your taste buds a treat!" he added. With an aspiration to create a new benchmark to serve authentic and delicious cuisine Tapas World brings together a rustic simplicity, with the refined ingredients of World gastronomic delights.. .that are presented to you in stylish and intimated vaulted restaurant. It is a perfect destination where you can sit back and relax on soft leather seatings with Golden and silver tones.

'Jasmine'- fine-dining oriental restaurant in Hotel The Royal Plaza, New Delhi

J
ENGimHlHMGIENE

o

asmine, an authentic oriental cuisine restaurant with a delectable repertoire of specialties from Mainland China. The oriental restaurant offers Thai, Szechuan and Cantonese cuisine. The dimsum cart service with an unlimited choice of delicately carved dimsums lends a unique dining experience in Jasmine. With its simple and elegant decor, 'Jasmine' is positioned to be the ultimate destination for oriental cuisine for Delhiites. Under the leadership of Chef Atul Shanker Mishra, Executive Chef, Hotel The Royal plaza and specialised chef from Singapore, Jasmine promises to be a culinary

delight even for the most discerning gourmet, with its extensive menu that includes Szechuan, Hunnan, Cantonese and Beijing cuisines and several signature delicacies. Some of the dishes are Crispy fried fish with chilly hoi sin/ Diced chicken zhong qing style, Prawn chilli. Vegetarians would relish Deluxe vegetable salt & pepper/ Crispy corn kernels pepper salt, Ma-fu-tofu vegetable/ Seasonal vegetable in hot garlic sauce. All this and a choice of Vegetable fried rice, Vegetable Hakka noodle. In deserts the delicious Tab-Tim-crob (Water chestnut & yam in coconut flavored syrup) would add to the taste.

GREATER KAILASH-2 +91-7838434222 PITAMPURA +91-8447750605 GURGAON +91-8447750606

DWARKA +91-8447750607 NEHRU PLACE +91-8447750604 AMRITSAR +91-8427355411

FREE HOME DELIVERY 9999032030

