AnimPACTFeature

us, the concept of Blissful Living sounds id it may well be how we try to live our ves, but everyday life has a way of getting in the way. ''ves, rushing from one thing to another, fit just a little bit more ijj^^ur days hey were designed to hold. Life can sometimes ything but blissful. This is when we most need to J. stop ... be still... and reach inwards to thepeacejIF ' that dwells within. ^r~ ~^r

INTERNATIONAL CITY: VILLA LIFE AT THE EDGE OF DELHI
Built by Sobha Developers a quality & delivery focused company with proven credentials of having delivered more than 50 million sq.ft. Sobha Developers is India's only backward integrated real estate company with in house resources & competencies including an interior division with one of India's largest wood working factory, metal works & glazing factory & a concrete products factory to bring fine craftsmanship and quality to every development that bears its name. obha presents you the lifestyle of the upper echelons of Delhi NCR. International City, a 150 acre upscale villa community is strategically located in sectors 109,106,108 of Gurgaon that touches Delhi border and is just a 10 minutes drive from the IGI Airport, right off the upcoming Dwarka Expressway. International City has a world class infrastructure with well designed & landscaped roads with broad walkways & tree lined avenues, 24-hour auto switch central power

C

back-up, central water heating, VRV air conditioning, solar lighting and rain water harvesting. Residents will also enjoy a privileged access to a premier clubhouse spread over 2 acre, offering world's finest lifestyle, health, entertainment and business facilities and a host of convenience amenities. International City offers a choice of presidential villas available in 500 & 400 sq. yd. The presidential villas have spacious 5 bedrooms with basement, convenient car parks, a private elevator, front & rear lawns, terrace gardens, ultra luxurious family & dining rooms with double height living spaces & 2 Master suites with 5 fixture master baths. International City has recently launched the concept of duplex villasindependent homes for two families providing unsurpassed living experiences with safety and conveniences of urban community living. The residents have a choice to own Ground & Basement or First & Second Floor of these independent villa homes spread over 600 sq. yd. These are spacious 4 bedroom residences with luxurious living spaces, terrace gardens & courtyards. International City is all set to be a perfect blend of sophistication, magnificent space planning, exceptional amenities and flawless execution. It could most certainly be your proud possession which in the true sense, ja iterations to keep!

AnimPACTFeature

BLISSFUL LIVING AT

SUPERTECH GOLF COUNTRY
he hustle bustle and hectic schedule has taken a toll on people living in Metro cities and regions nearby. Hard pressed for time, people residing in the urban areas are rapidly losing the charm of living a "life" - a life full of bliss. In this great rush of today's fast paced life comes a savior, Supertech Limited, a leading real estate developer of NCR which promises to usher in a 'place 1 where one can relax and have a life of one's own. A place which is away from the madness and apathy that emerges from the rising concrete towers of the city. At an unexplored location of Yamuna Expressway, Greater Noida, Supertech has introduced "Golf Country", a green township which not only offers all modern facilities but also brings people close to their souls. A township set amidst green and peaceful environment takes away all the stress of day-to-day busy life and fills a life with vigor and vivacity. Golf Country, a 100 acre township is a golf course project which comprises of individual plots, villas and high rise buildings set amongst the scenic lush green golf course. The key features of the project are 9-hole golf course, shopping mall, gymnasium, swimming pool, club house, hospital and school.

united?
in today's hectic life, everyone aspires to own a beautiful home that is a statement of luxury & style and is equipped with ultramodern amenities. Keeping these aspects in mind, we developed The Villas in Uniworld Resorts, strategically located near Rajiv Chowk, off Sohna road, Gurgaon. Consisting of limited four storey villas with personal elevator, people who have bought The Villas have loved its layouts as it satisfies their urge for comfort as well as modern lifestyle without compromising on the crucial factors - space and luxury. The Villas indeed redefine blissful living in iiirff"

T

Living a life of bliss and happiness is everyone's dream, come home to Golf Country and spend a life worth living!

