SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

IN THE CITY
Spiced Up

RESTAURANT

With cheerful and bright interiors, Macaca is a chic addition to the restaurant scene in Noida. The mood of the restaurant is peppy and energetic--in keeping with their décor, done up in shades of red, green and hot pink. The music is an interesting mix of retro and lounge. When here, one can choose from American classics, Mediterranean and European preparations, as well as Indian dishes with a modern twist. Take your pick from their sumptuous collection of grilled fish, parmesan chicken steak, fillet mignon and mushroom steaks. Their platters are divided into Mediterranean Mezze, Oriental Affair and Spanish Tapas--all hearty and delicious. Save some room for dessert--there are walnut brownies and Mexican chocolate sizzlers to choose from. Average meal for two Rs 1,000 plus taxes At J 4-5, First Floor, Sector 18, Noida Tel 012049422222
by

Shilpa Mehta

CAFE

Coffee World
An ideal joint for a great cuppa, Coffee World, a high-quality coffee outlet has opened its fourth outlet in the city. Unlike other coffee joints, Coffee World does not only serve the traditional variations of coffee-based drinks but also has delightful bites like Belgian waffles on offer. The waffles are always prepared fresh for every customer and are served with honey and strawberry syrup. The décor here is a mixture of grey and black walls with contemporary furniture, making the place cosy and private--ideal for a cup of coffee and a quick snack. Other picks from their menu would include the smoked chicken and pepper sandwich as well as the Mexican Fajita wrap (a great option for vegetarians). Average meal for two Rs 600 plus taxes At K 79, Lajpat Nagar II  by Marcia Rodrigues Tel 41048800

s-26

SIMPLY DELHI  AUGUST 2012

SIMPLY DELHI
EVENTS

Buzz

EVENTS
ONGOING TILL AUGUST 31
Crazy cake of the month
DoubleTree introduces Cake of the Month, at Café on 3 where crazy cake flavours are on offer. There is also an ongoing contest called `Craziest thing I have done' where contestants get to win a crazy gift, declaring them crazy. At DoubleTree Hotel, Mayur Vihar Tel 4110555

ONGOING TILL SEPTEMBER
Healthy bites

AUGUST 17 TO AUGUST 21
Oceans Stride
`Follow the Tide', a photo exhibition illustrating the biological diversity of our oceans will showcase the beauty and destruction of oceans in India. The exhibition will display photo-

graphs taken over the years by the NGO, Greenpeace, as part of its Oceans campaign. The works of both Indian and international photographers will be displayed here. At IIC, Max Mueller Marg, New Delhi Tel 24619431

AUGUST 7 TO AUGUST 26
Theatrical initiative
The Kutumb foundation, an initiative that is working on education and skill building through alternate and creative mediums for children and young people from disadvantaged sections of the society is organsing an event called Saudagiri. The event is an adaptation of the famous playwright, Willaim Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice which has been conceived and directed by the members of the initiative. At LTG Auditorium, Copernicus Marg; IHC, Lodhi Road Tel 9810757852

Eat healthy at 360 at The Oberoi, New Delhi with their Ayurveda food promotion campaign. Ayurveda--the ancient Indian form of medicine for healing and wellness classifies the body into three types--Vata, Pitta and Kapha and the dishes are served according to individual body types. Sample some of the items from the Ayurveda menu like the avocado, chicken and rocket salad, or the fish, coriander and saffron stew. At The Oberoi, Zakhir Hussain Marg Tel 24304452

RESTAURANT

Taste of Italia
Named after the Italian word for the phrase `you're welcome', Prego is a chic and vibrant restaurant that really does make its guests feel at home. The décor is replete with lovely artwork, an earthen colour scheme, glass blocks in different colours and an extensive wine cellar. The open kitchen here adds to the excitement as well. The food is as elegant as its décor with chef Davide Concas conjuring authentic flavours that are sure delights for any Italian food connoisseur.

SEPTEMBER 1 AND SEPTEMBER 2
Theatrical tribute
The city-based theatre troupe Dramatech, which has been around for nearly three decades now will be presenting a theatrical tribute to the legendary Munshi Premchand this month. The event is being organised to celebrate the Hindi writer's birth anniversary which

was on July 31 and will comprise enactments of Premchand's classic stories such as Do Bailon ki Katha, Shataranj ke Khiladi, Nimantran-- in a dramatised, musical form. At Sri Ram Centre, 4, Safdar Hashmi Marg, Near Mandi House Timings 7 pm Tickets Rs 500, 300, 200, 100 Tel 8800649019

For starters, salads such as the carpaccio di manzo--a combination of thinly sliced tenderloin fillet, rocket, marinated mushroom, sundried tomatoes and parmesan cheese or the classic minestrone soup with pesto are recommended. While you could try their surprisingly light pizzas, don't miss their risotto al porco rosso, which is a melt-in-the-mouth combination of red wine, gorgonzola, and pork sausage. All the dishes are flavourful, while being superbly light on the stomach. However full you are,

there's no way you should skip dessert at this Italian restaurant. Tiramisu lovers will, of course, dig into the famous Italian dessert which is delicious--but it would also be a great idea to taste Prego's famous chocolate mud pie--the ideal way to conclude a sumptuous meal here. Average meal for two Rs 3,500 excluding alcohol and taxes At The Westin hotel, Number 1, MG Road, Sector 29, Iffco Chowk Tel 09560796143
by

ONGOING
Barbeque buffet
The Qube calls for a fine dining monsoon lunch buffet every Wednesday this month. Choose from barbequed chicken frankfurters, char grilled lamb chops and a range of grilled vegetarian options, not to mention a wide variety of salads and desserts. Timings 12:30 pm to 15:30 pm Price Rs 2,000 plus taxes (individual) At The Leela Palace, Chanakyapuri Tel 39331234

Rewati Rau

s-28

SIMPLY DELHI  AUGUST 2012

AUGUST 2012  SIMPLY DELHI

s-29

SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

GADGETS

TOSHIBA

SATELLITE

SERIES

NOKIA LUMIA 610
Nokia has launched the Lumia 610 to take on the onslaught from affordable Android smartphones. Featuring a 3.7 inch capacitive touch display, it runs the Windows Phone 7.5 operating system. It has a 256MB RAM and 8 GB storage onboard, with no expandable memory card slots. Unlike other Windows phones, the 610 is powered by an 800 Mhz processor and has a 5 MP camera. Price 12,999

SANDISK SUITE
The new SanDisk Extreme Pro micro SDHC UHS-I card is the world's fastest memory card, ideal for smartphone and tablet users. The SanDisk Extreme USB Flash Drive is USB 3.0 enabled and can store and share large files up to 10 times faster with speeds of up to 190MB. It is available in 16GB to 64GB capacities. The 128GB Cruzer Glide USB Flash Drive is SanDisk's highest-capacity USB drive ever, while the Cruzer Facet is a durable drive with stainlesssteel casing designed with a variety of rich vibrant colors and a faceted texture. The Cruzer Pop, meanwhile, has a unique design that opens with a "pop" and conceals and protects the connector when not in use. Price 283 onwards

Toshiba India has introduced a new stylish range of laptops under its C, L, M and U series. Powered by Intel's 3rd generation Core processors, the highlight features of the Satellite Series laptops are a high speed start up (30 per cent faster than normal boot time), USB 3.0 for 10X faster data transfers, Bluetooth 4.0, high-definition Webcam and HDMI connectivity ports, SRS premium sound HD and Toshiba Audio enhancement. The `sleep and charge' USB option is also available in the L series laptops. Price Rs 23,000 onwards

SENNHEISER IE 80 & IE 60
Sennheiser's IE 80 and IE 60 ear-canal phones are ideal for those who want to hear music with as much fine detail as possible. They use dynamic transducers that cover the entire frequency range, keeping distortion at a minimum even at high sound pressure levels. The IE 80's dynamic transducer is capable of reproducing the most subtle nuances in complex musical passages. Price Rs 24,990

SAMSUNG DISHWASHER
Samsung Electronics has for announced its foray into the dishwasher segment in India with the launch of the smart and powerful DW-FN320T. Packed with features like intensive wash programme, Power 3 Nozzle spray, Delay Start, Half Load, Flexible Racks, Samsung claims it is perfect for Indian cooking

KARBONN SMART TAB 1
It is Karbonn's turn to launch an affordable tablet. Its Smart Tab 1 is a 7 inch tablet with five capacitive touch points. Running the Android IceCream Sandwich OS, this tablet has a 1.2Ghz single core X-Burst processor, 2 MP camera, 3700 mAh battery and Full HD video playback. It has Wi-Fi compatibility and will support 3G connectivity using a USB dongle. Karbonn is giving a Reliance NetConnect free with the tablet. Price Rs 6,990

CANONCINEMAEOS C300 & 650D
Canon India has entered the cinematography imaging domain in India with the launch of its Cinema EOS range consisting EOS C300, EOS C500 and EOS 1D-C. The EOS C300, featuring cinematic 2K video recording with 50Mbps 4:2:2 XF codec, a compact body and a 35mm equivalent CMOS sensor, will be the first to be available in India. Canon has also announced the launch of its new flagship entry-level DSLR, the EOS 650D. The 18 megapixel camera stands out for its high-speed sensor-based hybrid AF system and 3 inch touchscreen viewfinder which can be used to focus as well as shoot. The speed needed for the camera comes from the DIGIC 5 processor, which is six times faster than its predecessor. Price Rs 13,90,000 and Rs 55,995 (body only)

SONY SMART WATCH MITASHI FULL HD TVs
Mitashi Edutainment Pvt. Ltd has launched Full HD LCD and LED TVs in 42 and 32 inch screen sizes. The new range of televisions offer dynamic contrast ratio of up to 500,000:1 and a viewing angle of 178/178 and can play multimedia files directly from USB storage devices. The televisions feature 2 USB ports and 3 HDMI ports for you to enjoy multiple connectivity options. Price Rs 23,990 Designed for consumers who want to do more with their smartphones, the SmartWatch launched by Sony Mobile syncs with Android phones over Bluetooth. Available in different colours, this good looking watch has an OLED display that can be used for reading SMSes and email, calendar, Twitter and Facebook updates. The watch can also answer, reject or mute calls as well as act as a remote snap button for your Android phone. Price Rs 6,299 styles and utensils. The appliance boasts 50 per cent reduction in noise, 30 percent reduced water consumption and 20 per cent less electricity than the most energy-efficient dishwashers available in the market. The Samsung DW-FN320T has quick and easy out-of-the box installation and carries a oneyear warranty. Price Rs 31,990

Available at Samsung Electronics Limited, 6th, 7th & 8th Floors, Ifci Tower, 61, Nehru Place; Croma Store, 27, Bunglow Road, Kamla Nagar, Nokia Store, G-26,South Extension 1; Reliance Digital, 2nd Floor, 218, Ambience Mall, DLF City Phase III, Gurgaon;
GADGET REVIEWS by INDIA TODAY G&G www.gadgetsngizmos.in

s-30

SIMPLY DELHI  AUGUST 2012

AUGUST 2012  SIMPLY DELHI

s-31

