GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

RAHUL'S GATEKEEPERS

WHO'S NEXT?
P. Singh's tenure as chief of CBI comes to an end in October this year, and already there are several contenders for the job. Four names are doing the rounds. Newly appointed Delhi Police Commissioner Neeraj Kumar, an AGMUT cadre IPS officer of the 1976 batch; ITBP Director General Ranjit Sinha, a 1974-batch official belonging to the Bihar cadre; National Investigation Agency Director S.C. Sinha, a 1975-batch official belonging to the Haryana cadre; and Vineet Kumar Gupta, a 1977-batch Gujarat cadre officer who's currently special director in the CBI. Neeraj served in the CBI for nine years, and was instrumental in cracking several high-profile cases. Will he be the one?

T

hree Congressmen are the envy of their colleagues--Kanishka Singh, Bhanwar Jitendra Singh and Digvijaya Singh. Kanishka is Rahul Gandhi's gatekeeper-cum-political strategist; Jitendra is both a friend and a loyal aide; while Digvijaya is his mentor-in-chief. All three are Thakurs. As a Congress MP pointed out, "Hasn't Rahul learnt from his father? Three Thakurs let Rajiv down--V.P. Singh, Chandra Shekhar and Arun Singh." But then, Rahul does not have a particularly firm grasp of history.

A

TROUBLE AT HOME
veryone knows Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi's son Gaurav and state Education and Health Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma don't get along. But it took the molestation case in Guwahati for the rift to become public.The incident was aired on News Live, owned by Sarma's wife. Gogoi Junior is believed to have been behind his father's attack on the channel and its editor-in-chief. But the Congress high command was not amused. It ordered a public reconciliation. On July 20, Gogoi called Sarma to his home.The next day Gaurav visited Sarma for two hours. The father-son duo knows that Sarma is on his way up, having been sent to Gujarat on July 21 to help the Congress prepare for the Assembly polls.

LOOK EAST

E

N

arendra Modi's magic is working in Japan, where he met former Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe and Foreign Minister Koichero Gemba. Accompanied by a delegation of leading Gujarati businessmen such as Gautam Adani, Torrent Group's Sudhir Mehta and Suzlon's Tulsi Tanti, Modi attended 44 meetings over four days with Japanese officials and businessmen in an effort to bring more investment to Gujarat. The Gujarat Chief Minister is planning two townships in Gujarat which will be a home away from home for anyone from Japan. Take that, America.
GETTY IMAGES

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

MODI (LEFT) WITH GEMBA

SAWANT

ITEM PASS
all it the Rakhi Sawant effect. From now on, all visitor passes issued by Parliament will carry a one-line warning that visitors are allowed not to speak to the media on the premises. During the Budget session in March, TV actor Sawant had grabbed media attention when she visited Parliament and proceeded to give sound bites, offering her suggestions for the Budget. Once bitten by Rakhi, terribly shy it seems.

C

GAURAV GOGOI
GITIKA TALUKDAR

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
CALL FOR CUT
PLEA FOR RAIN
ith the state reeling under drought, the Karnataka government is spending Rs 17 crore to appease the rain gods. The new Muzrai (temples and endowments) Minister Kota Srinivasa Poojary has issued a circular asking 34,226 temples to spend up to Rs 5,000 each, doing special pujas, a Varuna Homa and Jalabhisheka on July 27 and August 2, in the hope of getting rain. In several parts of the state, local superstitions have pushed people to perform weddings of frogs, that is said to cause rain.The state had tried the puja method earlier, during droughts in 2001 and 2004, but to no avail.Time they tried some good, old-fashioned drought-proofing.

I

f cinema lovers get to watch a few good movies at the International Film Festival of India (IFFI) in Goa this year, they can thank Information and Broadcasting Minister Ambika Soni. She intervened in a stand-off between Information and Broadcasting Secretary Uday Varma and IFFI Director Shankar Mohan, who quit in a huff over the constitution of the steering committee. When Soni realised that festival veteran Mohan had quit, she made Varma reverse the decision. Perhaps too late? The festival begins in November.

W

YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

TABLE TALK

A

t Sonia Gandhi's thank you lunch on July 18 for UPA allies, she and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh were all charm. She had Lalu Yadav, Sharad Pawar and Ram Vilas Paswan on her table. The Prime Minister's table had Farooq Abdullah, Praful Patel, Rahul Gandhi, Mulayam Singh Yadav and P. Chidambaram. Mulayam sat next to Chidambaram, so there wasn't much conversation because of the language barrier. But there was much talk between the others about fitness, Srinagar and golf. No guesses on who dominated the chatter.

PAWAR POSTER

M

SONI
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

aharashtra BJP chief Sudhir Mungantiwar has hit upon a scheme to embarrass state Finance Minister Ajit Pawar as the state reels from a debt of PAWAR Rs 2,37,000 crore. He suggested that the government bring out a calendar with Pawar's photo, and circulate it in Vidarbha, infamous for its farmer suicides. Its message: Up mukhyamantranna atmahatya karavishi vatat nahi tar shetakaryanni ka karayachi? (If the deputy chief minister does not feel like committing suicide, why should the poor farmers do so?)

OF THE WEEK

JOKE

Rahul Gandhi has been misquoted.When at a UPA lunch he asked for a bigger role, he just meant a bread roll.

"Today it is easier moving around in Srinagar than in some parts of Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Jharkhand."
JAIRAM RAMESH

Union Rural Development Minister
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

"Digvijaya Singh will be far better as PM than Rahul Gandhi. Rahul has been an unsuccessful cartridge."
K.N. GOVINDACHARYA Former RSS ideologue

"I appeal to Sangma not to resort to such a misadventure. The world is watching us."
B.S. YEDDYURAPPA on P.A. Sangma's statement that he would move court on the presidential poll.

with PRIYA SAHGAL, KIRAN TARE, UDAY MAHURKAR, SOWMYA AJI, KAUSHIK DEKA, DEVESH KUMAR
AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

17

NEW

