Spe cial Report

AVIATION

`LOST' NOTE COULD HAVE GROUNDED KINGFISHER
Is the Government trying to protect Kingfisher Airlines? The aviation ministry says no but the evidence is mounting.
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora
(FROM LEFT) BHARAT BHUSHAN, AJIT SINGH AND VIJAY MALLYA

ingfisher Airlines, which has been on a deathwatch since November 2011, looked all set to crash and burn in early July. Unpaid and angry employees threatened to go on strike, and the Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) talked about suspending operations because the financial stress could seriously impinge on passenger safety. The employees did go on strike on July 14, the fifth in two months, but the depleted airlines survived. But DGCA E.K. Bharat Bhushan did not. On July 10, he was suddenly removed, less than a week after the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet, headed by the Prime Minister, had approved his extension as DGCA till November 30, 2012. On July 9, Bhushan wrote a note recommending that a notice be issued to Kingfisher, asking them to immediately arrange payment to its employees and creditors, if not full at least a substantial part. "It may be indicated that we may be constrained to suspend their operations if funds are not made available and liabilities reduced significantly within 15 days of receipt of this notice," he wrote. He added that Kingfisher had not paid salaries to its employees from February 2012, which was a cause of concern. "Special safety oversight continues over the operations. In the course of its audit, several engineering issues are emerging which have a direct bearing on safety," he wrote. Was Bhushan removed to give a breather to Kingfisher? Civil Aviation

K

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

PRAVEEN NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Minister Ajit Singh says the perception is misplaced. "We made it very clear at the beginning the Government will not bail out any private airline," he told INDIA TODAY. That, however, is not the issue. The question that Bhushan raised was on passenger safety. According to sources, Bhushan had flagged the safety issue several times. With maintenance of aircraft carried out by engineers at 2 a.m. and pilots flying at odd hours, financial and mental stress could have a direct bearing on safety. The minister does not make too much of it. He says no (air) accidents have taken place in the country in the last six months. "As far as stress of pilots and engineers is concerned, how can you measure it? I am sure the Kingfisher management will eventually clear their dues," he said. Such optimism is not always shared by analysts and aviation experts.

Kingfisher Airlines, meanwhile, says that it is operating with utmost safety under DGCA's close supervision. On Bhushan's sudden removal, UB Group Vice-President (corporate communications) Prakash Mirpuri said it is "highly incorrect and mischievous to suggest that it is in any way connected to Kingfisher Airlines". Ajit Singh and the acting DGCA Prashant Sukul insist that the controversial July 9 note did not exist. The disappearance of Bhushan's note is a shocking mystery, since it implies that it was excised out of the records--a criminal offence. Bhushan's "non-existent" note is not the only thing that the ministry has had to refute. On July 21, IndiGo Airlines promoter Rahul Bhatia claimed the "Government is tinkering with aviation policies for a select few in the industry". He added, "We probably are a zero-debt company, and

pitched against competition which gets sop after sop." Without naming Kingfisher Airlines, Bhatia said he knew about "artificial competition" from state-owned Air India but regretted "Government's relentless effort to keep inefficient private operators in business". He claimed reverse discrimination, and said it was frustrating. On Bhushan's removal, Bhatia said, again without naming any airline, that "in the US, the Federal Aviation Administration is equivalent to the DGCA. If they were confronted with a situation where the crew of an airline has not been paid for months, be it pilots or technical staff, I guarantee they would shut the airline on safety grounds". Caught on the wrong foot again over preferential treatment to Kingfisher Airlines, the civil aviation ministry on July 25 had to issue a detailed clarification: "The private oper-

ators are not being provided any financial support directly or indirectly but have been allowed to perform as per market forces." It went on to say that there is "no regulatory framework anywhere in the world which allow cancellation of the airline's licence merely for failing to pay salaries to the staff". Ajit Singh insisted there was no case for cancellation of Kingfisher's licence. "If a scheduled airline has five operational aircraft and a certain amount of equity, its licence cannot be cancelled unless there are safety issues," the minister said. But Bhushan did raise safety issues. While the ministry does not see any link between poor financial health of Kingfisher, non-payment of salaries and safety, this is one of the main issues flagged by Bhushan time and again. In a note on March 23, Bhushan mentions a meeting he had

with Kingfisher owner Vijay Mallya on March 20 where Mallya reportedly claimed that "his employees have no grievance despite not being paid for a substantial period". However, Bhushan observed: "According to my interaction with various segments of employees of the airline, I am of the view that disaffection among them is at its peak. According to my considered view, the situation raises several questions about safety of their services. The uncertainty and stress and above all the fact that there is no resolution in sight could lead to deliberate or inadvertent incidents that could have catastrophic consequences." Bhushan raised similar concerns in the controversial July 9 note which could not be found in the ministry records. Bhushan attached a copy of the Kingfisher note with the letter he sent to his successor Sukul on July 20, asking for an inquiry into its disappearance. The note, according to sources close to Bhushan, was part of the Kingfisher financial surveillance file (Number 23-11). The note was prepared by DGCA's Deputy Director Amit Gupta and forwarded to Bhushan by Deputy Director General (Air Safety) Lalit Gupta. The movement file shows the file coming to the DGCA's office on July 9 and going back to Lalit Gupta the same day. The note said that the financial condition (of Kingfisher) continues to be precarious: "There are large outstandings due to airport operators, oil companies and vendors." Bhushan also noted that operations of the airline were being closely monitored since November 2011 and there has been significant reduction in its fleet. The schedules had been restricted to nearly one-fourth of the original winter schedule. The International Air Transport Association (IATA) had im-

30

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 6, 2012

AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

NEW

NEW

Spe cial Report

AVIATION

INTERVIEW | AJIT SINGH

"Government won't bail out private airlines"
Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh, 73, has been embroiled in a controversy triggered by former DGCA E.K. Bharat Bhushan's noting, raising doubts about the safety of Kingfisher Airlines. Bhushan was removed as DGCA on July 10, within a week of being given extension till November 2012. Singh spoke to Senior Editor DEVESH KUMAR on Bhushan's charges and challenges his ministry faces. Q. There is a perception that the civil aviation ministry is bailing out Kingfisher Airlines. Former DGCA Bharat Bhushan's noting on the financial surveillance of the airline lends credence to the suspicion. A. We made it very clear that the Government will not bail out any private airline. When the Kingfisher management cut down the number of their daily flights from 340 to 120, DGCA investigated their condition and gave them a clean chit in May. The ministry wrote to the DGCA in June that the airline's safety issues should be investigated. The purported letter (written by Bharat Bhushan) was drafted on a piece of plain paper. Where is the despatch number? All notings and letters are routed through a process. Q. But there are allegations that the ministry overlooked Kingfisher's financial health to allow it to continue flying. A. According to rules, if an airline has five operational aircraft and a certain amount of equity, its licence cannot be cancelled unless there are safety issues. Q. What about the mental state of pilots and engineers of Kingfisher Airlines who haven't been paid salaries? A. DGCA has been doing a special audit of Kingfisher on maintenance of its aircraft. The idea is to ensure safety of the aircraft. As far as stress of pilots and engineers is concerned, I'm sure the management will eventually "The purported clear their dues. letter (written by Q. You joined the civil aviation ministry at a critical juncture. KingBharat Bhushan) was fisher Airlines was floundering, Air drafted on a piece of India's woes had aggravated and, plain paper." soon after, its pilots went on strike. A. The aviation sector was in crisis across the world. The Union Cabinet approved a turnaround plan for Air India with a Rs 30,000-crore bailout package on April 12. Three months before its pilots went on strike on May 7, Air India's revenues had gone up by 35 per cent, yields had increased. After Air India's merger with Indian Airlines, promotions of employees had been held in abeyance. The management has set in motion the process to resume the promotions. Q. Do you think allowing foreign airlines to buy a stake in Indian aviation companies will help inject the much-needed capital? A. If India has to grow into an aviation hub, we will need the expertise, both technical and managerial, of foreign airlines. Why shouldn't foreign airlines be allowed to buy 49 per cent stake in Indian companies? Q. The last few years saw a dramatic growth in the domestic aviation sector. Growth has now halted, and most low-cost airlines have folded up. A. Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) comprises about 45 per cent of the operational costs of an airline. Our ATF costs 60 per cent more than in neighbouring countries. Service tax is also being imposed. We have now allowed the import of ATF. We are planning to expand air connectivity by promoting feeder airlines to connect Tier 3 and Tier 4 cities such as Bareilly and Azamgarh.
KINGFISHER'S DEBT IS RS 7,500 CRORE

posed a suspension on the airline's Billing and Settlement Plan, forcing it to shut international operations from April 11, 2012. The airline had also truncated its operations in the Northeast region, a route that is mandatory for all airlines. Sources in the ministry disclosed that Kingfisher filed its winter schedule on October 30, 2011. According to that, the airline was supposed to operate 460 flights daily with a fleet of 64 aircraft. But soon after, the airline started cancelling its scheduled flights and a financial surveillance was ordered by DGCA on November 11, 2011. SpiceJet, IndiGo and other private airlines were also included in the surveillance amid reports that they too were operating fewer flights than scheduled. On February 9, 2012, the DGCA's financial surveillance report was finalised and it stated, "A reasonable case exists for withdrawal of (Kingfisher Airlines') airline operator permit as its financial stress is likely to impinge on safety." Kingfisher's debts have only mounted. The carrier, which has not made profit since its inception in 2005, has a debt of Rs 7,500 crore now. Kingfisher has just 15 aircraft currently and is operating about 80 flights a day. This too is a paper statistic, since flights are routinely cancelled. Many of their leased aircraft have been impounded for non-payment of dues. Some of them landed at Heathrow in London and could not take off since they were impounded there, leaving passengers stranded. Other aircraft cannot operate since there is no money for maintenance. Most of them are lying at Mumbai, Bangalore and Delhi airports, even as some of their parts are being used as spares in the operational aircraft. "The king of good times is on borrowed time," claim sources in the ministry. with Devesh Kumar

AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

NEW

