NET FLUX
tweet tweet

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video
THE PIANO GUYS PLAY ON A SINGLE GRAND PIANO

Ruling the Roster
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on July 23: Congratulatory tweets poured in for South African golfer Ernie Els, who at the age of 42 won the 2012 Open Championship in UK. People lauded and also doled out advice to President-elect Pranab Mukherjee, ahead of his swearing in as the nation's 13th president on July 25. Netizens listed the favourite games Indians play, ranging from gilli danda to antakshari.

This week, a video of the music group The Piano Guys playing boyband One Direction's song What Makes You Beautiful on a single grand piano; a kitten and a Doberman playfully fighting; and a watermelon exploding in slow motion under the force of numerous rubber bands, went viral.

The Piano Guys

3 million views

Rubber band vs watermelon

Akitten takes on a Doberman

7,11,883 views

1.4 million views

* Views from when videos were uploaded

Top of the Lot
app alert

This week's app round-up is for social butterflies, amateur videographers and meticulous planners.

The release of the first poster of Heroine, starring Kareena Kapoor, set Twitter on fire. Admirers went into mourning with the news of the death of freedom fighter Captain Lakshmi Sahgal, at the age of 97, in Kanpur.

Checkmark Vyclone helps Twist lets your is a to-do list you connect family and friends that syncs your with and make know if you are calendar events and locollaborative videos with running late, after calcucations so that you don't strangers shooting the lating your arrival time forget important tasks. from a specific location. same footage as you.
REGAN

smart sheet
10,07,386

#Pranab Mukherjee
5,09,049

#Games Indians Play
3,44,521

#Kareena Kapoor
31,507

#Lakshmi Sahgal
12,600
*Figures denote number of followers

news now
What received attention on the World Wide Web Three students from the Anna University of Technology in Chennai have launched Cellphone Accident Preventer,a device that can prevent road accidents by jamming the driver's phone signals and alerting cops. Samsung has sold 10 million handsets of its smartphone Galaxy S3 globally in less than two months.

Thanks to her TV show Oprah's Next Chapter, American media baroness Oprah Winfrey's visit to India in January is still being WINFREY talked about. Many called the episode that documented her visit to India offensive and ignorant, particularly food blogger Rajyasree Sen. "Myopic, unaware, ignorant and gauche. This was Middle America at its best worst," she wrote in a blog. Sen pointed out the many instances of her tactless behaviour--from asking children who live in a chawl if they feel cramped, to saying aloud,"So I hear some people in India `still'eat with their hands."

star of the week

#Ernie Els

Poor Chapter

RAVICHANDER

Fame Calling

Anirudh Ravichander, 21, is making waves online yet again. The music composer, best known for the song Why This Kolaveri Di? from the film 3, is out with another track. He has composed and sung Ai Dil Mere for MTV's coming-of-age television show, Rush, about collegeweirdonet goers.The track was posted Don Gibson, a 42-year-old man from on YouTube on July 18 and Oregon, found his son Craig, 22, after already has 30,000 views. 20 years, through Facebook. Ravichander is clearly using his age to his A robotics professor in Singapore has advantage--he knows invented a gadget called `Kissenger', that is what today's equipped with motion-sensitive electronic youth wants. `lips', which would allow couples to exchange long-distance kisses via the Internet.

web tips
Finding your dream job will be easier, if you keep your LinkedIn profile in perfect shape. Here are a few tips: Put your best foot forward--list all your accomplishments and awards. Update your profile with changes in job titles or new projects. The biggest turn-off for a recruiter is a profile with typos.

