BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

BEHIND THE PAWAR GAMBIT
t has been a long while since anyone has issued an ultima- bellion in a cluster confrontation: In the present context, it tum to Sonia Gandhi and survived to tell the tale. On July would amount to `Congress proposes, partner disposes'. The 24 Sharad Pawar sent a public message to the Congress final stage is divorce, but this needs existential provocation: president: `Find a solution to all my problems with your The mess must be toxic. A mere quarrel can set up estrangesatraps in 24 hours or I am out of here.' Those 24 hours ment, but is insufficient grounds for separation. The principal Congress allies are in ferment. DMK is silently slipped to 48, but eventually Congress provided some band-aid for Pawar's ego. That is about as good as it gets for rumbling. Circumstances have made it a helpless prisoner supplicants in the court of the Congress empire. of its own anger. However humiliating this cage for a proud For the eight years that Sonia Gandhi and Sharad Pawar regional party, it is better than the fierce jungle outside, have been partners in UPA, Mrs Gandhi has treated Pawar, teeming with big carnivorous cats. Sharad Pawar, who kept his rumble very quiet, has who was chief minister of Maharashtra when Rajiv Gandhi was an Indian Airlines pilot, with the indifference reserved opened his public campaign with an insurrection that is lookfor unwelcome fellow travellers. If Mrs Gandhi had a smile ing for a bargain. Mamata Banerjee has reached the third to waste, it was not bestowed on Pawar. She has neither for- level of rage. But both Pawar and Banerjee know the direcgotten nor forgiven Pawar's opposition to her nomination, by tion in which they are moving. Pawar understands the danacclamation rather than election, as president of Congress. gers of being punctured like a damp squib. He would not have Pawar also opposed the idea of Mrs Gandhi becoming prime raised the stakes without a long-term plan, since he is not minister in 2004. Mrs Gandhi's link with NCP is through the going to get what his party really wants, a new CM in Mumbai. more amenable Praful Patel. She campaigned for Patel in Pawar believes Prithviraj Chavan may be the most honest CM both 2004 and 2009; actually, Patel got the smallest leads in Congress has produced since 2004, but his administration is the Assembly segment where she addressed meetings, but, a failure. He does not want to pay his share of the price. That is at the heart of this dramatic script: Governance to be fair, this could as well be because he took her to the and accountability. The complete shambles in Congressmost hostile areas in his constituency. Pawar, conversely, has an excellent equation with ruled states is as astonishing as inexplicable. Three years Dr Manmohan Singh. Dr Singh would have given him a ago, Andhra, Assam and Haryana were models of political portfolio somewhat more suited to his heavy weight in rectitude. They have degenerated into cesspools of social vipolitics, if he had not been prevented by Mrs Gandhi. Pawar olence and political instability. Communal tensions and riots was also an early champion of Pranab Mukherjee's eleva- have reappeared in Assam, which gave Congress a historic tion to Rashtrapati Bhavan, a development about which victory and could now punish it with historic defeat. What has happened when, seemingly, Mrs Gandhi had reservations. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com nothing new has happened? This does not mean, however, You crash when you lose control that there are two factions in NCP. of your vehicle and your nerve. Patel is not commander of a proIntoxication might be one reason; Clive faction in Siraj ud Daulah's complacence, another. Allies are army. He is loyal to his leader, trying to shift away from the Pawar, who determines strategy on steering wheel, on which they are how to confront both allies and foes. permitted only the occasional finger They play good cop/bad cop in harin any case, so that they might be mony. So what is Pawar's strategy? able to swerve away from the wreck There are four stages in a politiwhen it comes. The story is not what cal rift. The first is murmur. This is happening in Delhi but the rumble is heard, but does not really dangerous and gathering chaos outregister for everyone knows that it side, from the Capital's doorstep to will take much more than a belly the furthest boundaries of the naache for the volcano to burst. The tion. Trouble is not a Congress mosecond step is an insurrection that nopoly. BJP is careering towards leaves space for a bargain. But an elPawar understands the dangers of ement of risk has entered. The pridisaster in Karnataka, and within being punctured like a damp squib. mary purpose might be to increase He would not have raised the stakes months of spectacular success, discomfort rather than destabilise, Mulayam Singh Yadav is reviving a without a long-term plan, since he is nostalgia for Mayawati in UP. but both sides know that they cannot going to get what his party really not allow demand to far outpace This is the miserable jam that is supply. The third is low-intensity reholding up India.  wants, a new CM in Mumbai.

I

AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

