Re ligion

SATHYASAI BABA

SATYAJIT (LEFT) AND RATNAKAR (RIGHT) WITH SATHYA SAI BABA IN PUTTAPARTHI

POWER STRUGGLE OVER SAI EMPIRE
Sathya Sai Baba's nephew spars with the godman's former caregiver over Rs 40,000 crore assets
declaration signed by Sathya Sai Baba on March 23, 1967, renouncing all worldly possessions, has brought back rival claims to run his empire. The declaration was recorded in 1975, seven years before the Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust (SSSCT) was created in 1982 as the organisation controlling the godman's assets. "I do not own any personal property, wealth or estate. Whatever is given to me by my devotees is under a trust management for public charitable purpose. This declaration I am making so that nobody can claim under or through me in the family properties, if any," stated Sathya Sai, who died in April 2011. The declaration was disclosed to the media by the godman's caregiver, Satyajit, on September 2, to put to rest any claims by Sathya Sai Baba's family over his vast assets, estimated to be worth Rs 40,000 crore. These include property in Puttaparthi, Andhra Pradesh, and elsewhere in

A

the world. Days before Satyajit's disclosure, R.J. Ratnakar, an SSSCT trustee, released the text of the declaration to the guru's followers, saying it was given to him by his father R. Janakaramaiah, Sathya Sai Baba's younger brother. Ratnakar, who is in his forties, reportedly hoped to exercise more influence over SSSCT and marginalise Satyajit. Sources, however, say Ratnakar found out about the document after Satyajit presented a copy to SSSCT on July 1. According to Satyajit, the guru told him: "Do not make it public. Keep it in your safe custody." The godman made it clear that he left his family at the age of 12 and severed all ties including his rights on family property. Differences between Sathya Sai Baba's family and SSSCT have widened in the past year and there have been allegations that Ratnakar staked claim on land and other properties. Sources say Ratnakar plans to use his position in SSSCT as a stepping stone to

politics, which may in turn give him greater control over the Sai empire. Ratnakar denies there are problems between his family and SSSCT, or Satyajit. "Some have had reservations about trustees though all SSSCT members are mere custodians. There is no personal agenda," Ratnakar told INDIA TODAY on September 4. Satyajit is believed to be against the family having any role in SSSCT management and is eager to play a key role himself. He has consistently refused to speak to the media, but he did not deny reports about the declaration being sent to the media in his name. He is in charge of the Vidya Vahini programme in which Tata Consultancy Services is helping develop a software for teaching methods at the 99 Sai high schools. Devotees in Puttaparthi are disgusted with the sparring between Ratnakar and Satyajit. They say the only redeeming feature is that healthcare facilities and educational institutions founded by Sathya Sai Baba are functioning normally. They are apprehensive of the ambitious Ratnakar trying to gain total control of SSSCT when the other eight trustees, all much older than Ratnakar, retire in the coming years. Unless the trustees lay the ground rules for a smooth transition, the Satyajit-Ratnakar clash could adversely impact the running of the Sathya Sai institutions.
by Amarnath K. Menon

74

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 17, 2012

