GLOSSARY

PROMO QUEENS
Film promotions are turning out to be almost as entertaining as the films themselves RANI MUKHERJEE
was expected to stun with her return to the big screen. Instead, she left us blinded at the trailer launch of Aiyaa. It is this dedication to stay in character that added to the success of No One Killed Jessica, but a small note for next time--the press usually come prepared with their own flash.

THE BIG APPLE

PREITY ZINTA has been talking about how Ishkq In Paris has been her toughest film so far and how she went blue in the face while filming it. But that wasn't the only damage, and she was at the film's music launch with proof--a bandaged ankle. Was it all the dancing with Salman Khan that did it?

The iPhone 5 has arrived. And surprisingly the earth isn't spinning the other way, even though many seem to be either buying the latest iPhone, or waiting for the next iPhone. Revealed in San Francisco, USA on September 12, it's the thinnest, lightest, smartest one yet. But need we say that?

KAREENA KAPOOR
has been scoring high on the sartorial front while doing the promotional rounds for Heroine. We believe the film's budget may have shot up to accomodate all her fancy designer wear. Why then did she turn up gift-wrapped in gold and black for Dance Ke Superstars on television?
FOTOCOP

>>

YOGEN SHAH

YOGEN SHAH

PACKAGE DEAL
Sunny Leone's tantalisingly promising film debut Jism 2 didn't quite deliver the goods but the 31-year-old adult actor is already throwing husband Daniel Weber into the ring. "There are a few people who have approached him and want both of us together in a film,"she reveals. They star in and make porn films together, so why should Bollywood keep them apart. Any ideas Mr Bhatt?
FOTOCOP

BIRTHDAY BOYS
YOGEN SHAH YOGEN SHAH T NARAYAN

Raj Kundra had a starstudded birthday bash on September 9 at his Juhu home in Mumbai. He turned 37.

Akshay Kumar returned from Muscat to celebrate his 45th birthday with his family in Mumbai on September 9.

Ayushmann Khurrana turns 28 on September 14. We hope he has planned a bash matching his newfound star status.

94

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

>>

>>

Q& A

"My singing has flaws but I've worked from the heart"

Priyanka Chopra unveils In My City, the first song from her music album a day before Barfi! releases. The lead single will play at every Thursday Night Kickoff game at this year's National Football League in the US. Q. How did the album come about? A. I was approached by Universal in the spring of 2011 with the idea of making a music album for the international market. Q. How many tracks are there on the album? A. We're only releasing the lead single In My City now. The album name and track listing will be confirmed closer to the album release in December. Q. Tell us about In My City. A. It came out of my adventures around the globe and the nomadic existence that follows it. Q. But with a thriving acting career, why take such a huge risk? A. I'm a born risk-taker. I don't know if I will succeed with my music, and people may think that my singing has flaws but I've worked from the heart. Q. What makes you think have what it takes to make it as a popstar? A. I have trained in classical western music since I was six. I have been to so many cities that have influenced me. But we'll have to let the public decide. Q. What do you hope the album achieves? A. The people over there don't know me, so I'm very curious to see what they will think of me. Q. Are you nervous to debut on such a big international stage? A. I've never had the opportunity to start from the top. It's actually a great feeling to have such a huge platform to begin a new chapter. Q. Which is more frightening, singing or acting? A. Acting is in my blood and I've never sung before. But right now I'm split between them.
by Varoon P. Anand

BASU must >> BIPASHA be on cloud nine since the
release of Raaz 3. Over Rs 40 crore in four days, this is her biggest opening to date. Why the wings on the shoulders of her green jumpsuit though? Taking things too literally?

YOGEN SHAH

POLITICIAN'S LUCK
With nudity no longer her bastion, Sambhavna Seth had to dig deep into her bag of tricks. She came up with Raju Shetti, MP from Hatkanangle, Maharashtra. She dances to a song praising him in Marathi-Hindi film Senani. "It's not an item song," she says. It's a special song of praise because "he has made a difference to the people of his constituency" . How touching.

by Nishat Bari

GETTY IMAGES

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

95

