HUMOUR AS SEDITION

The Lawmakers' Last Laugh
y arrest sparked a debate in the country over the sedition act. My fight will continue until it is removed," said Kanpur's Aseem Trivedi, 24, after he was released from Mumbai's Arthur Road jail around 1.30 p.m. on September 12. Trivedi was accused of sedition for his cartoons, displayed at Mumbai's MMRDA ground during anti-corruption protests led by Anna Hazare in December 2011. The clampdown started when Mumbai Police's cyber crime cell blocked his website Cartoonsagainstcorruption.com on December 26, 2011. A case of sedition was filed against him in January by Mumbai-based law student Amit Katanavare. A Mumbai Police team went to Kanpur on August 30 to arrest Trivedi, but when they couldn't find him, dragged his parents to the local police station instead. On September 8, Trivedi surrendered to the Mumbai Police, which sought seven days custody from a vacation court to conduct its probe. It led to a furore in civil society. Sensing trouble, the police surrendered Trivedi's custody to the court on September 10. The court then sent Trivedi to judicial custody for 14 days. However, acting on a PIL by lawyer Sanskar Marathe, Bombay High Court granted Trivedi bail on September 11. Having earlier refused to seek bail, Trivedi finally filed an application for bail and deposited Rs 5,000 as bond "out of respect for the high court". The court will hear the PIL on September 17 to decide whether applying charges of sedition against Trivedi was correct. It was a cartoon strip titled `new national symbols' that landed Trivedi in trouble. One of them depicts Parliament House as a toilet bowl, another shows the Ashoka pillar with wolves instead of lions, and the words `Bhrashtamev Jayate' in place of Satyameva Jayate. In others, he has `Netasur' as

m

Cartoonist Trivedi is charged with sedition. India is appalled, but the State is unmoved.

BINAY SINHA

``
22

If Scooby Doo calls Obama fat, will it be sedition? Cartoons are created to make people laugh and have a go at people, not incite acts of terrorism. It's preposterous."
RAJEEV DHAWAN, Supreme Court lawyer

``

Sedition was a British law to crush freedom fighters. One must be proven to have clear intent to overthrow the government before being held for sedition today."
PRASHANT BHUSHAN, Supreme Court lawyer

``

the national animal, bribe as the national food, blood of commoners the national drink and Satyameva Jayate the national joke. The cartoon that led to his arrest, called `Gangrape of Mother India', had Mother India in a tricolour sari, about to be raped by a character called `corruption'. Trivedi was booked under Section 124 (A) (sedition) of Indian Penal Code (IPC), Section 66 of IT Act, and Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971. The IPC says fun becomes sedition when "whoever, by words spoken or written, or by signs or visible representation, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards the government established by law in India". Under it, punishment varies from three years jail with fine, to life-term with fine. Retired Justice V. G. Palshikar of Isn't it odd Bombay High Court says Trivedi can be that with so many held guilty of insulting national honour, but rape and murder not of sedition. "His cartoons may be objeccases pending, tionable, but not seditious. Blasphemy and the police decide sedition are different." to probe a few Trivedi says he will continue to make harmless carcartoons. "I'm loyal to the Constitution and toons that haven't unhappy to see it being insulted. I wanted been in the public to stop that through my cartoons," he says. eye for long?" The cartoons seem to have done their job SOMNATH BHARTI, rather well. by Kiran Tare and Sonali Acharjee Supreme Court advocate

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

