Whether you crave for inner peace, or want to propitiate gods
\,-i&-ik ' ' U Q ? ~ . "\ " J HiwUraii'.ii . \a Mferjnexf^fclrW, or simply look for a few days'
rt .' ii"TM** '' ^i-""'' /  '., ^.- "  . --" ; A, . {

quietude, MP oners you once in a lifetime experience...
No two persons are alike. Likewise are their expectations from travel: For some, travel means destination, for other the journey is the reward; for many, the propelling force is need to rediscover oneself, others take up voyages to lose themselves; many want to escape from the crassly material world, though only temporarily, others want to please the gods for materials gains. Whatever be your reason for travel, Madhya Pradesh never fails to meets your expectations.
 TAWA A river wildlife safari? Yes, a river wild life safari is exactly what MP Tourism offers in its Jal Pari Cruise on Tawa River. The reservoir, the largest on Tawa River is located in Hoshangabad district forming the western boundary of Satpura National Park and Bori Wildlife Sanctuary. The MP Tourism operates Tawa Resort at the reservoir. The Resort has six AC rooms on the offer. The Jal Pari Cruise from the Tawa Resort to Madhai in Satpura National Park offers a peep into the wildlife of Satpura forests which are home to tigers, leopards, wild boars, fourhorned antelopes, gaur and many such species. If you are lucky, you may also find 4-metre crocodiles in reservoir giving your cruise a company, of course from a safe distance. What makes the entire trip unforgettable is the view of sun-set at the reservoir which leaves you spell bound. The cruise normally lasts 3-4 hours. Light refreshment provided on board is complimentary. However, meals are made available on request. Up to 10 people can be accommodated on one boat. HOW TO REACH  By Air: The nearest airport is Bhopal (120 km)  By Rail : The nearest railway station is Hoshangabad (45 km)  By Road : Tawa Resort is 30 km from Itarsi.  SANCHI On your way to Sanchi, whether by train or by road, the Great Stupa emerges on the horizon, when you are about 5 km from the village. As you get close to the UNESCO World Heritage site, the grand, majestic yet essentially religious edifice, perched atop a modest hill, seems to beacon you for a quest for spiritual solace, to lose yourself and to rediscover yourself. By the time you actually reach the place, you can feel the spiritual vibes pervading the village of stupas as Sanchi is often called. The surprisingly clean and quiet setting of the village in the lush greenery only accentuates the magic of the resting place of relics of disciples of Lord Buddha. Apart from the Great Stupa, also called Stupa No. 1, the area is dotted with other stupas, monasteries, temples and the much-famed Ashoka Pillar, spanning almost 1400 years from 3rd century BC to 12 century AD. The Great Stupa was built by Mauryan emperor Ashoka, and later on expanded by Sunga ruler Pushyamitra who added balustrades and staircase. The elaborately carved torans, added by Satavahana rulers, depict legends and myths from the life of Lord Buddha. The 36.5m diameter hemispherical dome is surmounted by triple Chhatraveli or three umbrellas which symbolize the three jewels of Buddhism viz the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha. The Sanchi Museum located at the bottom of the Sanchi campus displays among other artifacts, the Lion Capital of the Ashoka Pillar and some Brahminical slabs showing Vishnu, Ganesh and the Goddess Mahishasurmardini. HOW TO REACH  By Air: The nearest airport is in Bhopal (46 km)  By Rail : The nearest railhead is also in Bhopal which has rail connectivity with all major cities.  By Road : Motorable roads connect Sanchi to Bhopal (46 km), Vidisha (10 km) and Indore (232 km).

J>-"''- ^ ^

 BHOPAL Bhopal's royal past dates back to II"1 century when the city was founded by Parmar ruler Raja Bhoja who named it as Bhojabal. The present city of Bhopal was founded by Afghan warrior Dost Mohammed Khan in early 1720s. However, perhaps no other city amalgamates its glowing past with its glittering present, as beautifully and with so much pride as does the city of Nawabs, Bhopal. Bearing a loquacious testimony to the rich cultural heritage are the Chowk, Tajul-Masajid, Moti Masjid, Gauhar Mahal and a host of other architectural edificies. Life of the City of Lakes still revolves around its Chowk where its 200-year old culture is very much alive and kicking in form of buildings with Islamic arches, turrets and balconies. Its narrow by-lanes carry in their bosom treasure trove of traditional Bhopali crafts like exquisite beadwork, embroidered velvet purses and cushions, and silver jewellery. The Taj-ul-Masajid, said to be the largest in the country was begun by Shahjahan Begum. Due to lack of funds its completion was delayed till 1971. The imposing Moti Masjid has been inspired by Jama Masjid of Delhi and is likewise accessed by a flight of stairs. It was built by Sikander Jahan, daughter ofQudsia Begum, in 1860. Another creation of Sikander Jahan is Moti Mahal which is a blend of the Islamic and French architecture. Its most prominent feature is projected windows which keep the interiors thoroughly ventilated and cool. Gohar Mahal situated on the bank of the Upper Lake was built by Qudsia Begum in 1820. A perfect synthesis of Hindu and Mughal architectural styles, it was the first palace built by the rulers of Bhopal. Today, a handicraft market thrives in the palace. Apart from these sentinels of its past, Bhopal boasts of many witnesses of it having kept pace with the rapidly changing times such as Bharat Bhawan, Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Sair Sapata, Regional Science Centre, Van Vihar, Laxminarayan Temple and Museum. A creation of renowned architect, Charles Correa, Bharat Bhawan is a centre for the performing and visual arts. It also houses a museum of arts and an art gallery. The 200-acre Manav Sangrahalaya at Shamla Hills, was set up in 1977. It beautifully narrates the story of humans through time and space. Sair Sapata at Sevania Gond is a fun zone comprising adventure zone, food zone, musical fountain and a toy train. A much-lauded attraction of Sair Sapata is Jungle Trail developed by MP Tourism.
HOW TO REACH

 By Air: Regular flights connect Bhopal with New Delhi, Gwalior, Indore, and Mumbai  By Rail : Bhopal is on the Delhi-Chennai main line. Major trains going from Mumbai to Delhi via Itarsi and Jhansi also pass through Bhopal  By Road : Regular bus service connect Bhopal with Indore (186 km), Gwalior (423 km), Jabalpur (295 km) and all major cities of state.

 OMKARESHWAR If there is one place in India where nature seems to corroborate religious mythology, it is Omkareshwar, one of the 12 Jyotirlingas in the country. Located at the confluence of Narmada and Kaveri rivers, the island is believed to resemble OM, the most revered symbol of Hinduism. Two foot-bridges connect the island with the mainland. Often people take boat to reach the island. The Jyotirlinga is enshrined at the Shri Omkar Mandhata Temple. The temple has been built with soft stone which allows detailed carving on it. It is at this temple that devotees begin Narmada Parikrama around the island. Omkareshwar is home to many other ancient shrines including Mamleshwar Temple, Siddhinath Temple and Gauri Somnath Temple. Built in 10th century AD, Mamleshwar temple is actually a complex of many small temples on the mainland. It is located on the southern bank of Narmada opposite the Mandhata Temple. An ancient Sanskrit inscription at the Mamleshwar Temple claims it to be the actual Jyotirlinga. Though now in ruins, the Siddhnath Temple was once a fine example of the heights reached by Brahmanical architecture. The temple is located on 1.5 m high plinth the sides of which have exquisitely carved elephants on them. At the centre of the shrine, are columns arranged in a circle. These free standing columns are also famed for the detailed carving on them. The Gauri Somnath Temple is reached by a flight of 270 steps from the ghats. This temple bears a close resemblance to the Khajuraho temples. At the sanctum sanctorum in the temple is established a huge black Shivalinga.
HOW TO REACH

 By Air: The nearest airport is at Indore (76 km) with regular flights from Mumbai, Delhi, Gwalior and Bhopal  By Rail : The nearest major railhead is at Indore  By Road : Omkareshwar is well- connected to Indore, Ujjain and Khandwa by local buses.

Ahilya Fort,

 MAHESHWAR Older than written history and perhaps predating even mythology, Maheshwar, which literally means abode of Lord Shiva, finds a mention in the epics Ramayana as well as Mahabharata which call it Mahismati. Adorning the north bank of Narmada river in Khargone, Maheshwar was the capital of Avanti in olden days. Maheshwar is believed to be the site of an epic battle between King Sahastrarjuna and Ravan in which the latter was defeated. The victorious King Sahastrarjuna is believed to have placed 10 lit lamps on the heads of Ravan and one on his hand. To this day, 11 lamps are lit everyday in the Sahastrarjuna Temple to commemorate the victory of King Sahastrarjuna. Despite such glorious past, Maheshwar was shrouded in obscurity for eons before Maratha Queen Ahilya Bai Holkar made the city her capital and revived its former glory in the late 18'" century. Once jolted out of its slumber, Maheshwar was very fast in making up for the lost centuries. Today, it is home to more than 100 temples apart from numerous other historical buildings including forts, the must-visit of which are Ahilya Fort, Baneshwar Temple, Cenotaph of Ahilyabai and the royal palace complex. The rich historical heritage of Maheshwar has provided back drop to many popular Bollywood films, Ashoka being one of them. A tradition unique to Maheshwar, is the offering of a 1000-meter-long cotton sari to Narmada river on the occasion of Narmada Jayanti which falls between November 15 and December 15. Fund for the sari is contributed by general public. Though Maheshwar itself is very famous for its Maheshwari sari, the sari to be offered to the river is brought from Surat in Gujarat. HOW TO REACH  By Air: The nearest airport is Indore (91 km)  By Rail : The nearest railheads are Barwaha (39 km), Khandwa (110 km) and Indore (91 km)  By Road : Regular buses are available from H&t Barwaha, Indore, Khandwa, Dhar and Dhamnod

 CARAVAN Long ago Ernest Hemingway said: It is good to have an end to journey toward; but it is the journey that matters, in the end. Honestly for most of us the journey is as big a reward of our travels as is the destination. And nothing beats the experience if you get to enjoy the reward in the lap of affordable luxury. Though 'affordable luxury1 may seem to be an oxymoron, but this is exactly what the Holiday on Wheels innovation of MP Tourism has managed to achieve i.e. giving you travel experience of a lifetime at a surprisingly affordable price. In a first of its kind attempt in the country, MP Tourism introduced the Caravan Tourism for the adventurous tourists who want to satiate their wanderlust in the privacy of their little Universe. The honeymooners who are looking for a unique beginning of their married life would find the Caravan to be just perfect for the occasion. The caravan offers you air-conditioned ride by a well-informed driver to the spot of your choice not only in the state but all over the country. While gliding towards your destination on the tar ribbons, you can soak in the abundant natural beauty of the country side. Or you can simply cut off from the outside world and immerse yourself in the surreal world on the LCD TV. A microwave oven and a refrigerator in the caravan make your travel even more  comfortable. The studio-style interiors of the caravan offer lots of space for two adults and two kids below 12 years for which it has been designed. An attached washroom completes your home on wheels. It is not without reason the Holiday on Wheels was declared to be the Most Innovative Product of the Year. In Madhya Pradesh, at night, the caravan can be stationed at any of the parking bays of the MP Tourism properties spread across the state, for power back up and cleaning. Currently, the caravans operate from bases in Jabalpur, Indore and Bhopal. For more information please feel free to contact: MP Tourism, Toll Free no. 1800 2337777  UJJAIN Ujjain situated on the eastern bank of the Kshipra River was the capital of the Avanti Kingdom in Mahabharata period when it was called Ujjayini. One of the Sapta Puri according to Hindu scriptures, which deliver people from the cycle of life and death, Ujjain is also one of the four cities that host the Kumbh Mela every 12 years, the last being in 2004. Though Ujjain is famous for its numerous temples, the most revered of these is Mahakaleshwar Temple which enshrines one of the 12 Jyotirlingas. It is the only Jyotirlinga in the country facing south. Devotees throng the temple every morning for the Bhasma Aarti performed between 4 am and 6 am. Harsiddhi Temple in Ujjain is one of the 64 Shaktipeethas, where elbow of Sati is believed to have fallen. Famed ancient poet Kalidas is believed to have propitiated Goddess Kali in a temple 2 km from the Mahakaleshwar Temple. Kalidas has expressed his boundless love for Ujjain. in his magnum opus Meghdoot. Ujjain also prides itself on Sandipani Ashram where Lord Krishna and Balram are believed to have received their education from the sage Sandipani. Another not-to-be-missed place of attraction in Ujjain is the astronomical observatory built by Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh of Jaipur between 1725 and 1730 for studying movements of planets. It is located 2 km south west of Mahakal Temple. The Tropic of Cancer passes just to the north of the observatory. HOW TO REACH  By Air: The nearest airport is at Indore (55 km)  By Rail: Ujjain is well connected with all major cities in the country, by rail  By Road : Regular bus service connects Ujjain with Indore, I Khandwa, Omkareshwar and Bhopal.

^f

 v *'^. >&

