Nation ISRO
NAMBINARAYANAN

Vindication of ISRO scientist in 1994 espionage case can't wipe away 18 years of hurt
ighteen years after being named a key accused in the sensational Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) espionage case, former director of Advanced Technology and Planning of India's space institute S. Nambinarayanan, 72, feels it was an attempt by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to derail India's space programme, especially to stall acquisition of sophisticated cryogenic engine technology for energy efficient rockets from Russia. One of the founders of India's space programme, he quotes Russia In Space: A Failed Frontier? (Springer, 2011), a book by former BBC space writer Brian Harvey, to support his view. According to Harvey, India's attempts to buy the technology--ignoring US opposition--was the reason behind the cooked-up spy case. US opposition had by then extended to sanctions against ISRO and Glavkosmos, the Russian space firm supplying the technology. After Russia backed out, it took years for ISRO to develop it indigenously. "The scandal set us back by decades," says the scientist.

OUT OF SUSPICION ORBIT
All accused scientists barring Nambinarayanan were exonerated by CBI in 1998. The accused also included Bangalore businessmen S. K. Sharma and Chandrasekhar, who allegedly looked after business aspects of the deal, besides Mariam Rasheeda and Sowzia Hassan, two Maldivian women accused of setting up honey traps. Nambinarayanan was finally given a reprieve on September 7, two days before ISRO'S successful PSLV launch. A Kerala High Court division bench upheld a National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) directive to the state government to pay Rs 10 lakh as interim compensation to the scientist within three months. NHRC issued the order in 2001, after the scientist filed a case against the state government in 1999 demanding Rs 1 crore as compensation. That case is still pending in the Thiruvananthapuram sub-divisional court. The division bench, however, vacated the NHRC directive to initiate action against police officers who violated the scientist's human rights. It also overruled the quashing of NHRC'S 2001 order by a single bench of the state high court in 2006. As ISRO'S landmark launch was being telecast nationally, Nambinarayanan sat at home in Thiruvananthapuram with his TV set switched off. "I'm proud of our achievement. But the agony and shame I suffered for the 18 years has sapped me," he says. Though the high court order has come as a breather, the scientist is not enthused. "We worked hard for India's scientific progress, but were hunted by our own security agencies. Later, the state tried to deny us compensation," he says. "If this is the way India treats its scientists, how can one be excited?" he asks.
by M. G. Radhakrishnan

E

THE SCIENTIST FEELS THE SPY CASE WAS CONCOCTED BY CIA TO STALL INDIA'S PURCHASE OF CRYOGENIC ENGINES FROM RUSSIA.

78

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

C SHANKAR

