HUMOUR IN HISTORY
by Mushirul Hasan

Where's the Punch of Yesterday?
The Raj didn't mind political humour directed at it. Our founding fathers had the ability to laugh at themselves.
ohn Locke, the British philosopher, stated that wit lies most in the assemblage of ideas, and putting these together with quickness and variety. He was right. Every generation has its own standard of critical judgment, but there is no denying that humour introduces a tenderness and loftiness of feeling. Without that, speech would be insipid and company frightfully dull. The more advanced a language, the greater its ability to express wit and humour. "Now the pen has on its tongue some witty tales, which it lays out for the friends' sake," wrote the Urdu poet Mir Taqi Mir (1723-1810 AD). Witticism and satire became legitimate, acceptable and popular in social conversation, cultural dialogues and as a genre of literature principally because Nazir Akbarabadi (1740-1830 AD) chose the ground from which he was never to move during his ever-widening survey of popular culture. He possessed the skill to express, in an inventively humorous manner, the relationship between seemingly incongruous and disparate things. In his poetry, he blends satire successfully with humour, and the rhymes and puns show up rather than hide the depth of feeling and seriousness of thought. Mirza Ghalib (1797-1869 AD) mastered the art of satire, tinged with irony, to jibe at the Mullah and the Sheikh. When he castigated them, it was because they were unintelligent and corrupt. And when he satirised the ruling classes, he attacked not the theory but the abuse of authority. I am equally besotted by Akbar Illahabadi (1846-1921 AD), the gifted Urdu poet, who elevated satire to a fine art. He possessed the skills to distort words, twist their meanings, and resort to pun and idiom-based or verbal jugglery. Satire and cyni-

j

cism run through much of his poetry, especially when he directs his verses against the materialism of the West, the idiocies of his society, the quaint customs that came with Western learning, and the naiveté of those who considered themselves emancipated. Today, Akbar Illahabadi's poetry survives not because of its relevance to our times but because of the fine blending of satire with humour. Take these: When he appeals to the young boys to go to the prayers, they say, `Look at this man! Even at such an old age, Akbar has not ceased to be humorous.' Or What words of mine can tell the deeds of men like these, Our nation's pride? They got their B.A., took employment, drew their pensions and then died. Or My rivals have repeatSome edly gone to the police passages of station to report, great satirical That Akbar worships ingenuity are to be God in this Age. found in Maulana The British in Abul Kalam Azad's India didn't mind political humour being Ghubar-i Khatir. directed against their government; in fact, they promoted the Avadh Punch, Parsee Punch, and scores of such magazines. I wish Kapil Sibal knew this before setting out on an unholy mission to remove the `objectionable' cartoons from the NCERT textbooks. I wish our politicians were not so grim-faced, self-righteous, and humourless. The Indian Nation

Cartoonist

from Calcutta on April 7, 1854, observed Shankar has The Indian bourgeoisie was, in many cases, that it was worth cultivating humour to what R.K. Laxman Western through and through; Sarojini Naidu sweeten tempers, enjoy the ridiculous, called the cartoonist's was no different. She exhibited, in a high deand to look at things in their comic ascock-eyed vision that gree, the perceptiveness of a poet and its corolpect. And in 1881, Archibald distorts without lary, the fine sense of humour and irony. Constable, a fellow of the Royal Asiatic Bubbling with wit, humour and charm, she was Society of Bengal, refuted the widelosing a sense of deflected from the highway of poetry by her enspread belief that Indians were a huhumour. gagement in politics. "Ah! You must be Mrs Naidu! mourless lot impervious to a joke. The fact Who else dare to be so irreverent? Come and share my is that wit, humour and satire have had a longmeal!" Gandhiji said to Sarojini Naidu. They met in London standing career in South Asia. In the second-half of the 19th century, Awadh Punch, a weekly published from on August 8, 1914. "And so, laughingly," recalled Sarojini Lucknow, became a household name, notable for dignity, Naidu on the occasion of Gandhi's 78th birthday, "we began a friendship that has lasted, grown and developed through geniality of satire and good taste. The quality of wit and humour is determined not by a all these many years." Gandhi's simple and austere life inturn of phrase or a provocative remark but by catch-phrases, spired the combined feeling of reverence and awe, though word-play, mispronunciation, and other such devices. the world didn't know, so said Sarojini Naidu jokingly, what Consider this example from Pandit Motilal Nehru, the it cost to keep the Mahatma in poverty. She was the one perCongress president and father of Jawaharlal Nehru. son who helped him relax and enjoy a joke. Some passages of great satirical ingenuity are to be found Watching his butler serve him a dish of eggs, a horrified visitor remarked, "Panditji, you aren't going to eat those eggs!" in Maulana Abul Kalam Azad's Ghubar-i Khatir. The intel"I most certainly am," was his reply, "and in another few lectual discourses which engaged his liveliest wit and his close friends are at least as revealing as the melancholia that minutes, I am going to eat their mother too."

AN OCTOBER 30, 1960 CARTOON BY SHANKAR

44

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

HUMOUR IN HISTORY
COURTESY: DARA SHIKOH LIBRARY, URDU ACADEMY, DELHI

A PUNCH CARTOON ON CONSCRIPTION IN IRELAND. THE `MINISTRY OF ENGLAND' OFFICIAL (IN SUIT) TELLS MR PUNCH,"THIS SHEEP HAS BECOME A NUISANCE." MR PUNCH REPLIES,"DON'T CALL IT A SHEEP ANYMORE. THE WOLF HAS SHED ITS SHEEP'S CLOTHING."

finally overpowered him during the dark days of India's Partition. In one of his books, he cites a delightful verse that offers clues to his appreciation of humour: The night of union, and the command to shift My bed from here to there! So all night long, from place to place, I kept spreading and folding my bed. Somebody once wrote that more knowledge can be gleaned on political and international affairs in one hour on any Sunday at the Hyde Park Corner than could be obtained from reading newspapers all week. Could we say the same about our Parliament and Legislative Assembly? Sadly, the present-day parliamentarians lack the central vitality, the indisputable persuasive sincerity of tone to keep their prose alive. Their full-blooded laughter is often scornful and malicious. In the 1950s and 1960s, however, one could hear par-

liamentarians exchanging jibes, jokes and sallies that were quite often directed against politicians, religious preachers, publicists, and the elites. Word-play, in particular, was a source of great joy. Was Jawaharlal Nehru an aristocrat? "No," said Ram Manohar Lohia, his most In trenchant socialist critic the second in Parliament. "I can half of the 19th prove that the prime century, Avadh minister's grandfather Punch became a was a chaprasi in the Mughal court." household name for Jawaharlal Nehru regeniality of torted: "I am glad the satire. Honourable Member has at last accepted what I have been trying to tell him for so many years--that I am a man of the people!" R.K. Laxman had said that "a cartoonist born with a cock-eyed vision manipulates a face or a human situation and distorts it without losing the essence of humour". Shankar, the founder of Shankar's Weekly, did just that with great effect. A cartoonist like him could shine in summarising a welter of perspectives. In England, David Low did that by creating the character Colonel Blimp, a fat, pompous old gentleman with a walrus moustache, who opposed all change and became a symbol of British conservatism. Cartooning is a skill: Cartoons are meant to enliven the dull monotony of everyday life. They signify an expression in the number of people who cared about wit and humour, in the ways they cared about them, and in the available expression of that concern. I wish our politicians knew this! Shankar, R.K. Laxman and some other cartoonists have made us laugh; it is a natural urge in us. Some laugh more than others; some find a joke laughable while some do not. But all agree that the incongruities in life tend to evoke a response in one or the other. Or, that laughter results from an incongruity presented in a ludicrous context. For me, this is largely a happy story, in which a heroic vanguard of poets, writers and journalists lead the readers out of a world of dull, cautious, standardised prose into a home of freshness, variety, and some degree of sophistication. If you are not convinced by this short piece, please turn to Avadh Punch and Parsee Punch. They offer delightful reading, good amusement for leisure hours, and spiritual counsel for various moments. Above all things, they make life brighter, happier, and worth living.
Mushirul Hasan, a historian, is director-general, National Archives of India

46

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

