INTERNET HUMORISTS
By Shiv Aroor

Tweeters Take on the Establishment
The Prime Minister has called it a new "security challenge" , and in some cases it may be so. But Indians understand the difference between the baby and the bath water. Twitter is teeming with sharp comment. Here are some of the most merciless comic state-baiters.
The fire at Mantralaya was actually scheduled to happen five years ago, but was delayed due to red tape.  If only the Government was this hardcore on breaking the fasts of millions of starving children.


 Sonia Gandhi is so influential, she ensures that every Indian city during the rains becomes Venice.  Hey Indian Government, banning SMSs to prevent riots is like banning Charlie Chaplin moustaches to defeat Hitler!  Digvijaya Singh calls Mamata "immature" and the Congress gags him. Bad parenting--the one time he said something sensible you shut him up!  In the presidential voting, 15 MPs cast "invalid" votes. Good to know that our elected representatives are worse at voting than Bigg Boss inmates!

RAHUL ROUSHAN, 32, Gurgaon Full-time news satirist On Twitter @fakingnews

India: We hate black faces but love black money.  Narendra Modi's Google chat looked more fake than Shilpa Shetty's nose.  India is one country where if a distraught citizen yells "I am a tax paying citizen" , people will point and laugh.


 Why is madam doing this to us? The worst thing we did to the Italians was paneer tikka pizza.  Finally something that stalls more than Windows #Parliament.  Blackmail is BJP's bread and butter. And Congress serves paranthas with bhrasht-achar.  Sachin for Rajya Sabha? Oh boy! Bill number 100 better not be important.

Good thing is that no one can misquote Manmohan Singh.  Government is against "free speech" because they fear that if they give something "free" , CAG will claim losses.  Manmohan Singh is innocent. He didn't take any decision as coal minister, like he doesn't take any decision as prime minister.


SORABH PANT, 30, Mumbai Full-time comic,writer On Twitter @hankypanty
 Pratibha Patil pardoned a man convicted for child sacrifice. I bet he now thinks that the sacrifice actually worked.  I think Kasab has spent enough time in India for him to be tried as a citizen and not as a terrorist.  Reservations: Making an entire generation of people who had nothing to do with oppression hate a bunch of people who were never oppressed.

NEETI PALTA, 35,Delhi Comic,freelance writer On Twitter @neetipalta

KARAN TALWAR, 31, Mumbai
Comic,businessman dealing in ship/tanker spare parts

On Twitter @amuseddouche Experts conclude Prime Minister only grows a spine when the issue is media representation.  As a comic I wish this Government never gets voted out. As a citizen I'm surprised they haven't shot themselves out of shame.  Our Prime Minister is like the Loch Ness monster. Supposedly a powerful mythical creature that is rarely ever spotted.


AMOGH RANADIVE, 22, Mumbai Full-time comic, comedy writer On Twitter @amoghranadive
 There needs to be a Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for people traumatised by the sheer number of Rajiv Gandhi schemes.  One Sushil Kumar is an awesome wrestler, the other's a stupid home minister. As the poet once said, "What a difference a Shinde makes."  BJP is that guy who is always trying to convince the class to mass-bunk.

UTSAV CHAKRABORTY, 22, Mumbai Comic,consultant for Flarepath Digi On Twitter @satanbhagat
 This Vodafone 3G is like the Indian Parliament. It's there, but it's always looking for reasons not to work.  Can we not call him just Pranab Mukher? I don't want to add the Jee.  Most people put up pictures or dedicate statues of their loved ones. So, what's the deal with Mayawati and elephants?

Bet China's looking at Kapil Sibal thinking "Bande mein potential hai..."  Breaking News: Rahul Gandhi to visit houses of telecom company owners whose 2G licences have been cancelled.  I bet when Baba Ramdev was fasting, somewhere a very confused Manmohan Singh entered Rahul Gandhi's room with some muffins saying,"I heard baba was hungry so...."


GURSIMRAN KHAMBA, 26,Mumbai Full-time comic,writer On Twitter @gkhamba
24
INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

TANMAY BHAT, 25, Mumbai Full-time comic,writer On Twitter@thetanmay

ROHAN JOSHI, 29,Mumbai Full-time comic,columnist On Twitter @mojorojo

NEVILLE SHAH, 32 Mumbai Comic,executive creative director at an ad agency On Twitter @craziebawa

Shiv Aroor is deputy editor, Headlines Today
SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

25

NEW

NEW

