HUMOUR AS PROTEST
By Cyrus Broacha

One DayWhen India is Free...
Humour must coexist with other touchstones of our tradition such as corruption

t

he three questions I'm most asked Inspector Dhoble, weekends as a concept are: (i) Why do you walk on your have been cancelled. The other 15 per cent make up the toes? (ii) Are you male or female? and (iii) Please get off my foot? upper middle class to rich class. This inSomewhere down the line is the cludes the rich, affluent and powerful. 77th question I'm most often asked. It's This is the Brahmin of the group. They are rightfully sandwiched between question the only ones who are allowed to exercise 76 (Why do you wear only an apron to humour freely and fairly. This they do by bed?) and 78 (What are you doing with always laughing at the two guys below that eight-year-old?)No. 77, of course, them. Just to ensure that they always refers to humour, more specifically to enjoy this privilege, the other groups are how hard is it to be humorous in India not permitted to exercise humour at this today. Now let me clear all doubts off the group's expense. This follows in the great bat. By India today, we don't mean the tradition of Europe's great affluent and inmagazine INDIA TODAY. We mean India the fluential stand-up comics of yesteryear-- country--as opposed to India the country Adolf, Benito and Joseph. (To separate or countries of tomorrow. Although since their political work from the social, Hitler, this article is appearing in INDIA TODAY, the Mussolini and Stalin preferred to go by only their first names while on magazine, I get your point, but please stand-up tours.) don't be cheeky. It's Now you may have The answer to this vexing well-nigh guessed that percentile question is that it's wellimpossible to be isn't tallying. In precise nigh impossible to be huterms, we are missing morous in India at the humorous in India at three per cent of the present moment. In fact, the present moment. population. Well, these it's almost banned, frownIt's almost banned, are India's real hued upon and mostly negfrowned upon and morists, those who make lected. Let's look at this neglected. up a rallying point for huquestion from a sociological mour that is being suppressed. and psychological point of view. Indian humorists only hope. I refer of On second thoughts... er, let's not. It'll take too long, and I'm always unsure of the course to India's protesters, those that make Azad Maidan and Ramlila grounds spelling of psychological. India is a country of 1.15 billion such pleasant places to be in. Men and people, and even as I complete the sen- women with no fixed address, who ply tence the number has risen to 1.16. their trade--humour--across the length Thirty-eight per cent of our people live and breadth of the country. Whether it's Baba Ramdev, Anna below the poverty line which is defined as less than $20 a month, but little less Hazare, Arvind Kejriwal or the Raza than a clothesline. As per Government Academy, these are the movers and shakof India's ruling, they are requested not ers, who shine a light, a beacon of hope, to smile, leave alone laugh, more than that one day, when India is free, and, more twice a week. Forty-four per cent of our importantly, bars are open beyond 11 p.m., people are broadly called the middle humour may coexist freely with all the class. These people are permitted the other founding fathers of our culture such odd joke, but humour is confined to as corruption, disease, nepotism, moral evenings and most specifically weekends. bankruptcy and female infanticide. Ha ha and Jai Hind. Except, of course, in Mumbai, where thanks to the sterling efforts of that great humanitarian R.R. Patil and his muse Cyrus Broacha is a media personality

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

54

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

