LINES OF LAUGHTER
By Vishwajyoti Ghosh

When India's Emergency arrived with a midnight knock, the lights, and humour, went out in newspaper offices

Cry, Thy Beloved Cartoon

The first casualty of the morning paper is the political cartoon, its absence a reflection of the nation's missing sense of humour.

t is an unutterable sadness which punctuates the reality that I am called upon to portray, and yet the dominant superstition of my profession demands that I raise a laugh." O.V. Vijayan. Another complaint filed. Another sentiment hurt. Another cartoonist arrested. Another day in democracy lived. What about humour and free speech? That's a different story. The first casualty of the morning paper is the political cartoon. Besides being a comment, the cartoon was and is a reflection of the nation's sense of humour. Once the cartoon went missing from the front page, the baby went with the bath water. The Great Indian Cartoon is now the Great Indian Compromise and the cartoonist is the last man standing. So to think of the cartoons that The documented a work-in-progress nation is a gravedigger's delight. column for the A nation's political humour often repolitical cartoon flected the nation's political class. Sarojini was an integral part Naidu once referred to Mahatma Gandhi of the newspaper as "this tiny creature whom once in a architecture. Both mood of loving irreverence, I called Mickey Mouse of a man". Later, The Civil and editor and reader (CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT) CARTOONS BY R.K. Military Gazette, Lahore, published a caricademanded it. ways of our great leaders ever be published ture of Gandhi as Mickey Mouse. Today, not in FilmIndia in the 1950s? only would a political career finish for such a comThe 1970s were the great age of the Indian cartoon, ment, the fundamentalist Gandhian would turn up on the not least because of efforts to suppress the genius Abu streets with sticks, and fire. When the nation was a young work-in-progress, it Abraham, who drew a bunch of Congressmen with their had a sense of humour. Shankar did not spare Nehru. hands folded towards a portrait of their Lady Boss, singing Witness a flummoxed Nehru trying to pull back an agitated in chorus, "Madam, Madam on the wall, who's the fairest of Nehru during the 1962 Chinese challenge. Or a tired us all?" When India's Emergency arrived with a midnight Nehru running confused with the nation-building flame for knock, the lights went out in newspaper offices. Abu progress, with the rest running after him for inheritance. Abraham asked curiously, "Don't you think we've got a lovely How could so many cartoons taking digs at the philandering censor of humour?" The best of Abu's work, as we all know,

i

LAXMAN, SUDHIR DAR, MANJULA PADMANABHAN, O.V. VIJAYAN AND ABU ABRAHAM

was created in this period, including the famous one of the then president Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed signing the Emergency orders from his bath tub. When every single word had to be approved before print and the newspapers left blank spaces where editorials would have sat, the cartoon that brilliantly celebrated the protest was Laxman's common man with his head buried in a newspaper [Laxman], with headlines like `Very Good, Very Happy, Very Rosy'. Very succinct, very sharp. Despite hawk eyes following him everywhere, the drawing board never gathered dust. One would remember Manjula Padmanabhan's

draughtsmanship in her drawing of Indira Gandhi holding Sanjay Baba in a basket or O.V. Vijayan's sublime humour, his strength of lines and black strokes, his unique typography in depicting Indira Gandhi finally stumped by a character of mythological cinema, NTR. The column for the political cartoon was an integral part of the newspaper architecture. Both the editor and the reader demanded it. I remember the evening tabloid of a Hindi newspaper on the day Indira Gandhi was assassinated. On the same page as the bold headline announcing the tragic news, there was the daily pocket cartoon, this time showing a politician in a ribbon cutting ceremony shadowed by a doctor with a first aid box. Even in the gravest of circumstances, the space for the political cartoon was seldom compromised, the sense of humour seldom lost. The slow death of the political cartoon must have happened somewhere along the way. With its disappearance from the front page, the cartoon slowly lost its editorial powers. The newspapers forgot to renew their contracts with the cartoonist and the reader too forgot his sense of humour. The shrunk cartoonist now even had to apologise, like Ajit Ninan had for his cartoon on Rajiv Gandhi as the shepherd of black sheep and V.P. Singh, a white one, running away from the lot. Yet I would like to believe that the political cartoon is still breathing, albeit heavily. Most of us cartoonists began political doodling way back in school. I would think we've done less harm to the nation's cultural fabric than the ones who took us off the front page or had us arrested.
Vishwajyoti Ghosh is the author of the cartoon column Full Toss, and Delhi Calm, a graphic novel on India's Emergency

34

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

NEW

NEW

