HEALTH SPECIAL

YOUR GUIDE TO GOOD HEALTH
HOW H E A L T H Y IS I N D I A INC?

presented by

Nutnalite

Spe cial Report

CORPORATE HEALTH

How Healthy is

By Damayanti Datta

INDIA INC?
As the global downturn fills most people with fear and doubt about the future, doctors send out a health warning. Spiralling stress at the workplace now stalks the power corridors of corporate India. M Y T H O F G O O D H E A LT H A N D R E A L I T Y O F L I F EST Y L E
RESULTS OF EXECUTIVE CHECKUP 21% STRUGGLE WITH DEPRESSION
SHOWHIGH CARDIAC RISK HAVE HIGH CHOLESTEROL HAVE HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE HAVE DIABETES HAVE HEARTDISEASE HAVE ASTHMA

I

f you are a high-pressure executive, beware of your amygdala. That almond-shaped fear centre deep inside your brain gets jittery every time you log 60-plus hours a week, face 24x7 demands, unpredictable work-flows, endless jet lags, flexible global hours, late nights or sleeplessness. It puts your brain on alert and triggers off 1,400 biochemical changes down your body. Adrenal glands pump out stress

Exercise Regimen
I don't exercise Less than 1 hour 1-3 hours 24 9 5 Above 6 hours 3-6 hours

Workdays Lost
No absenteeism 1-7 days 8-15 days 16-22 days 23-30 days 31-100 days Above 100 days

21% 17% 12% 10% 6%

32 25 37 5 6 3
Figures per cent

38

12 4

4%

Figures in per cent

60%
corporate executives do not show symptoms of any diseases before tests.
BEHAVIOURAL CHANGE
Domestic stress 2000 2%
2011

80%
executives show signs of risk factors of lifestyle disorders after tests.
JOBS THAT PLAY HAVOC WITH HEALTH
SECTOR 63% Others SEVERITY 52% poor diet

19% 14% 24% 6% 16% 39% 50%

Smoking
2000 2011

Drinking
2000 2011

Overall Stress
2000 2011

All sources: Corporate Wellness Survey and The Urban Indian Health Profile, 2000-12 by The Apollo Hospitals Group and Confederation of Indian Industry; Medanta-The Medicity, Gurgaon; Fortis Hospitals, Delhi; ASSOCHAM Survey 2011-12; Asian Heart Institute, Mumbai

9% Engineering

11% Financial services 17% IT

6% No ailments

24% Chronic ailments 18% Acute ailments

hormones, sympathetic nerves go timely diagnosis. The 1970s was into an overdrive, your heart beats when hospitals in the US had faster, blood pressure rises and started marketing "executive your digestive system shuts down. checks". Reddy, back in India after Before you know, your body shifts a decade-long career as a cardiologist in the US, started planning into a state of perpetual anxiety. Corporate warriors of the new one. This was even before he set economy already have plenty on up India's first corporate hospital their platter to worry about the chain, Apollo, in 1983. "It led to the amygdala. Yet as the global reces- first-of-its-kind preventive checksion fills most people with fear up in India at my hospital," he about the future, scientists send says. "Today we have done seven out warnings about the amygdala's million health checks and we find ability to "hijack" the brain and the that although 60 per cent of corpobody: Stress can burn you out, rate executives do not show sympmake you sick, or even kill you. toms, for 80 per cent the tests With India Inc losing a series of indicate risk factors for serious star performers--from CEO Raghu lifestyle disorders." In 2000, when Apollo Hospitals Pillai of Future Group at 54, CEO Ranjan Das of SAP India at 42 to first compiled the health status Executive Director R. Ravimohan of corporate India from 15,000 executive checks in of Reliance Industries the six metros, the at 52--in the last two findings were dismal. years, it is an issue Over 56 per cent were that corporate execuof corporate found to be prone to tives ignore at their executives heart attacks, over own, and their comsleep less than 30 per cent had cancer pany's, peril. risk and 30 per cent Doctors are sup6 hours a day. were on daily medicaposed to become tion. Their latest study, inured to death. But concluded in 2011, Dr Prathap C. Reddy covering 250,000 emwas devastated when spend between ployees from 32 cities a young patient died of Rs 5,000-50,000 and towns, however, a heart attack way back in 1979. He could a year on lifestyle shows improvement in overall health: have been saved by diseases.

78%

21%

DREAMSTIME Graphics by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

48

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 3, 2012

SEPTEMBER 3, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

49

Spe cial Report

CORPORATE HEALTH
A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

Degenerative and chronic ailments "Our studies show that most of them have come down by 36 per cent over are not suffering from any disease, but the decade. But stress has zoomed. a third are likely to have high blood "Overall stress among corporate pressure, high cholesterol levels and executives has gone up from 39 per diabetes, brought on by stress," says cent in 2000 to 50 per cent now, while Dr Naresh Trehan, cardiac surgeon daily pressures are up from 9 to 17 per and chairman of Medicity. "The cent among the same group," says biggest trouble is that corporate execDr Adrian Kennedy, head of Lifetime utives are the worst victims of stress Wellness Rx International, an yet most are either unaware or unwillApollo Hospitals group company. The ing to confront it," he says. It's also trendy to be stressed. The immediate impact is behaviour change. No wonder, domestic stress smug view in power corridors is: among them is up from 2 to 19 per Competitiveness is a virtue and hence cent, levels of smoking from 14 to 24 it's cool to compete even on stress. per cent and alcohol consumption Dr Samir Parikh, head of psychiatry at Fortis Delhi, explains the new rat race from 6 to 16 per cent. through a case--one of What about CEOs? Power his patients, a 20-someseems to come at a price, as thing corporate emploa startling 100 per cent of yee. He owns a swanky chief executives seem to of corporate car and a plush home, all suffer from psychosomatic executives found on easy monthly instalstress ailments: High blood ments, and a smartpressure, diabetes, cholesto be prone to phone that he claims is terol to abnormal ECG, freheart attacks. his lifeline. Even during quent headaches, asthma, vacation, he answers backaches and allergies. work-related telephoneCEOs get 13 per cent more calls and checks emails ulcers and 10 per cent less are on daily constantly. "You have sleep than their executives. to be available 24x7, The source of all this stress medication to is, however, not the organiward off lifestyle what is the point of technology otherwise," is his sation or the home: Only disorders. mantra. He smokes 10 per cent CEOs find their about 20 cigarettes a jobs stressful, less than 5 per cent face problems at home, just day and pops a sleep medication 33 per cent complain of financial or a few times a week. "It's legal problems as causes of stress. everyone's story, not a big "The major cause of stress, it turns deal," he shrugs, when out, is their personality," says Dr Dr Parikh questions the Kennedy. "About 59 per cent of CEOs blurring boundaries bethave a Type-A stress-prone personal- ween work and life. "He's a proud member ity. That is, they tend to be highly motivated people who feel compelled of India Inc, a to win and are by nature impatient, new breed restless and critical." The glass and steel waiting lounge of Medanta-The Medicity in Gurgaon is always packed with people. But if you expect mostly elderly patients being led in and out, you are in for a surprise. Executives in suits or business casuals sip coffee, fidget with their cell phones, check time or walk impatiently up and down the hallway. Most of them are not patients, but waiting their turn for preventive checkups.

THREE DOCTOR CEOS ON CALL
Dr Prathap Reddy
APOLLO HOSPITALS
A cardiologist who set up India's first corporate hospital in 1983 and also the first-of-its-kind executive checkup package Health of India Inc "Our group has done seven million health checks so far," says Dr Reddy. The latest study covering 250,000 employees shows stress has zoomed among corporate executives, from 39 per cent in 2000 to 50 per cent in 2012. Daily pressures among the same group are up from 9-17 per cent. Word of warning "We need to detect diseases early on, prevent their onset as much as possible and address lifestyle issues with lifestyle modifications," says Dr Reddy. "These goals can be achieved through a robust tripartite partnership between doctors, technology and the individual."

MIND MATTERS
Dr Samir Parikh,
FORTIS HOSPITAL, DELHI

WHITE-COLLAR WOES
Lifestyle Ulcers
34% of executives
suffer from digestive disorders: Flatulence, acidity,irritable bowel and ulcers.

Girth of Cool
35% are overweight while 42% are
The head of psychiatry at Fortis Hospital in Delhi increasingly finds young executives in his chamber. Most are under severe workplace stress and show psychological distress: Demotivation to low productivity. Rising burnout rates "India Inc has experienced a 57 per cent rise in stress over the past two years. The fallout is fall in physical and psychological health as well as family relationships."

obese,with a body fat ratio in excess of the acceptable 30% for humans.

56%

Pressure Tactics
18% of employees have high blood pressure in excess of 135/85 and are currently on medication.

30%

Heart of the Matter

Dr Ramakanta Panda
ASIAN HEART INSTITUTE
The Prime Minister's cardiac surgeon who set up his hospital in Mumbai in 2002. Health of India Inc "Indians get heart attacks at 35 instead of the global 55. Corporate executives with their inappropriate lifestyles are sitting ducks for a heart attack," says Dr Panda, whose hospital sees footfalls from executives with high-risk profile: Family history of chronic ailments, weight issues, sedentary lives, stressed personalities and active or passive smokers. Word of warning "Every big hospital now runs top-of-the-line tests but corporate executives will have to find the time to go for those."

Dr Naresh Trehan
MEDANTA-THE MEDICITY
Ace heart surgeon and founder-chairman of medical multispeciality in Gurgaon. Health of India Inc "Corporate executives are the worst victims of stress, yet most are either unaware or unwilling to confront it," says Dr Trehan. Studies by his team show that a third of corporate executives coming in for checkups are likely to have high blood pressure, high cholesterol levels and diabetes brought on by stress. Word of warning "Exercise, control your diet, watch your weight and go for regular checkups."

21% show high
cardiac risk while 15% are currently on medication or have undergone a bypass or angioplasty.

Bittersweet Truth
15% are currently
diabetic with fasting blood sugar in excess of 110 and on medication.

The Daily Beast
48% of employees suffer from a range
of chronic ailments,from headache to backaches,allergies to insomnia.

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

50

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 3, 2012

Spe cial Report

CORPORATE HEALTH

of young, working Indians, who have money but no time for themselves," says Parikh. The rat race has a new finish line: It's not who gets there first, but who works the hardest and is hence the most hassled. The average workweek has expanded since the 1970s while leisure time has nose-dived by 37 per cent, explains Dr Parikh, and Indians seem to be working extra-hard even on vacations. Twenty-seven per cent Indians work for an average of three hours a day on holidays, 7 per cent above the global average. "Chronic or extreme workplace stress can lead to psychological distress in the form of anxiety, depression or other mental illnesses," he says. "Workplace challenges like demotivation, absenteeism, a high attrition rate, low productivity, increased healthcare costs have also been associated with stress." Scratch below the surface and it's an unsettling world of long workhours, strict deadlines, sleep debt, precipitous drop in physical activity, unholy reliance on fat-laden foods of convenience, vicious stress loop at home and work--spiralling into an abyss of chronic lifestyle disorders. At the root of it is obesity. About 36 per cent of corporate employees were found to be overweight and obese in a survey conducted by ASSOCHAM among 2,000 people across India in April 2012. "Obesity is not just a disease of wrong diet but also of negative stress," says Dr Anoop Misra, director and head, Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Fortis Hospitals, Delhi. The body releases a molecule, NPY (neuropeptide Y), when stressed, which unlocks the fat cells and causes them to grow in both size and number. "Stress also ups cortisol in the body, which is directly linked to fat accumulation." At the higher reaches of business, a typical workday stretches well beyond the 10-hour stint in office, over Internet and BlackBerry. But the punishing work pace is not the only stressor: 78 per cent of corporate employees sleep less than six hours, shows the ASSOCHAM survey. Loss of

THE CEO ATRISK

100%
10% CEOs find their
jobs stressful.

of chief executives seem to suffer from psychosomatic stress ailments: High blood pressure, diabetes, cholesterol to abnormal ECG, frequent headaches, asthma, backaches and allergies. CEOs get 13% more ulcers and 10% less sleep than their executives.

5% complain of
stress at home.

33% face financial or
legal stress.
Personality markers that tell on health: Excessive ambition Aggression Competitiveness Drive Impatience Need for control Focus on quantity Focus on quality Sense of urgency

Type A
The major cause of stress for CEOs is their personality: 59% CEOs have a Type-Astressprone personality.That is,they tend to be highly motivated people who feel compelled to win and are by nature impatient, restless and critical.

sleep can play havoc with hormones, lead to weight gain, diabetes and compromise immune resistance, leaving one vulnerable to anything from common cold to cancer. The survey shows 54 per cent of executives miss office for simple sicknesses, like common cold and fever. Studies confirm that insomniacs have a hard time holding on to jobs. Ajay Saxena, 30, an executive with a telecom giant, was gearing up for Diwali launches in 2010 when one

morning he felt a twinge in his left arm and uneasiness in his chest. A company dealer got alarmed when Saxena offered him a clammy handshake and forced him to go to a hospital. Saxena blacked out in the OPD: A minor heart attack. "I had never fallen seriously ill, but I was leading life at a frightful pace," he says. "Work, partying and more work. Eating anything I could grab on the run and smoking 20 cigarettes a day." He now eats sprouts and greens,

52

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 3, 2012

DREAMSTIME

Spe cial Report CORPORATE HEALTH
CARING COMPANIES
little during the day and then devouring 1,000-calorie dinners. "Unless there is a change in lifestyle and diet style, young corporate executives will be sitting ducks for a range of diseases," says Salgunan, who does surgery on at least one young victim of corporate lifestyle a day. Members of the corporate smart set are looking for action plans. And wellness is emerging as an antidote for India Inc's poor health. Information Technology Enabled Services firms are spending about 11 per cent of non-compensation facilities on wellness: Health food counters, nutritional counselling, psychologist on call, gymnasiums, spa and massage therapies. On the nutrition front, with corporate patronage, the market for functional food--herbs, minerals, vitamins, omega fatty acids, probiotics--is humming. Hospitals are providing a bouquet of services: From healthchecks, weight management modules, stress audits, tobacco clinics, to health tips via SMS, microsites and helplines. Real estate developers are into "wellness homes": Centrally air-conditioned, sauna, steam, jacuzzi to spas and club facilities, health clubs. What's the road ahead if you want to survive and thrive? Eat right, meditate, quit smoking, find time to work out, schedule vacations with family (and leave the cell phone behind), focus consciously on happy images from the past. They will pacify your amygdala, signal the parasympathetic nervous system to bring down your heart rate, slow down your breathing, and stop stress hormones cortisol and adrenaline from surging up your bloodstream. Over time, regions in your prefrontal cortex, that are responsible for optimism, creativity and well-being, will thicken with grey matter, enough to resist amygdala's primitive fragile insecurity. Don't wait until you develop heart disease. I

22% organisations
arrange for health counselling

30% organisations provide
medical checks to their employees

16% corporates provide gym facilities
offer fruits and health foods in their canteens and food courts

20%

18% encourage age-related, intra-department sport within the company

TOO SICKTO GO TO WORK

54%
are absent due to fever and cold.

20%
stay away due to high BP or diabetes.

15%
feel too depressed to go to office.

11%
fall sick due to nonspecific health reasons.

mostly. Spices are out, as are salt and sugar. At 5'10", he was a hefty 86 kg at the time of the incident. Now, he's down to his high school weight of 74 kg. "I realised it's, after all, just work. Life is much more than an executive's daily stressful grind." About 52 per cent of corporate employees are afflicted by lifestyle diseases linked to bad eating habits. Dr N. Salgunan, cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon in Chennai, is not surprised. "We Indians are prone to

stress, mainly because of the incorrect eating habits we are developing, thanks to the new 24x7 work culture." There is less time to cook healthy meals at home, with both the husband and wife often in the work force, and it's easy to eat unwholesome food at fast food outlets dotting city landscapes. New bad eating habits are creeping in: Skipping breakfast and then snacking sporadically through the day, fitting meals into one's busy schedule, eating too

