GLOSSARY

Photographs by YOGEN SHAN

ROYAL DISASTER
Nita and Mukesh Ambani's party to commemorate 25 years of designer duo Abu Jani-Sandeep Khosla looked like a yard sale at Antilla. Some turned heads for the wrong reasons. Yash and Avanti Birla's
sartorial choices tend to leave the viewer gobsmacked. Even so, matching animal prints and what looks like shiny harem pants on him? Why, why, why? We don't know what sort of a memo these two got with their invite, but surely they weren't asked to be part of the entertainment? Oh dear, Kangna Ranaut read the wrong invite. She thought she was going to a fancy dress competition and came dressed as Katy Perry. Ranaut stuck out like a sore thumb in the shimmery embellished mass around her. There must have been more trouble when she got back home and mommy saw that she had cut up her tablecloth.
O F T H E

WEEK

Expecting the world to treat you fairly because you are good, is like expecting the bull not to charge because you are a vegetarian. --Katrina Kaif,Actor

the Ambanis >> Are missing a chandelier? Socialite Natasha Poonawala certainly seems to suggest so, because she came dressed as one. She must have had something less shiny in mind, but was probably too blinded by that ensemble to see what she finally looked like.

SIZE DOES MATTER
Television actor Ram Kapoor, 38, was half his present size when he danced at a wedding procession in Mira Nair's Monsoon Wedding, in 2001. The filmmaker has roped him again for a short film. His rapidly growing waistline notwithstanding, Kapoor is a darling of the television world and has picked up several films of late. The bigger he got, the better his roles became. Let's hope he does not read too much into that, though.

KOLHAPURE

MUMMY'S DAY OUT
Padmini Kolhapure, 46, has switched from being daughter to mother in quick succession. She plays daughter to Asha Bhosle in the Marathi film Maaee, the singer's debut film as an actor, which is yet to release. Kolhapure has also been brought on board Rajkumar Santoshi's Phata Poster Nikla Hero to play Shahid Kapoor's mother. She may be a tad young to play mother to the 31-year-old actor, but it's better than not playing anything at all.

YOGEN SHAN

KAPOOR WITH HIS WIFE

O F T H E

WEEK

YOGEN SHAN

GOVINDA NOW

FOTOCORP

QU OT E

"I AM LUCKYTO HAVE PLAYED THE VILLAGE GIRL IN MY DEBUT FILM.YOU SEE GIRLS OUTTHERE WHO ARE FOREVER PLAYING STEREOTYPICAL WESTERN ROLES." --Sonakshi Sinha, Actor

70

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 3, 2012

>>

>>

ENGINEERING MUSIC
Who would have thought that the composer of the song Kafirana from Joker, Gaurav Dagaonkar, 30, would be an alumnus of IIM-Ahmedabad. He also released a music album, College Days, in 2008, before doing ad jingles for Dove and IndusInd Bank. "It was not a whimsical decision," he says.

giant Hawaiian salad >> A walking into the Ambani home turned out to be Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, on closer inspection. If she hadn't been flanked by the rest of the Bachchan family, she would have been mistaken for the centrepiece and installed on the dining table. Now, which of them left daughter Aaradhya alone with mommy's dress and tubs of paint?

DAGAONKAR

family sounds insane because Q& "Our our answers to the Saif-Kareena A wedding question vary"
Soha Ali Khan, 33, may not be the first name that comes to mind when it comes to making fashion statements, but together with designer Aki Narula, she will be telling people what to wear. Come September 3, the two will be seen hosting What Not To Wear­India, on TLC. Khan speaks to INDIA TODAY. Q. How stylish do you think you are? A. I have the potential to be very stylish, but the willingness varies. Q. With a designer as co-host, what was your contribution? A. Aki would come up with tips and I would select them, but I learnt a lot and began coming up with my own ideas. Q. Who do you consider stylish? A. Saif Ali Khan, but it's not a personal bias; Sonam Kapoor, Kangna Ranaut, Bipasha Basu and Kareena Kapoor. Q. How much of a gangster wife are you in Saheb Biwi Aur Gangster 2? A. I do hold a gun, but I don't shoot anyone. Q. Why the different versions of Saif and Kareena's wedding plans? A. As a family we sound insane because all our answers are different. The details are still being worked out, so it sounds like we keep changing plans and that's why we have stopped talking about it. KHAN WITH
NARULA

FAT BOY SLIM
A slim and toned Govinda, 48, playing football. As unbelievable as that imagery sounds, apparently it is true. There is even a fresh mop of hair completing the brand new look of the formerly tubby actor in his comeback film, Avatar. He plays a football coach in the Pahlaj Nihalani film and hopes to do for football what Shah Rukh Khan did for hockey in Chak De India! Next, even pigs will fly.

GOVINDA BEFORE

by Nishat Bari and Prachi Rege
SEPTEMBER 3, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

71

