ELECTIONS 2012

UTTAR PRADESH

AKHILESH ON THE KRANTI RATH WITH DAUGHTER ADITI
MANEESH AGNIHORI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

RISE OFTHE OTHER PRINCE A
By Priya Sahgal

Mulayam's son is the SP'S star campaigner and may emerge as the party's chief ministerial candidate if it needs Congress support to form the government
with a cell phone camera. "See, it's the latest model from Samsung and our party has it," he says, breaking into laughter. SP has often been portrayed as Luddite with its anti-technology stance. Akhilesh is trying to do a course correction, clarifying that the party is not against technology, so long as it does not lead to unemployment. When he spots a familiar face in the crowd, he immediately invites the acolyte on board, saying, "Isko maine hi party mein shamil kiya tha (I admitted him to the party)." When others clamour for a place in the chariot of Mulayam's heir apparent, Akhilesh cajoles, "Aage bitha lenge, chhota rath hain, kaise baithenge sab?" (Will seat you later. It's a small chariot. How can all fit in?) Seat accommodation is a delicate act for any politician. The eight-seater rath is already overcrowded with party workers and local candidates on the morning of January 3. Sitting on the last seat and playing with her iPad is Akhilesh's nine-year-old daughter Aditi. This is her day out with dad, a treat to compensate for a botched up New Year's Day outing. "Come on, share some of your chocolate with the others," says Akhilesh, playing along, rummaging through her lilac knapsack. Election time is sop time in the heartland. That's a lesson little Aditi is learning at a very early age. Vying with the Congress for the state's 18 per cent Muslim vote, Akhilesh is eager to nail the lie in the UPA's decision to subdivide the OBC quota and earmark 4.5 per cent exclusively for minorities. "Our party's stand is that reservations

khilesh Yadav is on a roll. Literally. Mulayam Singh Yadav's son is on a Kranti Rath Yatra, criss-crossing Uttar Pradesh on the eve of the most crucial Assembly elections for the Samajwadi Party (SP). Defeat will push the party, currently out of power both at the Centre and state, into political oblivion. This is also Akhilesh's first election ever since his father made him state party president in 2009. The 38-year-old Yadav junior seems to be enjoying both the moment and the momentum. Waving to the crowd of party workers lined up on the road to Haiderganj in eastern Uttar Pradesh, Akhilesh points to a man video-recording him

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

ELECTIONS 2012
should be given according to their numbers. Netaji wants at least 18 per cent reservations for Muslims," he says, addressing a crowd at Barabanki from the lift that projects him on to the roof of the bus. Besides, as Akhilesh points out, the sub-quota includes other minorities, not just the Muslims. Christians and Sikhs are in a better position to take advantage of the quota. The Congress has no Muslim MLA, while the SP has 21 and the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) 29. In the 2009 Lok Sabha polls, the Muslim vote had drifted away from the SP after Mulayam brought in former BJP chief minister Kalyan Singh.

UTTAR PRADESH
The Congress has three Muslim MPs in the House and BSP four while the SP has none. Now Kalyan Singh has been sacked, and Mulayam's favourite accessory at political rallies is Azam Khan. A six-term MLA, Khan is the party's Muslim face. He had left the SP protesting against Kalyan Singh's inclusion in May 2009. He is now back. Ironically, the two parties that may end up as post-poll allies are fighting for the same Muslim-Kurmi votebank. The INDIA TODAY-ORG opinion poll conducted in November 2011 showed that the SP had 41 per cent of the Kurmi vote and the Congress 23 per cent. The poll also revealed that SP had the lion's share of the Muslim vote (46 per cent) while Congress came second with 21 per cent. Most opinion polls have predicted a hung house, with the SP emerging as the single largest party. It will need Congress support to form a government. Badgered by the Trinamool Congress at the Centre, the Congress will oblige if the SP offers unconditional support of its 22 MPs. There could be a rider. Congress sources say that Rahul Gandhi may insist that Akhilesh and not Mulayam become chief minister since he wants India to get familiar with the idea of younger chief ministers as a prelude to a younger prime minister-- just as the Congress did with the Abdullahs in Jammu and Kashmir. The ailing 72-year-old Mulayam has been keeping a low profile, leaving the heavy lifting to his son. This is a proposal that may have his blessings. The rest of the party will fall in line as is what happened with Akhilesh's decision to deny muscleman D.P. Yadav a ticket. On January 3, when asked by the media about the former BSP leader, Akhilesh did not dial his dad before articulating the party line. "The SP will not admit anyone with such a tainted image," he said quite firmly. This was in contradiction to Azam Khan's warm welcome to D.P. Yadav on December 31. Minutes after Akhilesh made his announcement, Khan did a U-turn, stating that as party president, "it is his (Akhilesh's) right to decide". While Mulayam is Netaji, the son is Bhaiya for the party workers. He is seen both as a continuity of the old and the promise of the new. The graduate in environmental engineering from Sydney University in Australia readily rolls up his sleeves and takes to the streets. He was arrested last year for launching a three-day protest against the BSP government. He is also the other Yuvraj (a name given by sycophantic Congressmen to Rahul). "We are all yuvrajs and rajkumars in our own home," laughs Akhilesh, "the challenge is to earn this title from outsiders." This election is as much about Akhilesh's leadership as Rahul's. When his rath got caught in a traffic snarl, he charmed a truck driver by waving out to him with a "Hello truck driver bhaiya". He wears the traditional red SP cap but it's perched at a jaunty angle, giving it the aura of a fashion statement. When he is not in campaign mode, he prefers wearing jeans and sneakers. And playing football in a stadium in Etawah. He has already covered 170 constituencies on his Kranti Rath. He filed a Right to Information (RTI) query to find out how many people had visited the Lohia park set up by SP as opposed to the Ambedkar parks set up by Mayawati ("Patthar parks" is what he calls them). "Fifteen lakh people have visited the Lohia park so far but the RTI did not answer my other query," he says. RTI, instead of hooliganism, is a whole new game for the SP. Akhilesh is desperate to shed the tag of hooliganism that became identified with the party since its stint in power from 2003-2007. "Once we come to power, there will be a committee where you can call or email any complaint against our workers. My chacha (uncle), Ram Gopal Yadavji, will head it and I will be on it too. There will be no goondagardi (hooliganism)," he announces.

Rahulhas been around for 8 years.What has he done?
Akhilesh Yadav is an unusual poster boy for the Samajwadi Party (SP). He talks to Senior Editor PRIYA SAHGAL about taking his party into the computer age and his rapport with another heir apparent, Rahul Gandhi. Q. Do you see yourself as the party's face-lift? A. Ever since I have been given responsibility of the party, I have ensured that we use technology wherever we can. The Congress mocks us, saying that the party is against computers and English, but the party president has learnt both. Today, computers are being used in our party office. Congress says computers should be in English, I say they should be in Hindi and Urdu. Q. Isn't this a major turnaround in the party's ideology? A. It's not a turnaround. There is a feeling that SP is against machines. We said this for the weavers and artisans, as it leads to unemployment. We are not against technology. I thought about the irony of it all. India's leading private university, Amity University, was set up by Netaji (Mulayam). It teaches computers, English and professional courses. Q. Your party is against English, yet you studied abroad. A. You could say that it was a mistake and I should not have gone abroad. I tried to get into Hindu College (Delhi University). The media wrote that Mulayam's son wants to study in English-medium colleges. I didn't get in and studied engineering in Mysore. A lot of my colleagues were applying abroad, so did I. Q. What is your poll prediction? A. There is a feeling that if anyone can remove the Bahujan Samaj Party, it is the SP. The Congress did not even protest when BSP burnt down its PCC President Rita Bahuguna Joshi's house. All the anti-establishment votes should come to us. Q. Psephologists predict an SP government with Congress support. A. If Congress supports us it's good, but we are confident of a majority. Q. Do you and Rahul Gandhi share an equation? A. I don't have an equation. If we meet in Parliament, we ask ek doosre ka haal-chaal (about each other's wellbeing). There was a time during the debate on the nuclear deal when we spoke, par ab kahan baat-cheet ho pa rahi hai (but now where is the meeting ground). Before the nuclear deal vote, I met him at the Deoria PWD guest house. I was told that Rahul wanted to meet us, so I went. Even now the rapport is okay. Haal-chaal ki baat mein koi dikkat nahin hai (No problem in asking after each other's heath). Q. What if Rahul offers Congress support only if you are the CM? A. I have been given the responsibility to manage the organisation, and drive the rath. The party is of the view that Netaji will be the chief minister. Let's look at the results. The MLAs will decide. Everyone wants Netaji. Q. Do you miss Amar Singh? A. The party does not remember him. Only I call him uncle. We don't meet, but if we come face to face, I wish him and he gives me aashirwad. Q. Are you okay with having film stars in the party? A. Why should I stop film stars or industrialists? If we had, we would not have set up a 600-MW power plant and 29 sugar mills. Q. What is it about your father that inspires you the most? A. The respect he has for other people. He is my pitaji (father) and also my Netaji. In public meetings, he acts like my father and sometimes when he is being my father, I feel that he is playing the politician (smiles). Q. Mulayam takes on Mayawati and Akhilesh takes on Rahul? A. I want that Rahul should do something, otherwise the public will question me, saying what can you do when such a powerful youth leader did nothing. He needs to do something to restore people's faith in yuva netas. No one will get such an opportunity. He has been in Government for eight years. But what has he done?

e says no tickets have been given to those convicted by the court in criminal cases. This has its loopholes. As many as 24 local dons have been given tickets so far--former BSP MLA Bhagwan Sharma alias Guddu Pandit, arrested in 2008 on the charge of raping a college girl, among them. "The high court gave a verdict in his favour," defends Akhilesh. Jailed SP leader Amar Mani Tripathi's son Aman Mani has also got a ticket. "There is no case against Aman Mani," says Akhilesh. In the heartland, caste overrules public schoolboy niceties. Yet Akhilesh is trying to bring in some change. Professionals are being wooed--an IIM professor, an ex-cricketer and a woman entrepreneur. "Around 35-40 tickets have been given to youth and women," he says. Akhilesh's leadership has certainly stirred things within the staid old party. Cultural shifts are evident. Computers have been introduced at the party office; the party song has been spruced up to a livelier tune. SP workers are still getting used to the new tune. "Earlier, it was said we are an old-fashioned socialist party that cannot attract the new generation. This is not true anymore," says 42-year-old Neeraj Shekhar, former prime minister Chandra Shekhar's son and party MP. Akhilesh has the party support but there is one vote that still eludes him. When asked whether she would vote for her grandfather or father, Aditi immediately says, "My grandfather."
For full text of Yadav'sinterview, visit www.indiatoday.in/akhilesh

H

T NARAYAN/ www.indiatodayimages.com

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

NEW

