Society HOOKAHS

LET'S CHILLUM
By Gunjeet Sra and Shravya Jain

Generation Laidback is hooked to the hookah and its myriad flavours. Never mind the bans and health advisories.

Health

T

hey defined `cool' after cigarettes became passe. But hookah bars, which mushroomed rapidly in metros and Tier II cities across the country after the ban on public smoking came into effect on October 2, 2008, are now beginning to feel the heat. One state government after another is banning them under the Cigarette and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition) Act, 2003, for not only giving teenagers access to hookah or sheesha but using ingredients not permissible under the law. Bangalore was the first to see hookah bars go in March 2011. Maharashtra followed in October and Rajasthan, Haryana and Punjab enforced similar bans in December. Notwithstanding bans, hookah or sheesha bars remain the hangouts of choice for urban youth. "I'd rather come here instead of going to boring old coffee shops," says Mridula Sharma, 19, sitting inside Zook Café in Delhi's Saket area. Blowing smoke rings at Noida's Kaffiaa lounge, Raghav Rastogi, 18, adds, "You know, it is not so much the flavour or the mild buzz. What I love most about the hookah is the feeling I get of being totally and utterly wasted." Hookah smokers remain blissfully unaware of its dangers and often believe that they are a safer alternative to cigarettes. "I don't smoke cigarettes but I do smoke the hookah because I feel it is less harmful. If I knew this was harmful, I would never do it," says Class XII student Mohit Sharma, who has a hookah at home, hidden from his parents. Reema Chabbra, 15, says her parents are against the hookah but she refuses to take their word. "Why would my friends smoke it if they knew it's bad for them?" she asks by way of justification. "I think what smoking was to the previYOUNGSTERS AT A HOOKAH BAR IN CHANDIGARH
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Hazard

Hookah is in no way a healthy alternative to cigarettes
MYTH Water in a hookah filters out harmful ingredients from the smoke. TRUTH Passing tobacco smoke through water does not filter out cancer-causing chemicals. MYTH Hookah is not very addictive because there is little or no nicotine. TRUTH Tobacco used in a sheesha contains nicotine. In a 60-minute hookah session, smokers are exposed to 100 times the volume of smoke inhaled from a single cigarette. MYTH Herbal sheeshas are healthier than regular sheeshas. TRUTH A herbal sheesha exposes the smoker to tar and carcinogens. MYTH When soaked in molasses or honey and mixed with fruit, smoking a hookah is less harmful. TRUTH It still contains cancer-causing chemicals and nicotine.

Many Flavours of

Addiction

Fancy names are a gimmick to make hookahs glamorous
BRAIN FREEZE Extra mint flavoured tobacco to give the smoker a numbing cool feeling while inhaling. TREASURE TRAIL A fruity flavoured tobacco with a sweet pungent taste. ROYAL TREATMENT Flavours such as Kashmir apple. SUMMER OF 69 Two flavours are mixed for a hot-and-cold effect. SEX ON THE BEACH Peach or orange-flavoured tobacco for a flirty mix.

ous generation, a hookah is to us," says Noida student Siddhartha Verma, 17. "It is a safer way to relax," he adds. A typical hookah session lasts up to an hour of long, deep puffs. A 2005 study by the World Health Organisation (WHO) revealed that the smoke inhaled in that one session can equal that from 100 cigarettes. The charcoal used to heat tobacco in the hookah also generates high levels of carbon monoxide, metals, and cancer-causing chemicals. According to a WHO advisory, frequent use of hookahs can lead to addiction. This is contrary to popular belief about the benign effect of small quantities of nicotine in hookah smoke. The advisory clearly states that hookah smoking is not a safe alternative to cigarettes. Amit Rakholiya, owner of Sky Garage, a popular hookah café in Pune, admits hookahs can be addictive. "Ninety per cent hookah users smoke it every day," he says. The ban has done little to deter anyone from getting their hookah fix. Many have switched to using hookahs at home. Sahil Chaudhury, 25, did just that after Bangalore banned it. "I decided, what the hell! Let me get one for home and I can smoke it whenever I want to, even after 11 p.m.," he says. "At Rs 250, a hookah can easily be bought by a youngster. A monthly stock of flavoured tobacco costs just Rs 300. Children usually come in a group and bully us into selling it to them," says Manish Kumar, a cigarette shop owner at PVR Saket, Delhi. Even in cities such as Delhi and Noida where hookah bars are not banned, many youngsters keep a sheesha at home. Nupur Sareen, 24, a Delhi University graduate, bought a hookah and loves assembling and smoking it everyday. "Banning hookah bars is not going to work as we can easily get it from a regular cigarette shop. You could call me a hookah addict since I don't know anyone in my peer group who does it as much as me," she admits. "It is cheaper and much more convenient. I can smoke whenever I want to and use whatever flavour I want," says Delhiite Mihir Srivastava, 34. The first hookah bar was opened in Chandigarh back in 2005. Called Mr Bean, it was an instant success. But it was the Mocha chain of cafes, with its

Arab lounge-like ambience, that popularised the hookah. Hookah lounges proliferated around the time cigarette smoking in public became legally untenable post-October 2008. As universities became smoke-free, smoking eventually became `uncool', associated only with the burnouts of the generation. Enter the innocuous-looking hookah, with its fruity flavours and tonguetwister names like Tang Trick, Play 20 and Treasure Trail. As Delhi University student Shivani Raizada, 18, puts it, "It's regal and flamboyant. It does not darken your lips, does nothing to your skin and doesn't give you bad breath. It's the classier substitute to cigarettes." The easy ambience at hookah bars added to their appeal. The dim lights, cushions in bright colours and snug corners with ample reclining room are a far cry from the stiff chairs and cheekby-jowl table settings of conventional restaurants. The music's young and peppy, with techno-lounge ruling the playlist. "I love the alternate culture hookah joints brought in. Unlike the formal setting of coffee bars, they introduced a more relaxed setting that has so much more visual appeal," says Chetan Shastri, a 26-year-old designer. "Most places that offer hookahs are youth-oriented and have a very relaxed atmosphere. People can sit there for hours, just chilling," explains Delhi-based psychiatrist Avdesh Sharma. When it comes to hookah flavours, the possibilities are limitless--ranging from fruity to spicy. A single flavour costs up to Rs 500. A double flavour is between Rs 500 and Rs 750. The more one spends, the more exotic it gets. Alcohol can also be used as a base instead of water and marijuana can be sprinkled on the tobacco for an intense high. Hookah bars and lounges also cater to private parties. Although their hookah sales are high, their major source of income remains food. An official ban on bars will not suffice. The Government needs to shut the smaller, hole-in-the-wall places and heighten awareness about the ill-effects of hookah smoking to curb the habit.
with Olina Banerji, Aditi Pai and Prachi Rege. Some names have been changed to protect identities.

58

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

