Mail

Hope of the Hopeless
JANUARY 2, 2012

In a year that witnessed the serial blasts of reputations, it took the audacity of a moral warrior from the rural remoteness of India to inspire a new iconography of heroism.

Anna Hazare's simplicity and humility made him a nonentity in the eyes of the UPA, which proved to be the biggest mistake. A real hero of the masses was born.
ANUJ SHANKAR,
Manali

Man on a Mission
Anna Hazare has rightly been chosen as the Newsmaker of 2011 ("Anna Hazare: Hope of the Hopeless", January 2, 2012). The Gandhian's crusade against corruption fired the imagination of more than a billion people in India. Hazare keeps launching hunger strikes, risking his health to make our elected representatives see reason. There is no doubt that Anna Hazare has taken pole position in the race to make India corruptionfree. Let us all follow him.
RAMONA BEHL, Mumbai

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

RAVI S SAHANI/www.indiatodayimages.com

MUKHERJEE

GOKARN

has been able to generate has alarmed the political class. We are lucky enough to have vibrant, young generation which is firm on ridding India of corruption. Let us all hope for a massive turnaround. We are all with Anna in his gigantic effort.
ABHIJIT SUR, Visakhapatnam

Roll of Dishonour The Rupee Tumble
Rather than rely on competition, exporters have, for long, been pressing the Reserve Bank of India to let the rupee float northwards ("Who Killed the Rupee?", January 2). The RBI's control of the rupee has been anything but market savvy. It is doubtful if the Government can do much to turn things around in the short term.
KANGAYAM R. NARASIMHAN, Chennai

Brahmins are pained at being scorned by the national media and depicted as villains ("Leftovers of Faith", January 2). Many Brahmins also take part in the madey snana.
J. AKSHOBHYA, Mysore

Hazare's fight against corruption is an obvious manifestation of his deeds and profession in earlier days. It is a fact that Anna is not above the Constitution but the huge response that he

The reasons for the fall of the rupee against the dollar, the flight of capital, and the uninterrupted rise in the cost of living index offer a very bleak prognosis for the country and the citizens. The failure on the part of RBI has brought negative sentiment into the Indian psyche.
C. KOSHY JOHN, Pune

If madey snana can purify and cure Dalits, why don't our scientists try developing a vaccine out of leftovers for our politicians, to rid our nation of corruption and poverty?
RADHESHYAM, Noida

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

``

``

Mail
Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor is Ready for the Future
nsustainable Cities' by Vikram Soni and Romi Khosla (December 19) has been written without any attempt to seek factual, updated information from the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor or the state governments. The article suffers from severe factual inaccuracies and infirmities, and is entirely based on a generic, broadbrush perspective plan initially prepared for the entire region. Since then, seven investment nodes have been taken up for detailed master planning and preparation of development plans where the issues and challenges of water availability have been examined. The master plans have been prepared by leading international consultants with vast expertise in water management, after talks with stakeholders and state governments. Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor is consciously adopting strategies not only for water management but also reducing carbon footprint through smart community, recycling of waste, transitoriented development and renewable energy concepts. It is for this reason that the geographical area of some investment regions has been scaled down and for others, water-consuming industries were radically reduced. The issue of over-stressed ground water in the region has been recognised in the master plans. An attempt has been made to reduce the demand of fresh water in industry by adopting innovative and futuristic water management techniques, ensuring higher degree of efficiencies in the management of water use in irrigation, adoption of latest technologies like desalination and recharging of ground water levels by way of artificial aquifer

35
YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
F E B R U A RY 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

U

recharge and recovery. The Government has also constituted a committee under the chairmanship of the secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, Government of India, and comprising members from Central Water Commission, Central Ground Water Board and secretaries of water resources departments from each of the six states. These have not been uploaded on the website based on our experience of middlemen procuring vast tracts of lands for speculative purposes in areas being pooled/procured for trunk infrastructure development. Urbanisation will be a defining feature in India's growth in the coming years. Several studies have projected that India will face an unprecedented scale of urbanisation. About 350 million Indians will move to cities by 2030. This number will double by the year 2050. The Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor aims to create seven new Industrial Cities with a dedicated high-speed container train between Delhi and Mumbai.

Back to the Ballot
With her uncanny instinct for the dramatic and the unexpected, Mrs Gandhi has effectively knocked the wind out of the sails of her critics, both at home and abroad, by a series of bold, decisive measures that are still sending shock waves throughout the country. In a historic, unscheduled 15-minute broadcast to the nation on the night of January 18, the Prime Minister calmly announced the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, the relaxing of the stringent, 19-month-old emergency regulations and confounded those who had been bemoaning the loss of parliamentary democracy in the country by announcing that general elections would be held in March. Subsequent announcements have tentatively fixed the polling date for March 16, leaving her political opponents less than two months in which to organize their appeal to an estimated electorate of 319 million who will vote at approximately 3,43,000 polling booths spreadover 542 constituencies.While Mrs Gandhi's motives for her inexplicable decision still retains a tinge of obscurity, her undeniably superb sense of timing has left her holding most of the aces. by G. Shukla & Dilip Bobb

M

ost cities in Europe and America were established in the 19th century when there was easy availability of land, gas and water. This led to sprawling cities with residence being far away from the place of work. We recognise that India is far more crowded and complex and requires a far more efficient and sustainable solution for servicing urban areas. We also realise that India is a late starter but can reap the advantages by using technology to learn from practises from other parts of the world.

AMITABH KANT, IAS, CEO and Managing Director, Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development Corporation, New Delhi

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

DESAI AND NARAYAN--AN UNEASYALLIANCE

10

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

