Na tion

ANUJ BIDVE
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

MURDER IN MANCHESTER
Anuj Bidve's killing shows up the racism latent in UK's multicultural society
By Aditi Khanna in London

A VIGIL IS HELD FOR ANUJ BIDVE (INSET) AT THE VERY SPOT HE WAS SHOT DEAD ON DECEMBER 26

he murder of an Indian student has sent shivers across an already freezing Britain over the Christmas break. Anuj Bidve was shot in the head at pointblank range in a suspected race attack in Manchester in the early hours of December 26. The 23-year-old micro-electronics post graduate from Lancaster University died soon after in hospital. Bidve was headed towards Manchester city centre from a hotel in Salford with nine other Indian students when he was approached by two strangers. After a "very short" conversation, one shot him before fleeing with his accomplice. Sheetal Patel, a cake-maker from Altrincham, held Bidve's hand as he lay dying. She later said that the shooting appeared "very racial" and that he would still be alive if he were white. Kevin Mulligan, divisional commander for Salford at Greater Manch-

T

ester Police, said: "We have not established a clear motive for the senseless murder of Anuj, and there is no definitive proof pointing to it being racially motivated. However, we are treating this as a hate crime based on the growing perceptions within the community that it was motivated by hate." A 20-year-old man from Ordsall, Salford, has been charged with the murder. Kiaran Stapleton, who calls himself "Psycho Stapleton", appeared before the Manchester Magistrate's Court on January 2 and has been remanded in custody till March 20. A trial date has been provisionally set for June 25 at the Manchester Crown Court, estimated to last up to four weeks. Three others arrested on suspicion of Bidve's murder have got bail until March pending further inquiries

and the bail of a fourth man, aged 19, has been cancelled. Greater Manchester Police has been working tirelessly to make amends for what has been perceived as a major lapse that Bidve's family found out about his death via a Facebook post nearly seven hours later. Chief Superintendent Russel Jackson and Family Liaison Officer Peter Christal Rickards visited the grieving family in Pune on January 3 to reassure them that the killer would be brought to justice. The victim's brother-in-law, Rakesh Sonawane, said the police apologised and said they had not handled the death "in the right fashion". He is now on his way, along with Bidve's father Subhash and mother Yogini, to the UK to bring back the body to Pune

SHEETAL PATEL, WHO HELD ANUJ'S HAND AS HE LAY DYING, SAID THE SHOOTING APPEARED "VERY RACIAL" AND THAT HE WOULD STILL BE ALIVE IF HE WERE WHITE.

for the last rites. The body has been handed over to the Indian High Commission in the UK following a second post-mortem. A BE (electronics and telecommunication) from Sinhgad Engineering College, Pune, Bidve left for Lancaster University in September 2011 to pursue a year-long MS in micro-electronics. His father, who works with a multinational, is believed to have taken a loan of Rs 20 lakh to fund his education in the UK. "The last four days have been traumatic because we were in the dark about when we would be able to see Anuj's body. All our relatives have been left shattered by the news," Subhash Bidwe said before leaving for the UK. Bidve, described by his family as "a loving son, a super-caring brother and first and forever a friend to many", was a bright student and was working on advanced research on microchips for heart patients. He had plans of returning to India after his course, although he had a possible job offer in Switzerland. According to his friends, Bidve was not accustomed to staying out late and would

usually return home by 10 p.m. On the fateful night, he was reportedly on his way to queue up for the traditional Boxing Day sales at Manchester city centre with his friends when he met with his untimely death. The outpouring of grief and support on Facebook reflects the worldwide shock at the gruesome killing. The family has been using it to speed up the process of recovering Bidve's body. On December 27, a day after Bidve was murdered, his cousin Suruchi Wagh put up a message on her Facebook page urging people for help. "My cousin, Anuj Bidve, 23, was shot dead in Manchester yesterday. Please help us get his body back to India! We appeal to the UK government, the Indian government and to all our well-wishers. Please help us if you can." An online group of 7,700 followers called `Justice for Anuj Bidve' has been organising candlelight vigils. Hundreds gathered for one such vigil on the night of January 2 at the scene of the crime in Ordsall Lane. A lamp-post became an impromptu shrine, adorned with candles, flowers and messages around Bidve's photograph. Mourners travelled from across the country, with one tribute capturing the sentiment of the crowd: "So sad. Such a waste of a young life. R.I.P. Anuj". Chairman of the Home Affairs Select Committee and Leicester East MP, Keith Vaz, who had visited the Bidve family in Pune, was also at the vigil. He said: "It's wonderful to see so many people here to show their support for a young man who travelled 10,000 miles from his home country and who was sadly gunned down beneath this lamp-post. What it shows is... a community united in its grief." Shocked residents were out in force and insisted that people of the area were "nice". "I just don't think the action of one person should be allowed to change that," said Julia Harper, 34. Sibi Joseph, a Manchester resident from Kerala, added that it is a "wonderful city" but when Indian students come to the UK, they are unaware of dangers that lurk in parts of the country. with Aditi Pai in Pune

FARMERS FROM SARAGWADA IN GUJARAT

GUJARAT

HINDI FOREIGN TO GUJARAT?
Court says notices must be issued in local language
indi is akin to a foreign language in parts of the country where it is not the native tongue, the Gujarat High Court has observed. A bench comprising Justices V.M. Sahai and A.J. Desai made the significant observation while passing judgment on the plea of 15 farmers from Saragwada village in Junagadh Municipal Corporation (JMC) limits, who approached it in 2010 against a notification by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) announcing acquisition of their land for the Jetpur-Somnath highway. The notice was issued in Hindi and English. The court has quashed the NHAI notification. Valjibhai Koshiya, one of the villagers asks, "Why should the NHAI not issue a notification in Gujarati?" Mehul Bhatt, manager, NHAI, says, "We are supposed to issue the notification in a vernacular daily, which we did." Leading high court lawyer Nirupam Nanavati says, "What the court actually meant was that the notification should have been issued in the local vernacular, Gujarati." The legal battle is on hold for now but there may be no end to a debate on the status of Hindi. by Uday Mahurkar

AP

H

38

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

JANUARY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

