SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

In the City
NIGHT CLUB

ONLINE

Happy surfing
Bored of shopping on the same old websites? We suggest you check out freecultr.com, the recent entrant in the world of online shopping. On offer are a wide range of garments and footwear for both men and women. Shop for T-shirts, trousers, shirts, dresses, tunics and sweaters. Joy: go for their super saver offers where you can buy two sweaters at the price of one.

Hop over
The much talked about club from Mumbai has finally arrived in Delhi. Known for its electrifying live gigs, blueFROG is considered the mecca of good music. Situated at The Kila, opposite Qutub Minar, this club is a slightly bigger version of its Mumbai counterpart--the dance floor and performance stage are in the centre of the club, while guests can be seated around in bF's signature neon-lit circular seating pods. With high expectations, we visited blueFROG a few days after it opened on December 22, looking forward to some great music and a fun night. Unfortunately, everything that could possibly go wrong that night, did. A mismanaged crowd outside, long queues of

STUFF

With love
Designer Raghavendra Rathore has introduced a collection of chocolates for Valentine's Day. Take your pick from flavours like Rum Dreams, White Pearls, Golden Coffee or Truffle Charm. Price on request To book orders contact info@rathore.com

guests waiting to be let in, and parking chaos were some of the hiccups. Just as we made our way in, the sound system went off due to some technical glitch. People were disappointed but a round of free drinks kind of made up for it. The music was back in about thirty minutes, and the DJ played a mix of hip hop and Punjabi music. On the bright side, the cocktails were excellently mixed, and the food wasn't bad either. Serving only finger food inside, there's an outdoor seating area,

The Courtyard, where you can indulge in fine dining. We suggest you wait for them to sort out their teething issues before heading here. Call ahead to find out about their live gig schedule or go to bluefrog.co.in Cover Charge Rs 300 per person on weekdays, Rs 600 per person on weekends Time 8.30 pm to 1.30 pm At blueFROG, The Kila,Seven Style Mile, Opposite Qutub Minar, Mehrauli Tel 26645298
I by

Replenish
Try JAFRA's Malibu Miracle face mask, made with glycerin, honey, barley and almond, it will keep your skin nourished during winter. Price Rs 750 upward At Odeon Cinema Complex, Connaught Place Tel 46448000; jafra.net.in

Accessorise
Check out Hidesign's party collection of bags, clutchesand belts. Price Rs 1,500 upward At Select Citywalk, Saket Tel 4054882; hidesign.com

Ekta Marwaha

STORE

Modern living
Denmark-based furniture brand BoConcept has opened its first flagship store in Gurgaon. The interior consultants here will first discuss what you're looking for and then show you around the store. Take your pick from a wide range of coffee tables, sofas, rocking chairs and more. Price on request At Global Foyer, Golf Course Road, Sector 43 Gurgaon Tel 0124 4233811; boconcept.in

Wrap in style
Stop by Monte Carlo's showroom and shop from the collection of Pashmina and Cashmere shawls. Price Rs 1,000 upward At 4/10 Main road, Roop Nagar montecarlocollections.com

Cool steps
These deep wine colour boots made of suede are part of Taramay's winter collection. Also available are quilted ballet flats and brogues. Price on request At WHITE, Hauz Khas Village Tel 46054817; taramaydesign.com

s-38

SIMPLY DELHI N JANUARY 2012

JANUARY 2012 N SIMPLY DELHI

s-39

