The Arts THEATRE

STAR MOMMYTURNS JATRABOUDI
A
woman in a sequinned, snuffcoloured, body-hugging dress shimmies on the stage at a school playground in Bhagabangola, a nondescript block in Murshidabad district of West Bengal, late on a November night. She gyrates to Tu cheez badi hai mast mast and the audience can't get enough. Meet Raveena Tandon, the new jatra queen of Bengal. The 37-year-old actor is part of a play, Rupshagorer Rupashi (Mermaid from the ocean of beauty), this season. The play by Ratnadeep Opera, one of 54 troupes in Kolkata that produce jatra, a folk theatre form that is more than 500 years old, will be staged till April in Bengal and neighbouring states. Think Tank, a media company from Mumbai, brought Tandon and Ratnadeep Opera, a relatively new entrant to the Rs 120-crore industry that employs over 1.5 lakh people, together. Tandon is the latest entrant to an arena that has seen Jaya Prada, Zeenat Aman and Shakti Kapoor perform live. "It is all about the excitement of performing live in front of thousands of people, a fabulous experience. More so when it is in front of a domestic audience," says Tandon. Haradhan Roy, 52, the group's manager, explains the rush of Bollywood actors to jatra: "Life

What does a Bollywood has-been do for work? Try jatra in West Bengal.
as an actor in Mumbai is mundane and stifling. These actors find a new lease of life in jatra." Utpal Roy, 62, a celebrated playwright and director in the industry, who has written the script for the play, has a different take. "It is all about the money. These actors have no currency in Mumbai, but still have to maintain a lifestyle. What better place than a Bangla jatra?" he says. Dhononjoy Mukherjee of D.M. Productions, whose troupe Shilpee Bandana is all set to launch Monica Bedi, 31, another Mumbai actor, better known as the former companion of jailed don Abu Salem, as the lead in Chiradiner Saathee (Companion for a lifetime), agrees with Roy. "Today, at 30, you are over the hill as a heroine in Mumbai. Bollywood stars having little work actually plead and lobby to work in a jatra," says Mukherjee, 50. Tandon is learnt to have signed a deal of Rs 3 lakh per show. Costs incurred on her stay and for a personal make-up crew are extra. With Ratnadeep Opera slated to hold around 80 performances this season in Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa and Assam, and with Tandon featuring in at least half of them, she gets to make in excess of a crore. In Rupshagorer Rupashi, Tandon plays the role of a zamindar's daughter whose clan has been killed by the estate manager for property. Her lines were sent to her in Roman script. While language isn't a major hurdle for Tandon--Bangla is closest to Hindi, she says and adds that she's done a film Laboratory and a reality show Dance Pe Chance Boudimoni in the "sweet" language--she gets to dance more than deliver dialogues in the play. The audience isn't complaining. It's money well spent as they get to see the Mast Mast diva in action. by Partha Dasgupta

RAVEENA TANDON DURING A JATRA PERFORMANCE

FEATURING IN AT LEAST HALF OF THE 80 JATRA PERFORMANCES SCHEDULED FOR THIS SEASON, TANDON GETS TO MAKE OVER RS 1 CRORE.

SUVASHIS MULLICK/www.indiatodayimages.com

64

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 16, 2012

