Nation

TAMILNADU
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com RAVI S. SAHANI/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Lakshmi Subramanian

olitics in Tamil Nadu is opaque at the best of times, near crisis it is foggier than Delhi in winter. In the absence of publicly stated reasons, speculation abounds about Tamil Nadu Chief Minister J. Jayalalithaa's terse statement on December 19, expelling Sasikala and her family from the AIADMK. Jayalalithaa, 63, is believed to have told Sasikala, 54, to pack up and leave Poes Garden in Chennai, a home she shared with the AIADMK leader for over 20 years. The long-time confidante, her husband M. Natarajan, three of her nephews--TTV Dinakaran, Baskaran and V.N. Sudhakaran--Natarajan's brother M. Ramachandran and Sasikala's relative Ravanan have been stripped of their primary membership of the party. Conspiracy theories are plenty. One such doing the rounds is that Sasikala's husband had ambitions of taking over after Jayalalithaa. The family is believed to have met at a hotel in Bangalore to decide on the future course of action, in the event of Jayalalithaa's possible conviction in the Rs 66-crore disproportionate assets case being heard at a court in Parapana Agrahara in Bangalore. The theory doesn't stop there. Apparently, help was also sought from an astrologer in Chennai to divine who in the family would be most capable of taking over the government and party. Jayalalithaa, the story goes, made her move after hearing about this meeting. She is reported to have held closed-door meetings with her Cabinet colleagues, loyalists and top police officials. Giving

P

CURTAINS FOR SISTER ACT
Jayalalithaa expels Sasikala from her home and party. Speculation runs rife in Chennai that the AIADMK chief's long-time confidante stumbled on ambition.

AIADMK CHIEF JAYALALITHAA WITH HER LONG-TIME ASSOCIATE SASIKALA

"Sasikala was definitely an extra-constitutional authority. She was more like a shadow chief minister."
S. V. SEKAR Former AIADMK MLA

credence to this is Tuglak Editor Cho S. Ramaswamy's meeting with her in mid-December. Jayalalithaa followed it by summoning state DGP K. Ramanujam. Cho refused to discuss the issue, but reports suggest that he played a crucial role in Jayalalithaa deciding to snap ties with her udan pirava sagothari (a sister who is not a blood relative). The very first indication of Jayalalithaa's shake-up was the transfer of the intelligence chief, P. Manickavel. Then DSP Thirumalaichamy, who is Jayalalithaa's personal security officer, was given marching orders for "passing on information" to Sasikala. Next came the suspension of top police official, P. Sivanandi, who reportedly met Sasikala's relative, Divakar. This was followed by the expulsion of another Sasikala relative, A. Panneerselvam, a retired IAS officer who had been appointed officer on special duty in the government. "It is a surprise. The two have fallen out in the past. But this time around, Jayalalithaa has thrown out the entire family from the party, which has never happened," says Janata Party state President V. Chandralekha, who introduced Sasikala to Jayalalithaa in the early 1980s. She adds a word of caution. "It is too early to say if the split is permanent." Sasikala's clout had grown to unprecedented levels. Ministers and officials reported to her. She even released a list of 160 candidates during the Assembly polls in May on her own, which Jayalalithaa had to withdraw and release afresh. Such was her hold that only those who had her blessings were able to secure tenders and projects. According to sources, Sasikala and her husband's attempt to corner the Rs 16,650 crore Chennai monorail project was brought to Jayalalithaa's notice. "Sasikala was definitely an extra-constitutional authority. She was more like a shadow chief minister," says S.V. Sekar, a former AIADMK MLA who was expelled in 2008 at Sasikala's behest. He adds, "I was expelled because I was Amma's loyalist and used to speak my mind to her." 

UPA ALLIES AJIT SINGH (LEFT) AND SHARAD PAWAR OBJECTED TO THE FOOD SECURITY BILL

FOOD BILL

UPA's Meal Ticket
The UPA's Food Security Bill is good electoral politics but is it good economics? Experts do not think so.

T

he Food Security Bill was adopted by the Union Cabinet on December 18 after Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar, a lone voice of powerful dissent, finally gave in to the majority. Pawar's objections, which centred around the huge fiscal costs of the proposed law, had held up the adoption of the bill at a Cabinet meeting on December 13. But even Pawar knew that his resistance would count for little in the passage of what is a pet project for Sonia Gandhi and the National Advisory Council. Speaking at a function organised by the Dalit Chamber of Commerce and Industry on December 16, Pawar had said, "The bill will be passed in Parliament but the real challenge is how much financial burden the Government will have to bear." The additional financial burden of the legislation is estimated to be Rs 27,663 crore per year. It will bloat the Government's total food subsidy bill to Rs 95,000 crore per year. The Government al-

ready spends Rs 40,000 crore every year on its flagship Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. The Government is struggling to contain the fiscal deficit. Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee had set a fiscal deficit target of 4.6 per cent for 2011-12. It will be at least one percentage point higher, without factoring in the extra cost entailed in the implementation of the new bill. India's current account deficit is estimated to be almost 4 per cent of GDP this financial year. A combination of large deficit with low capital inflows could make emergency imports difficult. "We cannot afford it. This will create an entitlement that will not only put pressure on the fiscal side, but also put pressure on the external account," says FICCI SecretaryGeneral Rajiv Kumar. Cost is not the only factor. At the Cabinet meeting of December 18, newly inducted minister, Ajit Singh of the Rashtriya Lok Dal, reportedly

LENS

44

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

NEW

NEW

Na tion
The additional burden of the food bill is estimated to be Rs 27,663 crore per year. It will bloat the total food subsidy outlay of the Government to Rs 95,000 crore per year.
raised concerns about the leaking Public Distribution System (PDS), which will continue to be the delivery system for the Right to Food. Singh said the PDS should be fixed before such a scheme is launched. Economist Laveesh Bhandari agrees. "There are better ways of providing food to the people than through a leaky PDS." The Government should have invested in agriculture and infrastructure instead, thus raising farm output, reducing waste and enabling poor farmers to feed themselves, he feels. Bhandari is also concerned that the proposed bill could kill agriculture by creating a monopoly of the Governme-nt. In order to meet its commitments for the bill, the Government will have to procure at least 10 per cent more foodgrain than it does. That will mean 40 to 50 per cent market share. "It will wreak havoc on the open market. Prices will go up. The poor buy from open markets as well," says a senior official. A senior bureaucrat says, "Where will the Government store the additional grain it procures? Even at current procurement levels, wheat rots every year." Pessimists are now pinning their hopes on a watering down of the Food Security Bill in the standing committee of Parliament which will vet it before it is tabled, possibly in the Budget session. The Government, however, has its share of supporters. Economist and former Union minister Yoginder Alagh says, "I think the bill is a step in the right direction." He feels that the argument about increased expenditure and a scarcity of resources is fallacious. "We do find the resources to subsidise exporters, so why not food?" he asks.
by Dhiraj Nayyar

KARNATAKA
BK RAMESH

BLOCKED BY ASECTWAR
By Sowmya Aji

(ABOVE) PEOPLE PROTEST AGAINST THE BMIC PROJECT, IN BANGALORE; (LEFT) GOWDA DEMANDS THE ARREST OF ASHOK KHENY (BELOW)

The Bangalore-Mysore expressway has run aground and turned into a fight between the state's two major communities, the Lingayats and the Vokkaligas
Bangalore city, the construction of the actual corridor up to Mysore has barely begun. The project has instead been mired in serious land acquisition controversies, with opponents branding it a real estate project. Sectarian politics and an antifarmer perception have left the project, that needs over 20,000 acres of land, hobbled. Its prime promoter, NRI Ashok Kheny, 61, who now harbours political ambitions in Karnataka, is a Lingayat from the backward Bidar district. The project received its biggest boost under Lingayat chief ministers J.H. Patel, from 1996 to 1999, and Kheny's current supporter and political comrade-in-arms B.S. Yeddyurappa, who is no longer in office but still wields immense influence in the government. While Lingayats and Dalits figure among the land losers, most of the belt between Bangalore and Mysore is the stronghold of the land-owning and farming community, the Vokkaligas, which swears by former prime minister H.D. Deve Gowda and his JD(S). The project company, with the acronym NICE (Nandi Infrastructure Corridor Enterprises Limited), is openly supported by the pro-Lingayat BJP. Kheny did get support from a Vokkaliga chief minister, S.M. Krishna, but this was perceived as due to the latter's `pro-development' and `anti-Deve Gowda' tilt. "The issue of project versus land losers has been reduced to a caste war between the Lingayats and Vokkaligas.

There is not much the government can do to fix it, as NICE has won all its land acquisition cases right up to the Supreme Court," a Karnataka cabinet minister told INDIA TODAY. The situation has been getting progressively ugly due to raging anger among land losers who gave up their land for prices ranging from a few thousand to a couple of lakhs per acre and saw it being re-sold in crores. This anger is said to have been fanned further by caste considerations and votebank politics. On November 17, a land-losing farmer, Siddalinga Prabhu, 31, a Lingayat who was strongly in the Vokkaliga camp, was brutally murdered, allegedly by the project's supporters. Five persons arrested by the police reportedly `confessed' that they killed him over an altercation. Deve Gowda, the prime mover behind the protests against the project, sat on a day-long hunger strike on November 22 demanding the arrest of Kheny and a BJP leader, Rudresh, who, he alleged, had instigated Prabhu's murder. He has demanded an inquiry by the CBI into the case as he believes the BJP administration and police machinery "would not do justice to Sidda-

made a member of the Legislative Council if I gave up the agitation. I refused. Now, they have decided to target my followers and supporters," he said. The deceased farmer's wife Mamata, 24, swallowed sleeping pills and tried to commit suicide on November 21. She was saved, but the suicide note that she had written stated that she was depressed as Kheny and Rudresh had not been arrested for her husband's murder. Kheny expressed outrage and denied all knowledge of Prabhu's killers. He and his representatives stated that all the land required for the project in the region, including those owned by Prabhu and his uncles, were in the possession of NICE since 2004. Gowda's supporters contest this, with Panchalingaiah stating that Prabhu's family still cultivates the disputed land. Kheny hits out at Gowda. "Him (Gowda) alleging that we needed the land, which we already have, is beyond ludicrousness," he said. The face-off is now set to take another legal turn with Panchalingaiah and others filing a case in the Karnataka High Court seeking a CBI inquiry. "A similar case in Andhra Prad-

BK RAMESH

WHILE LINGAYATS AND DALITS FIGURE AMONG LAND LOSERS, MOST OF THE BELT BETWEEN BANGALORE AND MYSORE IS THE STRONGHOLD OF THE VOKKALIGAS.
linga Prabhu". He also raised the issue in the Lok Sabha on December 21. Panchalingaiah, 58, a BJP-turnedJD(S) leader who heads the BMIC Bhoo Swadhina Virodhi Raitha Horata Samithi (farmers' committee against BMIC land acquisition), told INDIA TODAY: "Kheny and Rudresh offered Prabhu, who was fighting along with all of us against them, a sum of Rs 50 lakh to drop out. He refused. Prabhu and his uncles own land near the NICE road and have refused to give it up. His uncle, Basappa, has filed an FIR against Kheny and Rudresh accusing them of instigating the murder." Panchalingaiah said the BJP government supported Kheny completely. "Kheny offered me Rs 10 crore and promised that I would be esh brought even the powerful former minister G. Janardhan Reddy down. We are hopeful that Kheny will also not get away with his land grab," Panchalingaiah said. The state government, headed by D.V. Sadananda Gowda, is in a fix. The Chief Minister is a Vokkaliga too, but from the coast rather than the region where the dispute is on. He has expressed regret for the "politicising" of the murder. Vokkaligas have not been able to meet the Chief Minister as he is reportedly toeing the `Lingayat' line of Yeddyurappa. Thus the Home Department, headed by another Vokkaliga, R. Ashok, has given Kheny and Rudresh a clean chit in an affidavit filed in court. The next hearing is in mid-January. 

A

ring of villages surrounding Bangalore city has become a battlefield for the ruling BJP and its ally-turned-rival, the Janata Dal (Secular) (JD-S). A long-drawn caste war is being fought here between the state's two major communities, the Lingayats and the Vokkaligas, over a long-pending infrastructure project. The Bangalore-Mysore Infrastructure Corridor (BMIC), conceived as a road that would ensure seamless connectivity between Karnataka's two major cities, Bangalore and Mysore, has become anything but that. While a 9.1-km link road and a 41 km peripheral road have been built around

46

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

47

