Na tion CHANDIGARH

PUNJAB CONGRESS SLIPS
Erosion of vote share among Chandigarh's voters could spell trouble for Congress
he results of the recently concluded Chandigarh civic polls would have set alarm bells ringing in the Congress camp. The party has suffered a 1 per cent dip in its vote share while rival BJP has gained by 5 per cent compared to the last elections in 2006. The trend is being attributed to a record turnout of 59 per cent as opposed to the 43 per cent in 2006. The Congress has two seats less than the last time while the BJP's tally has increased by four. If the trend gets mirrored across urban Punjab, it could pour cold water on the Congress's plans of a return to power in the Assembly polls in the state in 2012. The perception of a drift at the Centre and the several controversies dogging the UPA might have played upon the voters' minds. The results indicate a shift in the Punjabi urban middle-class's preferences. Political analyst and Director of Chandigarh's Institute of Development and Communication Pramod Kumar says the results show a growing frustration among the middle classes with price rise, corruption and
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

ANURADHA PALDHE WITH A PHOTO OF HER SON, AMAR

T

the Centre's apparent arrogance in dealing with dissenters. He says urban Punjab, with its predominantly middleclass Hindu voters, will reflect similar concerns. In the backdrop of the Congress's chief critics, Anna Hazare and Baba Ramdev, vowing to campaign against the party in Punjab, the analyst believes urban Punjab might follow Chandigarh's lead. Scores of normally reticent, affluent, educated residents came out of their homes with a spring in their step. And there are no points to be gained for guessing who they must have voted for. Several of them were apparently incensed by the treatment meted out to Hazare and Ramdev or simply angry at Delhi's incapacity to tackle spiralling inflation. The BJP camp has reason to celebrate. Says Manoranjan Kalia, 53, former minister and the party's chief spokesperson in Punjab, "People are angry with the Congress and this will work to our advantage in Punjab too."

Total number of seats

26

BJP WORKERS CELEBRATE IN CHANDIGARH

CONG: 11,BJP-SAD: 12,BSP: 2,IND: 1

He is confident that the anger against Delhi will neutralise any anti-incumbency the BJP-SAD combine might face in the Assembly polls. The coalition has been in power for the past five years in the state. Kalia, who was removed as Punjab industries minister after the CBI named him in a corruption case earlier this year, says, "BJPSAD is the natural choice for voters distressed with inflation, corruption and misgovernance at the Centre." Though senior lawyer Anupam Gupta, 55, agrees that national concerns may have played a significant role in the outcome of t he municipal corporation elections, he says the verdict is more a reflection of public fatigue. As the Congress has been in power in the municipal corporation for the past 10 years, the lawyer believes "people have grown weary of the corruption, criminality and arrogance of power mirrored in the old faces". Gupta, however, says the trend is "unlikely" to spill over to the rest of Punjab as the BJP-SAD combine stands equally sullied after five years in power. "I find it difficult to imagine how Anna Hazare could campaign against the Congress and in favour of the BJP-SAD," he says. Former Punjab chief minister and state Congress chief Amarinder Singh is, however, confident of victory. "We will form the next government and Punjabis, both rural and urban, will help us to do it. Chandigarh can be no yardstick of the mood in Punjab," he told INDIA TODAY. Amarinder and his party may hope to find comfort in the fact that most national movements have left Punjab untouched. Be it L.K. Advani's rath yatra, the demolition of Babri Masjid or Anna Hazare's anti-corruption movement, all have at best evoked a tepid response.
by Asit Jolly

MAHARASHTRA

A Mother Battles for the Truth
Eighteen years into her diver son's death, a retired Mumbai teacher alleges a cover-up by the navy

A

nuradha Paldhe lost her elder son Amar, a diver with the Indian Navy, on September 21, 1993, during an operation off Kakinada in Andhra Pradesh. Eighteen years on, the 66-year-old retired Mumbai school-teacher is engaged in a legal battle with the navy for the truth behind her son's death. She has not spent a single rupee from the Rs 10 lakh she received as compensation and won't touch it until she finds out the truth. The navy, on its part, has offered explanations ranging from heart attack to accidental death. According to the navy's version of events, Amar, 23, was one of four divers scheduled to jump from a helicopter. The plan was for them to jump from a height of 15 metres into the water and swim to the nearest island. The first

two divers jumped safely. The third sustained injuries after the jump. He was picked up by a rescue boat and taken to hospital. Amar then jumped into the water, surfaced and disappeared all of a sudden. On seeing Amar surface, the helicopter left to fetch another batch of divers while the rescue boat was busy with the third diver. When officers realised that Amar was missing, they began a search within 10 minutes. His body finally was found by fishermen three days later, nearly 750 metres from the jump site. Paldhe's reached Visakhapatnam on September 24, 1993, to claim Amar's body. Her suspicions were fanned by the navy's papers on Amar's death which stated that it could not recover the body because of high tide. The Meteorological Department clarified that high tide was at 5.42 a.m. that day whereas the accident took place at 6.50 a.m. The navy cited heart attack as a possible cause of Amar's death but it found no mention in the post-mortem report. The report also revealed that there was no water in his lungs, so there was no possibility of death due to drowning. A navy officer, Commodore J. Verghese, sent Paldhe a letter on June 8, 1994, holding the operation incharge guilty of negligence. Paldhe filed a suit in a Kakinada court in 1997. "We did not want money. We just wanted to know the reason for Amar's death," she says. The navy lawyer told the court that Amar was trained to dive from 10 metres whereas during the exercise the helicopter was at 15 metres. "Why was my son asked to jump from 15 metres?" asks Paldhe. "The navy has killed my son. I have enough reason to level this allegation." The Kakinada court in April 2004 held negligence by navy officers to be the cause of death and ordered the navy to pay Paldhe Rs 10 lakh as compensation. The navy challenged the judgment in the Andhra Pradesh High Court on September 23, 2004. It was Paldhe who taught her son to swim. "Amar wanted to become the best diver in the navy and serve the country," she says. by Kiran Tare

NEW

