The Big Story RUPEE
The Big Dipper
The Indian currency has lost heavily against the dollar, pound and euro in the past 12 months
Value of $1 in rupees 44.67 69.45 68.90
1.042

Flight of Capital
Outward investment has exceeded FDI in 2011
5.656 5.478

Markets in Bear Hug
The Sensex has mirrored the decline in the rupee
Inward Outward Aug 1 18,314

Trade Deficit
Imports are far in excess of exports,pressuring the rupee 8.4 6.3
Mar Apr May Jun Jan Feb Jul Aug Sep
Graphics: ANIS SAYYED/www.indiatodayimages.com

52.96

(Figures in $ billion)

4.664 3.700

Value of £1 in rupees Value of 1 euro in rupees

82.03

Inward Total 23.686 Outward Total 29.727

3.074

3.221

3.121

2.830 2.288

2.358

2.694

3.460 1.160 2.064

1.099

1.075

59.37 Jan 3,2011 Dec 19,2011 Jan 3,2011 Dec 19,2011

1.274

1.390

1.765

-4.5 -7.5 -9.7
Source: BSE

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Dec 20 15,175

(Figures in $ billion) Source: RBI

-11.9 -11.7 -15.6 -14

WHO KILLED THE RUPEE?
By Dhiraj Nayyar

The Government and RBI are guilty. They did nothing till it fell steeply against the dollar. Then, their intervention mattered little.
rate in mind." Gokarn ruled out defending the rupee using foreign exchange reserves. Unwittingly or not, he had stabbed a rupee that was already bleeding. Gokarn's remark came at a particularly inopportune time. The eurozone crisis had taken a turn for the worse in November. The fall of an ineffective Greek Government and the imminent resignation of the tainted Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi were meant to inspire confidence in investors and lenders. Instead, there were serious doubts over whether the new technocratic governments in the two countries would have the political legitimacy to push tough austerity measures that were necessary to rein in the debt overhang. In the US, a congressional committee with members from both major political parties, the Democrats and Republicans, failed to reach an agreement on an acceptable debt ceiling for a struggling American economy in mid-November. Those events together increased global economic uncertainty and triggered a flight for safety as investors cashed out of emerging markets like India, selling rupees to buy dollars, thus driving down the price of the Indian currency. The decline in the BSE Sensex mirrored the decline in the rupee. Gokarn's statement greatly accelerated a decline that may have happened more slowly because of external factors. The rupee fell below Rs 50 and had lost another 10 per cent of its value in less than a month, hitting an all-time low of Rs 54.20 on December 15. The RBI, under pressure from the finance ministry, intervened on the evening of December 15, banning certain forms of speculation in the rupee. The rupee recovered marginally to Rs 52.70 the next day. In the interim, Gokarn performed a 180-degree turn. On December 3 he said, "Not using reserves to prevent currency depreciation poses the risk that the exchange rate will spiral out of control, reinforced by self-fulfilling expectations." Two weeks later he hardened the RBI's stance on defending the rupee when he said, "The measures we have already unveiled are not the only ones we have. There are a number of other measures we can use." But the damage had already been done by him. The Government and RBI were prepared for a decline of around 10 per cent. They were disconcerted by a 20 per cent tumble. By August, the Government was anticipating a depreciation of the rupee as a fallout of its failure to contain inflation for over one-and-a-half years. An alibi was ready. A 10 per cent decline could have easily been ascribed to a worsening of the economic environment in the US and Europe. Says Commerce Secretary

PRANAB MUKHERJEE Finance Minister

SUBIR GOKARN Deputy Governor, RBI

32

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

``

``

he rupee seemed to have discovered a stable life at between Rs 44 and Rs 45 per US dollar for the first seven months of 2011. Suddenly, in August, it began its slide to Rs 50 when it breached the Rs 46 mark. In the next three months, by the first week of November, it had lost 10 per cent of its value hitting the Rs 49-50 exchange rate band. The Government and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) were unconcerned. A depreciation of the rupee could have helped boost a sagging growth rate by buoying exports. On November 8, Subir Gokarn, deputy governor of RBI outlined the argument for no intervention. "In exchange rate policy, rupee is a floating currency. It remains that exchange rate is market determined and there is no intent to intervene with a particular exchange

T

``

I WELCOME THE RESOLVE TO CHECK SPECULATIVE INTERVENTIONS IN THE FOREX MARKETS, WHICH AMONG OTHER FACTORS HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THE SHARP DEPRECIATION.

``

THE MEASURES WE HAVE ALREADY UNVEILED ARE NOT THE ONLY ONES WE HAVE. THERE ARE A NUMBER OF OTHER MEASURES WE CAN USE...TO BRING STABILITY.

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

The Big Story RUPEE
Rahul Khullar, "The difference between inflation in India and inflation in the US has been around 8 per cent per annum for the last two years. In fact, except Brazil and Turkey, no other country has had inflation as high as ours in the past year. That was eroding our competitiveness while the nominal exchange rate remained at the Rs 44 level." A 10 per cent fall in the value of the rupee would have corrected that problem. Says Khullar, "I think Rs 49-50 per US dollar is a fair value." Sources in the finance ministry confirm that the Government was not averse to a 10 per cent depreciation in the rupee. By boosting exports, and making domestic industry more competitive vis-à-vis imports, a 10 per cent depreciation could have boosted a stalling growth rate. The fact that exchange rates of other major emerging economies like China had not declined against the US dollar by similar magnitudes would have given Indian exporters an added comparative advantage. Investment banker K. Vaidya Nathan believes that the decline in the rupee works in India's favour, "I think plausibly argued that the correction has gone far enough," he told INDIA TODAY. At levels below Rs 50, the costs of depreciation, primarily its effect on inflation and the fiscal deficit, start outweighing the benefits, mainly of additional exports. Explains Khullar, "On the import side, there is a 100 per cent pass-on in prices. The price of key imports like crude oil, edible oil and pulses will immediately rise by 20 per cent." This has serious implications for the Government's fight against inflation. It also has serious implications for the fiscal deficit as it raises the Government's fertiliser and oil subsidies bill. The Government is already forecast to overshoot its fiscal deficit target of 4.6 percent for the financial year 2011-12 by one percentage point. That will not inspire confidence in foreign investors, particularly foreign institutional investors who have been pulling out of Indian stock markets in 2011. The Government's inflation managers are not the only concerned interest group. Large Indian corporates have an estimated $150 billion in out-

THATSINKING FEELING

Experts believe the rupee's fall could have been stemmed with timely intervention

ASHIMA GOYAL Professor,
IGIDR, Mumbai

BIBEK DEBROY Professor, Centre for
Policy Research, Delhi

JAYANTH VARMA Professor,
IIM Ahmedabad

RAJESH CHAKRABARTI Professor, Indian School
of Business, Hyderabad

Q

SHOULD GOVERNMENT OR
The nature of intervention is important. If RBI gives the impression that there will only be one-way intervention, no one takes forward cover.

RBI HAVE INTERVENED EARLIER?
I don't think so. The RBI did okay. The falling rupee itself may have prompted more FII withdrawals, which could have been prevented.The RBI had enough forex reserves.

Yes.A more substantial early intervention would have prevented the widespread speculation in currency markets on the decline of the rupee.

Q Q Q

WHY THE SHARP DECLINE?
Policy uncertainty, high import bills, FII outflows Large current account deficit, inflation, drying up of FII flows
FII outflows

The euro crisis, drying up of portfolio inflows

20%

is the fall in the rupee against the dollar since August 1, 2011

is the decline in the value of the BSE-30 Sensex since August 1

17%

is net FII outflow between January and October 2011

$2.7 bn

WHAT IS THE IMPACT ON INF LATION?
0.25% Difficult to say Significant

1% increase in core inflation

ing. Says a senior official, "You can curb some forms of speculation but you can't change the expectation of market players." The RBI could make a forceful intervention to shore up the rupee by selling dollars (and buying rupees) from the $300 billion it holds in foreign exchange reserves. Vaidya Nathan believes that the RBi can use this `war chest' to defend the rupee. But others believe that the reserves may not be enough to beat back market forces. Global trading in the rupee is around $75 billion a day. A substantial intervention is therefore necessary to manipulate that market. Writes economist Ajay Shah on his blog, "If RBI sells $80 billion in reserves, the market will see that. They will know that further defence of the rupee is going to be tough (since $300 billion in reserves is starting to look like a small hoard), and speculators across the world will start betting that RBI's defence of the rupee will fail." Agrees Jayanth Varma, "The reserves are roughly comparable to the levels which the Koreans found to be inadequate in 2008." Says a senior policy official, "The RBI has changed its stance after the hysteria created by corporates, exporters and the media. The truth is that there is not much the RBI can re-

domestic and foreign investors that the relative supply-demand relationship for dollar versus rupee is determined. There is no plausibly positive texture to the India story anymore in the minds of foreign investors; and, increasingly, in the minds of the largest Indian corporates." That is a remarkable turnaround from even a year ago. Says Mistry, "India was generally rated through 2000-10 as one of the three best emerging markets to invest in. Now it is ranked the worst of some 40 emerging markets to invest in whether from the viewpoint of FII or FDI. The natural consequence is the markdown of the rupee by even more." Mistry says that he hasn't seen such pessimism about India abroad since the crisis of 1991. The only sustainable way to resurrect the rupee is to revitalise the India story. Mistry has a number of suggestions. "We need rapid improvements in public and corporate governance. The Government should relax immediately the absurd policies restricting FDI to various limits whether 26 per cent, 49 per cent or 74 per cent. And swifter action needs to be taken to bring closure to the never-ending soap operas on a variety of corruption scandals." Officials in Government are pessimistic. Says a senior bureau-

WHAT IS THE LOWEST LEVEL TO WHICH RUPEE WILL FALL?
57 Impossible to predict Impossible to predict

Will appreciate to 50

CORPORATES HAVE AROUND $150 BILLION IN OUTSTANDING DOLLAR LOANS. A 20 PER CENT DIP IN THE RUPEE HAS INFLATED THEIR DEBT.
alistically do in the short term to stem the decline." He adds, "In any case, how is the government or RBI to determine what the right price for the rupee is. That task is best performed by market forces." Percy S. Mistry, chairman of financial advisory firm Oxford International and former chairman of a high-powered Government committee on financial sector reforms, believes that the collapse of the rupee is driven more by a vote of no-confidence by foreign and domestic investors in the India story than by external factors or even inflation. Says Mistry, "It is in the community of crat, "All our vital economic indicators are heading in the wrong direction. The current account deficit is growing, the fiscal deficit is above danger levels, inflation will persist at 9 per cent, and growth is below 7 per cent. In such a scenario, the rupee will decline even more dramatically." If the rupee-dollar exchange rate dives to Rs 60 or below, more than the RBI, it is the Government, having mismanaged the macroeconomy and brought policymaking to a standstill, that will have to take all the blame for killing the rupee. with inputs from Rajesh Sharma
and Shravya Jain

China would love to have the problem that we have. The crux of the economic brawl that the US has with China is that the yuan is being kept artificially depreciated. Now the market is doing the job for us." The Government would have bought this argument had the rupee not started to sink below the Rs 50 per dollar mark. Once it fell below Rs 50, officials in the finance ministry believed that it had "overshot" a reasonable correction. Jayanth Varma, professor of finance at IIM Ahmedabad, agrees with the finance ministry on this overshoot. "It can now be

standing dollar-denominated loans that are due to be repaid in the next six months. Many firms did not hedge their exposure. A 20 per cent decline in the rupee has inflated their debt burden. India Inc has, therefore, been exerting pressure on the Government and RBI to stem the fall of the rupee. Jayanth Varma believes that this should not be the Government's concern. "Corporates should have been hedging their risk," he says. In reality, the Government has little choice but to heed India Inc's concern. Industry has already been reeling under the effects of a high interest rate regime.

The Index of Industrial Production for October was ­5.1 per cent. Industry is clearly not in a position to take another major blow. Ironically, even exporters, the one interest group which ought to have welcomed the decline of the rupee, are unhappy about the 20 per cent depreciation. Says Ramu S. Deora, president of the Federation of Indian Export Organisations, "For an average exporter in any sector other than commodities, 25-75 per cent of inputs are imported." That raises costs. The additional cost is not necessarily covered by additional revenue. Says

Khullar, "When buyers abroad see a depreciation of this magnitude, they negotiate with Indian exporters to split the gains. Indian exporters have to give in because the importers have bargaining power. They can always buy from elsewhere." Deora and other exporters are making precisely this point in their meetings with the RBI and the commerce ministry. To make matters worse, the Government may not have the firepower to contain the rupee at a Rs 4950 level in the short term. The effects of RBI's measures announced on December 15 are already evaporat-

34

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

JANUARY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

