Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

PICTURE PERFECT
By Pramod Kumar K. G.

TOP10
FICTION
1. Revolution 2020
Chetan Bhagat, Rupa Ravi Subramanian, Rupa

A monthly list of national bestselling books compiled for INDIA TODAY by ORG-MARG

Photographer Dayanita Singh's foray into photo fiction breaks new ground in visual storytelling

ayanita Singh's House of Love heralds an unusual new genre of photo fiction, following no chronology or allowing us the luxury of anticipating fixity. Here colour creates characters and photographs make the plot, with empty HOUSE OF LOVE spaces and prose creating myriad byDayanita Singh situations, all animating the book with an Text by: Aveek Sen Radius Books ephemeral storyline. Price: RS 1,500 The opening chapter Continuous Cities Pages: 198 sets the tone of the book by its use of a fauvist palette of cities singed in blue. It is the BETWEEN THE COVERS subsequent use of a bluish-green shade in Colour creates The Ambulance that sets us on a rollercharacters and coaster ride of photographs, both in colour photographs make and black and white, that populate the the plot,while empty book. Colours are the characters of this spaces and prose novel. Moving intermittently from the create the myriad azure blue that jackets Departure Lounge situations. to the startling white of Being of Darkness, colours magnify the photographs and define the characters. Those seeking a conventional narrative or a theme will seek but in vain; a folk tale would be our closest approximation. A plethora of characters and settings come together at the finale justifying their presence and very often their absence in the story. Her colour photographs in their varied hues are a result of a conscious effort to implement on paper the decisions envisaged in her mind at the close of the camera's shutter. Primacy is always given to the fidelity of the eye and not to pigments that colour paper. House of Love perhaps comes closer in explaining the prodigious and fecund mindscape of Dayanita Singh. Her mulish abhorrence for captions finally finds a voice and clear reasoning in Aveek Sen's luminous text. It is almost as if the artist was waiting for a writer who journeyed with her, visibly and invisibly, through her work and her life, seamlessly jotting down her innermost thoughts. Towards the end of the book, there is an apocryphal question and answer session between the artist and the writer. What is purported to be Dayanita's answer to a question on the importance of national or cultural context in understanding a photograph is nothing short of an artist's bold political statement. This slim volume packs myriad punches and brings to the fore the thinking artist and her determination to explain her vision through a photo narrative. Don't be fooled, this is the work of a very clever storyteller plotting a whodunit and in no hurry to help us reach the end. 

D

2. The Litigators John Grisham, Hodder & Stoughton 3. The Incredible Banker 4. The Wandering Falcon
Jamil Ahmad, Hamish Hamilton

5. The Collaborator
Mirza Waheed, Penguin

S R E L E S T S E B L

NON-FICTION
1. Get To The Top
Suhel Seth, Random House

2. Does He Know a Mother's Heart?
Arun Shourie, HarperCollins

3. Steve Jobs: The Exclusive Biography
Walter Isaacson, Little, Brown

4. The Secret Letters Of The Monk
Who Sold His Ferrari Robin S Sharma, Jaico 5. No Higher Honour Condoleezza Rice, Simon & Schuster

OTHER INDIAN BOOKS IN THE TOP 20
FICTION
6. The Good Muslim
Tahmima Anam, Pengiun

7. Last Man in Tower
Aravind Adiga, HarperCollins

8. Noon
Aatish Taseer, Fourth Estate

9. The Secret Of The Nagas
Amish Tripathi, Westland

10. River Of Smoke
Amitav Ghosh, Penguin

NON-FICTION
6. 24 Akbar Road
Rasheed Kidwai, Hachette

7. 7 Secrets Of Shiva
Devdutt Pattanaik, HarperCollins

8. 7 Secrets Of Vishnu
Devdutt Pattanaik, HarperCollins

9. The Difficulty Of Being Good: On The
Subtle Art Of Dharma Gurcharan Das, Penguin
Participating bookshops: Delhi: Om Book Shop, Teksons, Land Mark, Crossword; Mumbai: Oxford, Shah Book Stall, Land Mark; Bangalore: Gangarams, Land Mark; Hyderabad: Walden Book Link, The Book Point; Kolkata: Oxford Books, Modern Book Depot, Family Book Shop; Chennai: Land Mark

For the complete list click to: www.indiatoday.in

64

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

