UP FRONT

by GOPALKRISHNA GANDHI

NEWSMAKER ANONYMOUS
t is April 9, 2011. Anna Hazare has won a signal in them, but a new calm as well. Swami Agnivesh takes victory. The Government has accepted each of his the mike. He introduces a grand-nephew of Shahid demands. A joint committee comprising his colleagues Bhagat Singh. The gathering erupts with joy. Like everyand ministers, 50-50, will draft a Lokpal Bill. one present, I feel history. The good man says Government's acceptance of Representatives of a popular campaign will join ministers `on par' and draft a bill which our sovereign legislative Anna's proposals yesterday--April 8--was a good augury. body will then debate. This is unprecedented. It adds a April 8 was the date, he says, on which, in 1929, Shahid Bhagat Singh hurled a bomb into the Central Legislative new and creative dimension to our democracy. Assembly so that `the deaf may hear'. The day is historic, without the least doubt. The gathering explodes into a delirious applause. I go to Jantar Mantar to join the thousands who are gathering there to felicitate the man who has brought this `Bhaaarat Maataa Kiiii....' comes the cue from the stage. about and, overnight, put corruption on notice. He has A few thousand voice-boxes respond straight-from-theturned our passivity about corruption on its head, as also belly-heart-and-lungs: `Jaaaai!' My mind is in a swirl. April 8, 1929... That was under our complicity in it, and our cynicism about ever seeing it end. What seemed unchallengeable, indestructible, a per- the Raj ...But...April 8, 2011... under Swaraj...? But before I can figure that out, Anna is at the mike. `No manent `given' is now cowering and in retreat. The crowd at the venue is a mix of many kinds--young violence' he says. `Remember, no violence.' Come August and crabbed, rich and vagrant, `high' and flat-out. It is 15 and no Lok Pal , he says, I will march to the Lal Quila. also emotionally churned up--jubilant and curious, ex- The throng disperses charged, energised. I do not mind hilarated and unsure, sloganeering and quietly reflective. the shove, the push. The tug and the press give me a sense There are NRIs there, clutching `safe' water-bottles. of the `ocean of India's humanity' Tagore has described And NRAs--­No Residence Anywhere--clutching leaflets in `Mahamanaber Sagar...'. On every face is a radiance, on every face a new hope. that are being distributed. I have not seen so many people thronging together and To be sure, there are many weirdos around as well , lookyet staying so thoroughly disciplined. There is not a single ing like Limca Book of Records finalists. And men in sadhusannyasi garb holding trishuls policeman doing any crowdSAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com and the tricolour, a dubious control, though there are many combination. One holds on the road outside. Volunteers a placard with unacceptable wearing makeshift badges are slogans against Manmohan on duty, helping the crowd to Singh. He ignores my glower. stay in line and keep moving. A As I get onto the road, column of people has a dynamic my pocket feels light. I have of its own. It heaves forward by been `relieved' of the 200 rusome inner propulsion. Several pees or so I was carrying. hundred become one heave, Opportunism will manufacture one impulse. Everyone wants to its chance. Onlookers wonder see the man, get a measure of at this old guy looking bewilhim, interpret his gestures, his dered when he should be smile, his frowns. jubilant, excited. I do not exWhen the concourse is diplain my bewilderment. That rectly in front of Anna Hazare, it would spoil the mood. pauses, raises its hands in naThe year is Anna's. But maskar, responds to a slogan's `newsmaker of the year' is the start--`Bharat Mata Ki...' with unknown Indian who has powits finale--`Jai!' and moves on. ered India's campaign against Patriotism is a longing. corruption, given it body and is Honesty is a dream. The year is Anna's. But `newsmaker its very soul. And who deserves When my turn comes to be a clean, honest India, beyond a face to face with Anna, I instincof the year' is the unknown Indian corruption-free government. tively do the same. who has powered India's campaign Kiran Bedi controls the against corruption, given it body crowd with gestures that have Gopalkrishna Gandhi is former and is its very soul. the police-woman's impatience governor of West Bengal

I

10

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 2, 2012

