The World MALAYSIA

RETURN OFAREFORMER
By Roshni Jayakrishnan in Singapore

Court clears Anwar Ibrahim of sodomy charges trumped up to destroy his career. Can he become the next PM?

W

hen the Kuala Lumpur High Court judge delivered a not guilty verdict in the Anwar Ibrahim sodomy trial, the former deputy prime minister was taken aback. Ibrahim, 64, told reporters after his release on January 9, "To be honest, I am a little surprised." The final scene of the 13-year politico-legal drama was over faster than anyone expected. Judge Zabidin Mohamad Diah took only two minutes to give his ruling, saying DNA samples used as evidence might have been contaminated and that he could not convict in the absence of other corroborating evidence. The judgment has brought the curtains down on one of the most controversial chapters in Malaysian political history. Ibrahim has been on trial for sodomy twice and has always maintained that the charges were politically motivated. He was deputy prime minister between 1993 and 1998. Ibrahim was booted out of the government in 1998 for challenging the authority of then prime minister Mahathir Mohamad. In 1999, Ibrahim was sentenced to six years in prison for corruption, and in 2000, to another nine years on charges of sodomy. The court reversed the second sentence in 2004, paving the way for his release. In July 2008, he was arrested again on sodomy charges, just after he had led a three-party opposition coalition to unexpected success in the elections. Ibrahim has gone on to become a symbol for change in not just Malaysia but across the region. He brought the opposition together, posing a challenge to the ruling National Front. So what does the verdict mean for Malaysia? Has the victory given Ibrahim an edge over his fiercest
IBRAHIM (LEFT) SPEAKS TO SUPPORTERS AFTER THE VERDICT IN KUALA LUMPUR
GETTY IMAGES

critic and rival, Prime Minister Najib Razak? Professor James Chin at Monash University in Malaysia believes the acquittal does not really do much for Ibrahim. He says, "The sodomy issue would have been more effective had Anwar been found guilty. But now it is unlikely to be a major campaign issue." Political analyst Ooi Kee Beng explains, "One of the biggest challenges for the Pakatan Rakyat (the three-party opposition coalition) is to convince voters that it has the leaders needed for a change in paradigm." Other Malaysian political analysts see the verdict as a sign that the judiciary in Malaysia is really independent. They say it disproves Ibrahim's claims about government interference in the judiciary, especially since Judge Diah had earlier come under fire from his counsel for being biased. Ibrahim's camp, led by stalwarts including Azmin Ali, deputy president

Says Anshar, "In the past 42 months, since the accusations against Ibrahim were first made, he has used the court solely as a political campaign platform. Now he can no longer use court for political sermons and that will even out the playing field." He believes, "Ibrahim will use his freedom to claim that the government tried to fix him, and that his victory was just a fluke." The impact of this verdict will most certainly be seen in the forthcoming polls, as Razak tries to hold on to power and Ibrahim's attempts to improve upon his threeparty coalition's 2008 success. Elections in Malaysia could be held anytime between June 2012 and March 2013, say analysts. Cleared of the sodomy charge, Ibrahim is all set to hit the campaign trail. He will use the verdict to galvanise the Opposition. "We are ready for any eventuality; we have been ready for elections for over a year

"In the coming election, this corrupt Government will be toppled."
ANWAR IBRAHIM, Former deputy PM of Malaysia of his party, Parti Keadilan Rakyat, is thrilled with the acquittal. "This is not justice for Ibrahim alone, but for all those who care about freedom and justice," says Ali. He adds, "We will continue to explain to people that Ibrahim is a victim of a malicious conspiracy." But Ali is also quick to counter claims about the judiciary's independence. He says that is a claim made by Razak and Mahathir. The deputy chief of the Keadilan party says public perception is very different. "Malaysians feel there is a need for reform in the judicial system, and there are very few judges left who speak from their conscience," he claims. So how does the verdict change the face of Malaysian politics? Both sides have different views on its impact. Azmi Anshar, chief editor of one of Malaysia's most prominent dailies, The New Straits Times, believes this will finally end Ibrahim's "unfair advantage" over his rivals. now. The verdict has given us confidence that we can capture Putrajaya (the federal administrative centre of Malaysia)," says Ali. Anshar believes Razak has an edge. He says, "Either a status quo will be maintained or the government will scrape through. But it will be wrong to underestimate the popularity of Razak, who managed to draw in the support of many disgruntled voters during his last campaign." Now that he is a free man, unless the Government appeals, Ibrahim seems to be even more determined to ensure that his three-party opposition coalition is a force to reckon with in Malaysian politics. This was foremost on his mind as he walked out of the court on January 9. He tweeted moments after the judgment, "In the coming elections, the voice of the people will be heard, and this corrupt government will be toppled from its pedestal of power." I

44

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

45

NEW

NEW

