Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE UNBLINKING EYE
An infamous crime puts the spotlight on the seamy side of Mumbai's glamour machine
foreign dancers, small town hopefuls, and jaded moneybags. She gives us the broken parents left beost books about Mumbai tell us what the hind, most of them bewildered by their children, city is. Very few tell us what it can do. who emerge as dissembling strangers. The Death in Mumbai is one of those. It talks Grovers, who never knew the full extent of their of what it did to Maria Susairaj, a young, son's love life. The Susairajs, who continue to live in ambitious, morally ambiguous woman from denial of Maria's reality. The Jeromes, who cannot Mysore. To Emile Jerome, an upright naval officer believe their "beautiful, dutiful" son could be a DEATH IN from her home town who excelled at everything. To cold, calculating murderer. But most of all, Baghel MUMBAI: A Neeraj Grover, a man on the make, from a well-to- is our guide on a tour of a certain kind of world TRUE STORY byMEENAL do family in Kanpur, who jumped jobs as often as where the men are looking for emotional BAGHEL he changed girlfriends. Journalist Meenal Baghel succour and the women are just looking for sex on Random House has written a crackerjack of a book, in prose that is call, where the rules are being reversed and relaPrice: RS 299 as elegant as the crime is baroque. It is a rare tionship guidebooks are being rewritten. As one of Pages: 231 howdunnit which is as much a story of three lives Maria's sometime friends, Kiran, says: "With women getting so forward, it has become impossiBETWEEN THE COVERS as it is a study of a city in all its ugliness. ble to find peace in relationships." Its underbelly has been chronicled before, in Baghel's bookdoes Baghel also gives us just ghoulish minutiae in cinema more than take us SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com through an exotica tour and in books, by its greatest enough of soap queen Ekta of Mumbai glamour.It troubadours, even those, like Kapoor's crazy lifestyle, provides a fascinating Ram Gopal Varma, now fallen where the Gayatri mantra insight into a crime plays non-stop, Diwali card on bad days. But never has its that had the country parties are set up like a Las disparate bits been assemriveted.It reveals the Vegas casino, and women bled together with such milidarkest heart of our sport emeralds the size of tary precision. Baghel has modern urban exotic animal's eggs. Of Ram written a fascinating account existence,at its Gopal Varma's caustic riffs on of what goes on just before the horrendous worst. power and sex. Of Mumbai camera comes on. The TV Police's investigation. Of the camera that makes young quiet desperation of tattooed girls from small towns into Conans and mini-skirted living room staples. The Barbies milling outside movie camera that makes Oshiwara studios wanting to Ekta Kapoor's TV staples into become famous. As Rakesh superstars. And the news Maria, the police officer who camera that records it all unwas investigating the case blinkingly, breathlessly, altells Baghel, "Children these ways unforgivingly. The days have become like gladiMaria-Emile-Neeraj story has ators, left to deal with beasts on their own." elements of all these. The last chapter, as the narrative winds down to The studios of Oshiwara where the gods of entertainment pluck people from obscurity and hurl the chilling crime, is feral. The congealing blood, them unsuspecting into the cruel world. The news- the carving knife, the duffel bag, the room freshpaper and TV houses that feed on stories that ener, and the body dismembered at the joints. The scream sex and murder. The First World homes facts have been recounted before in every media with Pedro Almodovar DVDs, 24X7 air conditioning outlet in dramatic detail, but it doesn't stop you from and foreign wines, which clash with the extreme re-reading them, riveted by what you know will follow. This is ambulance chasing at its best, but also, poverty on its streets. But Baghel, a fine reporter, does more than take for what it reveals about the dark heart of our us on an exotica tour of Mumbai glamour, with its modern urban existence, its horrendous worst. I
By Kaveree Bamzai

M

60

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

