NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA

HUNTSMAN WITH HIS DAUGHTERS GRACE MEI AND ASHA BHARATI

Getting Personal
The forthcoming US presidential elections turned nasty when supporters of Republican presidential hopeful Ron Paul uploaded an ad against rival Jon Huntsman on YouTube.The ad, called the Manchurian Candidate, suggested that Huntsman was weak on China because one of his two adopted daughters was born there. The video also showed Huntsman, who is a former ambassador to China, speaking Mandarin and a photo of him with his other daughter, adopted from India, with the words "Shares our values? A man of faith?"written on the screen. It's now off YouTube.Thankfully.

buzz feed

In the Pipeline
The iPad 3 is to be launched in March. So they say. With Apple, everything is a rumour. Here are some more: It will have a high-resolution retina display, double of what we have today. It could have a smaller tablet to counter the cheaper Kindle Fire from Amazon. But that would mean going against founder Steve Jobs' stated disgust for smaller screens. There could be a more powerful A6 processor. It will make the present A5 look like a duck out of water. As Jeremy Horwitz, editor-inchief of iLounge, tweeted: "I'd show you a picture, but there's..nothing to be seen..you could walk past this new iPad..and have no idea that anything had changed." But then Apple loves to surprise.
by Nandagopal Rajan

``

REUTERS

The ad is quite funny in its tactlessness,once you work through all the racism and vomit a few times."
www.gawker.com,political website

blog watch

Mommy's Mad
A writer, a wife, a mother, politically incorrect, no fence-sitter, non-conformist-with-streaks-of behenji, are some of the titles this anonymous blogger gives herself.A journalist by profession, she's been writing The Mad Momma , featuring her kids the `Brat' and the `Bean'and her husband `The Other Adult' , for three years now. Her most recent rant is about the necessity of coaching classes for kids."For me, it's less racking of the brain and more torture on a rack as I try to explain to him evaporation and why S sounds like Z when writing cheese and please..."

web wow

Seriously Funny
Are you bored of real news? Satire is doing a brilliant job of competing with alleged facts in American websites like The Onion. India now has its own version with The Unreal Times.While ours declares that it is a fake news website, The Onion proudly calls itself `America's finest news source' .
FROM THE UNREAL TIMES

@

Kingfisher to stow away passengers in overhead cabins to cut losses. M.S. Dhoni believes current series is a level 2 dream turned nightmare from Inception.
FROM THE ONION

SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

Witch who granted Beyonce fame returns to claim first born. Obama to create 17 new jobs by resigning and finally opening that restaurant.

viral video

Two literary gems that got people talking, tweeting, blogging and posting.

World at a Click
What happens when a man quits his job, picks up a camera and starts travelling? Catch the video, Speeding around the world in under five minutes, to know. International photographer Kien Lam compiled his travels across 17 countries in 343 days and created the breathtaking time lapse video that had almost a million views in 10 days.

Dare to Disconnect
Pico Iyer lives and writes across the world but he has never used a cellphone, hasn't tweeted and doesn't access Facebook. His article, The Joy of Quiet, is for those who cannot imagine a life without texting, tweeting, or checking their email."The more ways we have to connect, the more many of us seem desperate to unplug," writes Iyer.

smart sheet

`My Voltaire'
When British-born writer Christopher Hitchens passed away, his longtime friend Salman Rushdie wrote about `my Voltaire'on www. vanityfair.com."I have often been asked if Christopher defended me because he was my close friend.The truth is that he became my close friend because he wanted to defend me."

FILM MAGIC

