Signature

by S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

THE CHINA COMPLEX
hy can't we be like China? In the comparative literature of national aspiration, this question is getting a bit tired--and tiring. We are familiar with seminar rooms swelling with awe-struck balladeers of the soaring Middle Kingdom. We have not yet finished reading the screeds that extol how the emperors in pinstripes dream the future--and realise it with such perfection. We are also used to those die-hard Third Worldists who never stop rhapsodising the Thunder of the East as a desirable counterpoint to the imperial transgressions of the West. China is the exclamatory republic and the latest red-star struck fan is Prime Minister Manmohan Singh. "Over the past few decades, India's relative position in the world of science had been declining and we have been overtaken by countries like China," he said at the Indian Science Congress in Bhubaneswar recently. It is quite okay for the Prime Minister to be worried about his country's diminishing status in science and technology. It is also okay for him to pull the scientists out of their smugness with words that inspire, even if in the end he sounds so predictably platitudinous. But is it okay for our head of government to suffer from China complex, and show its worst symptoms in public? He could have made the point without the un-prime ministerial Look-at-China! The mythology of China is built on statistics. The erstwhile revolutionary wasteland of the East is now the world's fastest growing economy; and the biggest bazaars of social capitalism are rising on what was once the graveyard sprawl of Maoism. It is glorious to be rich, as long as the rich doesn't ask questions in a coun-

W

try that continues to value the intelligence of silicon more than the mind of its own citizens. Beyond the glitz of the shopping malls is the shadowy gulag, home to writers and artists and other dissidents who dare to shatter the idyll of the People's Republic. "Be quiet, we'll make you happy" is the oldest conceit of totalitarianism, and China today is the biggest marketplace of happiness. Shoppers are expected to mortgage their conscience to the state. It is not a Marxist paradox; it is just another instance of Chinese ingenuity in improvisation. For once, the market is essential for the perpetuation of the Party, which is Leninist in practice. Engaged in the twin tasks of the preservation of the Party and the expansion of the market, the residents of Zhongnanhai, the Kremlin of China, are eternally paranoid--about enemies within and without. The Party cannot afford to lose the market, where everything is on sale except that stale western import: democracy. Saboteurs in the Chinese mall call it the fifth modernisation. In an ideal scenario, an Indian prime minister who believes in his own country and its democratic tradition, no matter however chaotic it is, should have no reason to be intimidated by the next door dragon state. Manmohan Singh is not that prime minister; he is not going to be the one talking about the possibilities of modernisation in a democracy. He is the failed moderniser who has shown no resistance to the worst instincts of democracy. China has the power of the first world and the paranoia of a tin-pot dictatorship. A country that is not at peace with itself cannot be a global leader. China dazzles only those who cannot make use of democracy.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

IN AN IDEAL SCENARIO, AN INDIAN PRIME MINISTER WHO BELIEVES IN HIS OWN COUNTRY AND ITS DEMOCRATIC TRADITION SHOULD HAVE NO REASON TO BE INTIMIDATED BY THE NEXT DOOR DRAGON STATE. MANMOHAN SINGH IS NOT THAT PRIME MINISTER; HE IS NOT GOING TO BE THE ONE TALKING ABOUT THE POSSIBILITIES OF MODERNISATION IN A DEMOCRACY.

S I G N P O STS
MESSI

HONOURED Barcelona football star Lionel Messi, with the Fifa Ballon d'Or award for the best player of 2011. The Argentine international has become the second player in history to win

the prestigious award three times in a row. FINED Anti-corruption campaigner and a key Team Anna member Shanti Bhushan, over Rs 27 lakh for evading stamp duty to the tune of Rs 1.35 crore in the purchase of a prime

property in Allahabad. FINED Bollywood actor Dia Mirza, Rs 1 lakh for carrying undeclared goods worth Rs 2 lakh upon her arrival from Bangkok at the international airport in Mumbai. INVITED Thailand's first

woman PM Yingluck Shinawatra, to be the chief guest at India's SHINAWATRA Republic Day parade celebrations on January 26. Shinawatra will arrive in India on January 24.

