Na tion RAILWAYS
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

ANDAMANS

inesh Trivedi is seeking a bailout of Rs 10,000 crore for the railway ministry from the Government. He can earn that much and more from the surplus railway land by leasing it to build hotels, malls, warehouses and residential complexes. The 43,000 hectares (one lakh acres) of vacant land--nearly the size of Puducherry--at the disposal of Railways is worth an estimated Rs 22 lakh crore. All Trivedi has to do is to allow the Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) to do its job. RLDA was set up in 2006 to generate revenue for Indian Railways through commercial exploitation of huge tracts of vacant rail land by leasing it to developers. The surplus 43,000 hectares is just 10 per cent of Railways' total landholding, which is 4.23 lakh hectares. Of the total, 3.19 lakh hectares is being used for railway operations, including tracks, stations, offices and colonies. Even if a small percentage of the vacant land is used commercially, Railways can tide over its cash woes. However, instead of giving a free hand to RLDA, Railways has tied up the organisation in red tape, making it nearly redundant. The first setback came from an order of then Cabinet secretary K.M. Chandrasekhar in March 2011, which said that no government department could "alienate" or lease any land without prior approval of the Cabinet. "This was in reaction to the Adarsh Housing Society scam. However, RLDA should have been exempted, since it was set up by an Act of Parliament as a statutory body," says a senior Railway Board official.Then railway minister Mamata Banerjee should have taken

D

DANCE OFSHAME
Endangered Jarawa tribals are used to provide cheap entertainment for tourists
ance now...dance!" says a voice. The four children, three of whom are bare-breasted adolescent girls, do as they are told, their orange skirts swirling as they gyrate, clap and sing for the camera. In the corner, a girl stands completely naked but for a small cloth she is holding to cover her privates. "Come on now...dance," the voice says, camera panning to her. A video released by Gethin Chamberlain, a journalist with The Observer, a UK-based newspaper, has blown the lid off how members of the 55,000-yearold Jarawa tribe in the Andaman islands are being used as cheap entertainment for tourists. This is not an isolated incident, according to Survival International, an NGO that works for tribes across the world. "This happens quite regularly. We uncovered a similar human safari in 2010," says Sophie Grig, a senior campaigner who has worked to protect the tribe since 1995. She adds that some tour operators advertise these services, although such operations are more secretive now. "At the moment, if you give operators enough money, they will bribe people to let you through," she says. According to Chamberlain, a policeman was reportedly bribed with Rs15,000 to get tourists to interact with the tribe, with a population of 365. The fact that the video doesn't have a date is being questioned. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands police say the video is at least 10 years old. "It is a lie that policemen were involved. We will register a case against whoever has shot that video," says S.B. Deol, Director General of Police, Andaman and Nicobar Islands. According to him, such an incident could not occur now. "Strict traffic restrictions have been implemented
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

D

since 2002. It is impossible for anyone to interact with tribals," he says. NGOs like Survival International are convinced the video is recent, while environmentalist Samir Acharya of the Society of Andaman Nicobar Ecology doubts this. However, Denis Giles, Director of SEARCH, an NGO in Andamans, says that he hears of incidents involving junior police officers. "The police have done a lot for the reSURVIVAL INTERNATIONAL

LEASE LAND TO GET BACK ON TRACK
Railways needs to look within to raise money instead of asking the Centre for a Rs 10,000 crore bailout
up the issue with the Government, especially since RLDA was her brainchild, conceived during her first stint as railway minister as part of the NDA government in 2003. It had started functioning during the tenure of Lalu Prasad Yadav as railway minister. But also from Banerjee's Trivedi, Trinamool Congress party, is doing nothing to get Cabinet approval for 138 sites, which had been identified all over the country. His ministry has not even finalised the Cabinet note. The 138 sites account for 1,500 hectares of land valued at Rs 6,000 crore. Some projects, which had already been sanctioned before the Cabinet secretary's order, have also been stalled. The biggest involves land near Sarai Rohilla railway station in the Capital. Realty developer Parsvnath Group was awarded the lease for development of 16.5 hectares of land for a 90-year period in 2010. As part of the agreement, the company was to make residential flats and a commercial complex on the land and keep aside 5.5 hectares for the railways. The developer had even paid Rs 330 crore to RLDA as the first instalment of the Rs 1,651 crore lease amount. RLDA gave the money to railways, but Parsvnath has still TRIVEDI not been given

THE ILLEGAL COLONY ON RAILWAY LAND NEAR DAYA BASTI STATION IN DELHI

WASTE LAND
Total railway land

Even if a small percentage of vacant land is used commercially, Railways can tide over its cash woes Value of * vacant land Rs 22 lakh crore Encroached land

Total Land under use for rail operations vacant land

4.23
lakh hectares

3.78
lakh hectares

43,000
hectares

2,240
hectares

possession of the land. Now, the developer wants to scrap the contract and has been asking RLDA to return its money. "If this is the fate of one of the first and the biggest land deals, who will want to come and do business with Railways," says the Railway Board official. Another huge project involving 4.5 hectares of prime land in Bandra East, valued at Rs 4,000 crore, also remains suspended. This, too, was cleared for commercial use and lease of 45 years. RLDA Vice-Chairman Pankaj Jain says only three projects were unaffected by the Cabinet secretary's order and are in progress: one in Bangalore, valued at Rs 50 crore, and two smaller projects in Gwalior and Gaya. All other projects stand suspended. "We have been writing to the Railway Board regularly to expedite the projects," says Jain. Board sources reveal that all the projects are still stuck at their level, as the Cabinet note has not yet been prepared. Once the note is ready, it will go to the law and finance ministries for comments and only then will it go to the Cabinet. "It does not seem likely that the Cabinet will give approval easily, considering the sour relations between the government and Trinamool Congress," a railway official says. I

A JARAWA TRIBAL IN THE ANDAMANS. A BRIBE GETS TOURISTS ACCESS TO THEM.

gion, but they still need to sensitise and educate officers that these tribes need protection and shouldn't be a source of amusement," he says. Irrespective of the date of the video, environmentalists and tribal rights campaigners blame the Andaman Trunk Road, built in the late 70s, as a major cause for the exploitation of Jarawas. The 300-km road connects the capital Port Blair in the south to Mayabunder in the Union territory's northern end and passes through the Jarawa region in western Andamans.
by Lakshmi Kumaraswami and M.G. Radhakrishnan

*Railways' own valuation
38
INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012 JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

39

NEW

