Na tion

INDIA-CHINARELATIONS

China threatens, India backs down. In business disputes, as in diplomatic rows, the dragon dominates.
By Shafi Rahman and Sandeep Unnithan

INDIACROUCHING
India has reacted meekly to Chinese incidents of high-handedness.

PROVOCATION
JANUARY 2012 China denies visa to IAF officer hailing from Arunachal Pradesh, who was to attend a bilateral defence exchange programme. JANUARY 2012 Indian diplomat S. Balachandran faints in Yiwu, China, after appearing in court for Indian workers who were illegally detained. DECEMBER 2011 China protests Dalai Lama speech in Kolkata. Writes to state chief secretary, asking the Chief Minister and Governor not to attend. NOVEMBER 2011 China postpones November 29 border talks after India refuses to prevent Dalai Lama from attending Buddhist seminar in Delhi. SEPTEMBER 2011 China opposes oil prospecting by Indian firms in the South China Sea by calling it a military build-up.
PTI

RESPONSE
India gives in to Chinese pressure and takes his name off the list of officials travelling to China. India summons China's deputy chief of mission in Delhi. Issues advisory asking Indian businessmen not to do business in Yiwu. Ministry of External Affairs protests against breach of protocol. Bengal Governor M.K. Narayanan attends Kolkata meet. Dalai Lama attends Buddhist seminar, but no Indian government official is present. India sticks to its stand with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh stating exploration of oil and gas is a purely commercial activity. cident killed 41 and three Chinese engineers from the firm building the chimney were arrested. One engineer has been allowed by the Supreme Court to visit his country for three months. The other two were also allowed to visit China in 2011. "The inquiry commission set up by the Government is yet to submit its report. Even two years after the incident, the case is languishing in the district court," says Laxmi Chouhan, a social activist based in Korba. With bilateral trade and investments on an upward spiral, there is an immediate need to address disputes in a fair manner. "The Government should set up a joint dispute-resolution mechanism with China to deal with these disputes and smoothen out trade relations between the two countries," says Mohammed Saqib, secretary general, India-China Economic and Cultural Council. Clearly, India will have to breathe fire at the dominant dragon. I

n December 6, China refused to stamp a visa on the passport of senior IAF officer in Arunachal Pradesh, Group Captain M. Panging. He was to be part of the team scheduled to travel to Beijing on a defence exchange programme. India buckled under Chinese pressure and took his name off the list. In November, China postponed border talks after India allowed Dalai Lama to attend a Buddhist seminar in Delhi. This new belligerence extends to the way China does business with India. On December 15, two Indian workers, Shyamsunder Agrawal and Deek Raheja, were illegally detained in the Chinese trade hub of Yiwu, after their Yemeni employer decamped without paying his dues. The incident escalated into a diplomatic row between the two countries after an Indian diplomat, S. Balachandran, fainted in court while trying to ensure their release on December 31. The only response from the Ministry of External Affairs was to forbid Indian businessmen from trading in Yiwu and summon the Chinese deputy envoy in New Delhi to complain about mistreatment of the diplomat. When Indian firms try to get their dues, they can hit a dead end. Mumbaibased Scania Global Infraprojects advanced $4 million [Rs 20 crore] to Shaanxi-based Baoiji Oilfields in 2007 to buy drilling rigs. When the Chinese firm failed to deliver the equipment, Scania asked for a refund in December 2007. For four years, the Chinese firm waffled. Finally, in November, Scania approached the Chinese Embassy in Delhi with a request to bring the Chinese company to the negotiating table. It's yet to get a response from the mission. In 2011, Indian firms had disputes

O

A DIAMOND TRADER RELEASED BY CHINA ARRIVES IN MUMBAI

CHINA PLAYS ROUGH
amounting to $3.4 million (Rs 17 crore) with Chinese firms. In 2010, Indian companies were defrauded by Chinese firms to the tune of $5.4 million (Rs 27 crore) and in 2009, it was $7.8 million (Rs 39 crore). Now, after mounting complaints from Indian businesses, the Government has released a list of 48 Chinese firms with whom Indians have been asked not to trade. India and China have bilateral trade of $59.2 billion (Rs 2,96,000 crore), but the balance of trade is heavily skewed in favour of the People's Republic. In the last financial year, India imported goods worth $39.8 billion (Rs 1,99,000 crore), whereas exports were far less at $19.4 billion (Rs 97,000 crore). The reverse is true of investments. Attracted by cheaper production costs and robust infrastructure, Indian firms have invested $433 million (Rs 2,165 crore) in 676 projects in China. China's investments

"India can educate and guide its people doing business in China to abide by our laws and regulations, practice honesty and operate legally."
HONG LEI, Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokesperson

in India are worth only $300 million (Rs 1,500 crore), but well protected by the Chinese Embassy. National Security Adviser Shivshankar Menon, India's key interlocutor on the boundary dispute, thinks trade disputes are "corollaries of an intensification of economic and social engagement". China, however, blames Indian businessmen for defaulting on payments and the Indian Government as well as the media for hyping the Yiwu incident. The state-owned Global Times blames the conflict on "a confrontation between nationalist sentiment of Indians and the steady market regulations of Yiwu". "It is interesting to see whether Indian businessmen or Yiwu

market will lose the prestige when news of this incident spreads," the paper says. Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said: "China hopes the Indian side can positively educate and guide its people doing business in China to abide by our laws and regulations, practice honesty and trustworthiness and operate legally." But clearly, it's not just Indians who are fuming. Recently, the US consulate in Shanghai warned its businessmen that disputes in China are not always handled through the courts. "Incidents of American citizens being detained by workers or gangs being hired for the specific purpose of extorting money have gone up. Sometimes they are physically assaulted," it said. India, however, remains weakkneed while dealing with China. India's response to the September 2009 collapse of a chimney at the Bharat Aluminium Company Limited (BALCO) power plant in Korba in Chhattisgarh is a case in point. The ac-

36

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 23, 2012

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

37

NEW

NEW

