BYWORD

by M.J. AKBAR

BEDSIDE MANNERS
he much-married diva Elizabeth Taylor had an unan- election. She could easily have 30 or even more MPs if polls swerable riposte for a pesky reporter after one of were held this year, with commanding Cabinet portfolios her husbands, Mike Todd, went up to the Great in the next Central government. Some of the butter salesHollywood in the Sky. "Mike's dead," she said, "what do you men in her entourage might even be encouraging dreams about the Prime Minister's gaddi. want me to do, sleep alone?" Ideally, Congress would have wanted Mamata Banerjee Elizabeth Taylor should be formally recognised as the defining icon of contemporary Indian politics. True to merge her party into the national organisation, but the love has its limits. Romance is nice, but not essential to fill Lady of Calcutta has tasted independence, always dear to a bed. What do you expect political parties to do when a a Bengali's temperament. Conversely, the patterns emergpartner is dead or departed? In practical terms, the ing out of Uttar Pradesh suggest a slow transition that frucsecond is worse than the first, just as a divorcee has more tify into a Congress-Samajwadi Party alliance that could, in a few years, lead to merger. Congress is not as hopeless in problems than a widow. Alliances do not come apart for tactical reasons. They UP as it is in Bihar, but nor is it a natural claimant for power. disintegrate over strategic interests. In Bengal, Mamata It needs some bulk infusion of ground presence, in addition Banerjee and Congress are not squabbling. They are to its high-flyer leaders. SP provides that. There are no sepreparing for the inevitable battle for the same space. Both rious ideological differences between the two parties, given Mamata and Congress know that the Left Front will need a that ideology has shrivelled into a corpse anyway. SP faces one serious problem, however. For nearly half decade in Bengal before it can revive, but that there is an election due in another four years. The Congress will be a century UP has been a rewarding playground for fracMamata's principal opposition in the next Assembly elec- tious parties. The reasons are slowly becoming irrelevant. tions. For the Congress, the Trinamool Congress is an UP's political consciousness, shaped by the freedom moveusurper and a maverick intervention in what should have ment, as a bulwark of nationalism and natural home of prime ministers, will reassert itself, and sooner rather been a natural return to power for the Congress. The Congress lost Bengal in stages, through a two-step than later. The next general elections could well be the last alliance between a breakaway Congress faction and in which regional parties get any mileage; after that the state will gravitate between the the Left. Its first manifestation, in the SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Congress and the BJP. Regional leaders 1967 elections, was the United Front. It will have to choose in order to survive. took ten turbulent years, including a The appetite for separate identity will bloody Naxalite insurrection and the fade once the vote begins to wither. Emergency, for the Left Front to Mulayam Singh Yadav was weaned emerge as the natural ruling force of by Dr Ram Manohar Lohia's socialist, Bengal in 1977. While there is no ceranti-Congress thesis. His son and heir tainty in politics, it is possible that Akhilesh wears the party red cap but Congress will mount a similar two-stage has no real interest in such baggage. assault on Mamata Banerjee, which Mulayam is a child of the Hindi movemeans an initial alliance with the Left in ment of the 1960s. Akhilesh is a child of the next Assembly polls. Mamata the English movement that has been Banerjee is certainly worried about such a remarkable fact of the last two such a possibility, not least because it decades in India. The British Raj has makes sense for those determined to been replaced, after an uncertain gap of dislodge her at any cost. a few decades, by an English Raj. Its Congress and Left are not in a hurry powerful bureaucrats in media have albecause time is always on the side of Alliances do not come ready discovered, to their delight, that Opposition. Mamata Banerjee is in a apart for tactical reaAkhilesh is "one of us". The English-cenhurry for precisely the same reason. She has to maximise her strength at sons. They disintegrate tric Rahul Gandhi and Akhilesh Yadav make comfortable partners, and might the peak of her popularity. There is over strategic interests. wonder why they are contesting on sepafter all only one direction in which you Mamata Banerjee and can travel from a peak, downwards. arate symbols, and for the same Muslim Mamata Banerjee has a vested interest Congress are preparing vote, by a general election in 2019. in a mid-term poll, because she (along Both in the contrivance of Hollywood for the inevitable battle and the simulation of politics, marriage with Jayalalithaa) is certain to for the same space. make huge gains from a Parliament is a pact held together by convenience.

T

JANUARY 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

NEW

