ELECTIONS 2012

PUNJAB INDIA TODAY-ORG OPINION POLL

HEADING for a
Congress, led by Captain Amarinder Singh, is in the lead, but the Akalis are pulling up on the campaign run.
By Asit Jolly

PATIALAPEG

D
PARTY CONG SAD/BJP+ OTHERS TOTAL

eputy Chief Minister Sukhbir Singh Badal's dream of "ruling Punjab for the next 25 years" could be in jeopardy. Projections by the INDIA TODAY-ORG opinion poll, conducted in the first week of January, suggest that the ruling Shiromani Akali Dal-Bharatiya Janata Party (SAD-BJP) combine faces a 7 per cent erosion from the 45 per cent vote share it got in the 2007 Assembly polls. Theoretically, this leaves the SAD-BJP alliance with just 40 seats, down 27 from its current tally and 19 short of the halfway mark. Congress is a partial beneficiary, picking up just 2 per cent more votes. But this gives it 25 additional seats to take its score to a comfortable 69 in the 117-member House. The Akalis have, in fact, lost more votes to "others" than to Congress, but the seat gain is towards Congress in our first past-the-post system. The split in Akali ranks with the

CONGRESS AHEAD BEFORE CAMPAIGN
ASSEMBLY RESULTS 2007
VOTE% SEATS

LOK SABHA** RESULTS 2009
VOTE% SEATS

2012 (PROJECTED)
VOTE% SEATS

SWING
(SINCE 2007 ELECTION)

VOTE% SEATS

41 45 14 100

44 67 5 116*

45 44 11 100

65 52 0 117

43 38 19 100

69 40 8 117

2 ­7 5

25 ­27 3
PUNJAB CONGRESS PRESIDENT AMARINDER SINGH GETS READY BEFORE FLYING OUT TO CAMPAIGN IN AMRITSAR
T. NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

Others includes PPP alliance, BSP, other parties, independents * 2007 tally is for 116 seats for which elections were held, 1 was countermanded ** Shiromani Akali Dal (4), BJP (1) and Congress (8), translating into 41, 11 and 65 Assembly seats respectively

ELECTIONS 2012
departure of Manpreet Singh Badal, has hurt the party. Punjab has never voted back an incumbent government since Parkash Singh Badal first became chief minister in March 1970. But, things can change during a campaign. The bookies, who know more than journalists, have increased the SAD-BJP tally from 40-42 to 48-49 after the first 10 days of campaigning. The rise of Manpreet Badal as an independent political force is unlikely to win him seats but is set to significantly damage the SAD, headed by his estranged tayaji (uncle) Parkash Singh Badal and cousin Sukhbir. Poll projections indicate Manpreet's People's Party of Punjab (PPP) has chipped away the SAD's vote base in its southwestern stronghold, Malwa. This adds to the traditional anti-incumbency factor, a constant pattern in Punjab elections. Sixty-one per cent of the respondents polled rated the SAD-BJP's performance as "poor" or "average" and 51.8 per cent favoured a change in government. The Punjab Congress is additionally weighed down by negative impulses from Delhi. There is resentment against its government at the Centre. UPA is perceived as incompetent or unwilling to tackle corruption. Anna Hazare's anticorruption movement has accentuated such perceptions. The Gandhian's recent illness and the consequent pause in his agitation may have come as a breather for the party. This parallel anti-incumbency factor against Delhi could help BJP in urban constituencies. The Congress is also struggling to contain rebellion in its own backyard, with 27 rebels in the fray after the last date for withdrawal of nominations. Add Sukhbir Badal's well-honed election management skills and the Congress seats could come down a bit, but not yet enough to deny the party a majority. Former chief minister Amarinder Singh has traded blue-blooded social niceties for a khunda (traditional staff carried by villagers and used as a weapon of self-defence). His headquarters are not in his palace in Patiala, but in Chandigarh, where Amarinder is assisted by two former generals--old army buddies. "I mean business and

PUNJAB INDIA TODAY-ORG OPINION POLL

feel SAD-BJP government did not fulfil promises made five years ago.34% sayit has delivered on its promises.

44%

*Can't say 22%

How do you rate the overall performance of the SAD-BJP government in the last five years?
Average Poor Good
*Can't say 14 (Figures in percentage)

32
29 25

Which party/alliance can serve the interests of Punjab better?
Congress SAD-BJP Sanjha Morcha
(PPP-Left-SAD-Longowal)
*Rest/Can't say 19 (Figures in percentage)

T. NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

SHIROMANI AKALI DAL LEADER AND PUNJAB CHIEF MINISTER PARKASH SINGH BADAL (CENTRE) CAMPAIGNS IN LAMBI CONSTITUENCY

44
32 5

saytheywill not be swayed byemotion and will not vote for Parkash Singh Badal.

39%

28% believe the CM's appeal will work; Can't say 33% *2

disagree with Which government is largely the Badals that responsible for high prices? the Centre is discriminating 35 against Punjab,while 29% State government UPA Government 35 agree with them.

47%

*Can't say 24%

*Can't say 30 (Figures in percentage)

am always ready for a fight when and where the Akalis want it," he says, aware that his tough demeanour never fails to win new admirers. For a man born into royalty, he handles his khunda with the ease of a veteran of many brawls. The 2012 elections mark the final `Amarinder versus Badal' joust, one in which many Sikh peasants living in SAD strongholds perceive the former chief minister to be "more reliable" than his octogenarian rival. "Though he still commands much respect and loyalty in the villages, Badal is no longer the Jat model and son Sukhbir still has a long way to go to claim that mantle," says Faridkot-based Punjabi writer Jas Singh. Dressed in an overcoat identical to

the one he brought back from the US in 2010 for his younger brother-turnedrival in Lambi constituency, Gurdas Badal, the Chief Minister races against time to address between 12 and 14 election meetings every day. He requires assistance in walking but man-

ages to get around, with five doctors, including a Canada-trained physiotherapist, in attendance. His speeches in Lambi, Giddarbaha and his son's constituency, Jalalabad, signal a recognition of popular discomfort with the notion of Sukhbir as chief minister.

METHODOLOGY
he INDIA TODAY-ORG opinion poll was conducted in 20 randomly selected representative Assembly constituencies across Punjab.A total of 4,012 voters were interviewed by means of a structured questionnaire.The sample was proportionately allocated to urban and rural areas. Similarly, a quota size was fixed to obtain a suitable proportion of SC voters.The survey was carried out between January 3 and 10.The findings are subject to a margin of error of 3 per cent.The projection of votes and seats was done by measuring the shift in votes for each party/alliance (by eliciting answers on voting intention and recording how the same voters voted the last time) and extrapolating this shift onto the actual votes polled in the last election.

T

32

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

NEW

NEW

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

ELECTIONS 2012

PUNJAB INDIA TODAY-ORG OPINION POLL
T. NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

Whom do you want as the next chief minister?
Amarinder Singh Parkash Singh Badal Sukhbir Singh Badal Ambika Soni Manpreet Singh Badal Preneet Kaur
*Rest/Can't say 10.4 (Figures in percentage)

32
29 14 8 6 0.6

Which party can protect the interests of your caste or community better?
AMARINDER SINGH (CENTRE) WITH WIFE PRENEET KAUR (LEFT) IN PATIALA

Congress SAD-BJP Sanjha Morcha
(PPP-Left-SAD-Longowal)
*Rest/Can't say 10 (Figures in percentage)

43
41 6

52%

favour a change of government in Punjab while 41% want SAD-BJP coalition re-elected.
*Can't say 7%

"This is my last election. If you elect the Akali Dal, I will be your chief minister for the next five years. No one else," he reassures voters. Only 14.3 per cent respondents favour Sukhbir as the next chief minister whereas 28.6 per cent want Badal Senior again. Amarinder is the popular choice at 32 per cent. Forty-four per cent believe only the Congress can best serve Punjabi interests. Despite the criticism, Sukhbir runs a highly efficient poll campaign, watching every move by rivals and working tirelessly to rein in rebels within his party. Brushing aside Amarinder's charges, including payoffs to Congress rebels to stay in the race, he regales supporters at Adampur near Jalandhar on January 18 by targeting his Congress adversary. "I'll bet Captain thinks Sultanpur Lodhi (a constituency in Kapurthala district) is in Pakistan. He makes so many trips to that country," Sukhbir said, alluding to

the state Congress chief's friendship with a Pakistani woman journalist. The 69-year-old scion of the erstwhile Patiala royal family could now create history as the only Punjab Congress leader to sit on the chief minister's chair twice since the reorganisation of Punjab in 1967 (before 1967, Pratap Singh Kairon was chief minister twice from 1956 to 1964). He points to other Congress-ruled states like Haryana where the chief minister was returned to power but concedes, "It will finally be Soniaji's decision." His wife Preneet Kaur's name is often whispered in Delhi and Punjab as a possible chief minister. Comfortably ensconced in her ministerial bungalow in Delhi's Lodhi Estate, she is candid, "I've heard it too but never from anyone with authority." She adds that "he (Amarinder) would be Mrs Gandhi's natural choice for the job". Taking time off from her duties as UPA's junior minister for

Which party can protect the interest of Sikhs better?
Congress SAD-BJP Sanjha Morcha
(PPP-Left-SAD-Longowal)
*Rest/Can't say 6 (Figures in percentage) **Only for Sikh voters

44
43 7

Hindus think Congress can protect their interests while 37% put their faith in SAD-BJP.

42%

*Rest/Can't say 21% **Only for Hindu voters

34

INDIA TODAY  JANUARY 30, 2012

NEW

SWING SEATS
The contests here will go right down to the wire

FARIDKOT

WHY The constituency has
always voted in candidates destined for opposition benches.

When did you make up your mind to vote for the party that you intend to vote for in the elections?
More than 2 years ago More than a year but up to 2 years 7 months to 1 year 4 to 6 months ago 1 to 3 months ago Last month
*Can't say 11 (Figures in percentage)

Which party/alliance do you think can fight corruption better?
SAD-BJP Congress Sanjha Morcha
(PPP-Left-SAD-Longowal)
*Others/Can't say 20 (Figures in percentage)
PTI

WHATHAS CHANGED
Who the Dera Sacha Sauda aligns with will prove crucial.

25
23 19 16 5 1
HARSIMRAT KAUR FILES HER PAPERS AS A STAND-IN FOR PARKASH SINGH BADAL (RIGHT)

39
36 5

THE CONTENDERS
Deep Malhotra, 55, of SAD and Avtar Brar, 74, of the Congress.

KHANNA

WHY The constituency
has flip-flopped between the Congress and SAD since 1977.

WHATHAS CHANGED
Deep resentment against corruption and local police.

THE CONTENDERS
Gurkirat Kotli, 38, of Congress, Ranjit Talwandi, 56, of SAD.

What is the biggest failure, if any, of the SAD-BJP government?
Corruption Lack of development Lack of employment/jobs Wasteful government expenditure Law and order Price rise Lack of remunerative prices for agriculture
*Rest/Can't say 16 (Figures in percentage)

19
14 12 11 10 9 9

DASUYA

WHY The constituency went
the Congress's way for 22 years but voted for the BJP in 2007.

WHATHAS CHANGED
A substantial floating vote, on which hinges the outcome.

THE CONTENDERS
Singh Sahi, 54, and R.C. Dogra, 73, of the Congress.
BJP's Amarjit

DINANAGAR

WHY BJP lost the Gurdaspur
Lok Sabha seat, under which this constituency falls, in 2009.

WHATHAS CHANGED
Little development work; serious anti-incumbency factor.

Election Commission says that politicians distribute drugs to influence voters. Do you agree or disagree?
Agree Disagree
*Can't say 17 (Figures in percentage)

49
34

THE CONTENDERS
B.D. Dhupad, 64, and Aruna Chaudhary, 54, of Congress.
BJP's

external affairs, Preneet is currently in Samana managing son Raninder Singh's poll campaign. Anticipating anointment as the chosen one, Amarinder had set up work groups to make future policies on key areas of governance, including economic revival, agriculture, industry, policing, education and health. A version of what the experts suggested is in the Congress's manifesto, which also promises an independent lokayukta and a statutory vigilance commission to nab corrupt ministers and officials. The party also promises to continue with and enlarge existing welfare schemes, including SAD's low-cost AttaDal Scheme and wedding grants for Scheduled Caste girls. The SAD-BJP's numerous cases against Amarinder and other Congressmen notwithstanding, Punjab's voters have identified corruption as a major failing of the state government. Sixty-four per cent say their MLA is corrupt. But perhaps because of the scams at the Centre, more people believe that SAD-BJP can combat corruption better than Congress. PPP chief Manpreet Badal, the SAD government's finance minister until he was shown the door in October 2010, accuses his uncle and cousin of being personally corrupt. "The manner in which the Badals hijacked Punjab's luxury bus business is a classic example of abuse of power," he told followers on Twitter in November. Inspired by the Arab Spring and Anna Hazare, Manpreet is convinced that "the winds

voters saytheywill disregard Anna Hazare's appeal to vote against Congress, while 26% will respond to his appeal.

46%

What matters most when deciding who to vote for?
Candidate's personal reputation/integrity Competence Party affiliation
*Can't say 6 (Figures in percentage)

How corrupt is your present MLA?
Moderately corrupt Highly corrupt Not corrupt
*Can't say 14 (Figures in percentage)

*Can't say 28%

38
33 23

39
25 22

in Punjab are blowing for change". He promised to pull off the biggest upset of the 2012 Assembly polls, but Manpreet has only been a spoiler for the Akalis. INDIA TODAY-ORG projections suggest the PPP could sever a 5 per cent chunk off the SAD's traditional vote base, compromising the ruling combine's attempt to get re-elected. Manpreet is ranked fifth behind Information and Broadcasting Minister Ambika Soni in the list of prospective chief ministers, his party, too, is not viewed as a serious challenge. Meanwhile, over a hundred politicians across party lines have travelled to pay their respects at the Dera Sacha Sauda, a quasi-ecumenical sect that has headquarters near Haryana's Sirsa town since the campaign commenced. With millions of its adherents in the Malwa region of Punjab, the sect has the capability of affecting the elec-

toral outcome, as it is widely believed to have done in 2007. Across Punjab, around 300 such self-styled religious sects influence the way their primarily Dalit followers vote. Analysts say just four big sects-- Sacha Sauda, Sachkhand Ballan, Radha Soami Satsang Beas and Bhaniarawala's Dera--could play a role in deciding Punjab's new political dispensation. "It is impossible for any party to ignore the influence of the deras," says Pramod Kumar, director of Chandigarh's Institute for Development and Communication. More acceptable across religious and caste boundaries according to the INDIA TODAY-ORG poll, Congress appears to have the advantage in these elections. Will the dense winter fog enveloping the Punjab hinterland precipitate into victory for the party?
With Abdus Salam

NEW

NEW

