Nation ANDHRAPRADESH
A.PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

FAMILY REUNION

Looking for an electoral win, the TDP has decided to field N.T. Rama Rao's son in the 2014 polls

NAIDU WITH BALAKRISHNA AT A TDP FUNCTION IN HYDERABAD

esperate to shrug off its two consecutive defeats at the hustings in Andhra Pradesh, the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) has decided to field Nandamuri Balakrishna, actor son of late chief minister and founder of the party N.T. Rama Rao, in the elections in 2014 when Assembly and parliamentary polls are scheduled. The TDP has 85 MLAs in the state Assembly. The party, however, hasn't clarified whether Balakrishna will contest the Assembly polls or the parliamentary elections. The January 7 decision indicates that the 51-year-old Telugu film star is all set to play a more prominent role in the party. On January 8, he praised TDP president and brother-in-law Chandrababu Naidu, 61, and said that Naidu was working to achieve the aspirations of NTR. He also sought to rake up `Telugu pride,' a plank that had helped his father capture power in the state. Targeting the Congress,

D

Balakrishna said the party had `mortgaged' the self-respect of Telugu people in Delhi. "With 18 MPs, the DMK--a UPA ally--got good ministerial berths in the Union Cabinet while our 32 Congress MPs could not do anything for the state," he added. Naidu is married to Balakrishna's sister and their son Lokesh is married to Balakrishna's daughter Brahmini. The party, founded by NTR in 1982, was taken over by his son-in-law Naidu in 1995. "Balakrishna's popularity as a film star could help the TDP in coastal and Rayalaseema areas. If

POLITICAL OBSERVERS FEEL BALAKRISHNA'S STAR POWER WILL HELP GET VOTES FOR THE TDP IN THE 2014 ELECTIONS.

the party loses one more Assembly election, Naidu will find it difficult to hold the cadre together. It is unlikely that Balakrishna will question Naidu's leadership since the relationship between the two families is cemented by marriages," says K Nageshwar, political analyst and a professor in Osmania University. Dismissing speculation that the actor may emerge as an alternative power centre within the TDP, political analysts also feel the decision is part of a well-thought-out strategy by Naidu as it will help him gather more support within NTR's family. Naidu's projection of Lokesh as his successor has not gone down well with the Nandamuris. Balakrishna's brother and TDP politburo member Harikrishna, 55, feels he and his son and film star Jr NTR, 28, are not being given much importance in the party. In April 2011, the party's Krishna district president Devineni Uma was forced to resign because he cancelled a scheduled party meeting in Vijayawada during Harikrishna's tour of the district. Harikrishna felt that Uma, a staunch follower of Naidu, deliberately ignored him. Harikrishna and his family also stayed away from Sankranti celebrations at Naidu's Naravaripalle village in the Chittoor district. "There is only one leader in our party and that is Naidu. Balakrishna has been campaigning for the party since it was formed. He has decided to contest because the party wants it. With Harikrishna too, there is no rift. He is our politburo member. His son Jr NTR campaigned for us during 2009 elections and he will be there during next elections as well," says K. Yerran Naidu, TDP politburo member and former Union Minister. With the move, the TDP thinks Balakrishna will be a good counter for actor-turned-politician Chiranjeevi, who will be the star campaigner for the Congress. The announcement has certainly brought the two families together and signals that the TDP is leaving no stone unturned to ensure victory in the forthcoming polls.
by Sreekala G

JANUARY 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

55

