OF TH EK NO W N

Presidential Elections

FE AR

Hunt Begins for Head of STATE
Pranab Mukherjee and Hamid Ansari are the frontrunners. But don't count out a dark horse yet.
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

nion Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee has again emerged as the main contender for President, with Vice-President Hamid Ansari coming a close second. With crucial Assembly elections scheduled in five states before the presidential elections in July 2012, a lot hinges on the emerging equations and the choice of candidate for the post of President. For Mukherjee, 76, Rashtrapati Bhavan is seen as a fitting end to a long and distinguished political journey that began over four decades ago. His name had come up in 2007 but Sonia Gandhi found a flattering excuse to keep him out of Rashtrapati Bhavan: he was praised as too useful to executive governance. The excuse may be repeated, but Mukherjee is not equally ready to be fobbed off. However, if he is not the first choice of the UPA, Ansari has a good chance in a contest not likely to be as one-sided as 2007 when Congress was able to push its choice, Pratibha Patil. A career diplomat and erudite scholar, Ansari is seen as the best suited for the post of President. Apolitical, and with an excellent non-partisan record as Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, he could emerge as a consensus candidate

U

tions and indicated Ansari as their choice. Another name that is doing the rounds is that of veteran Congressman Karan Singh, who is perpetually in the race for the job. A man of letters, the 80-year-old Rajya Sabha MP would perhaps make the perfect envoy. However, his royal status is always held against him, as it is seen as being non-representative of the aam admi. In the final analysis, a lot will depend upon equations and alliances. Mayawati's BSP had supported the UPA candidate last time but did not vote with them on Lokpal Bill in the Lok Sabha. Jayalalithaa's AIADMK. Samajwadi Party and TDP had tried to prop up APJ Abdul Kalam as their candidate last time but he did not agree, not sure of his chances of winning. The BJP hopes for their support this time around. The UPA will not get the support of Left parties either. Sources within the Congress claim that things are still at a speculation stage. "The candidate will be decided only after the Assembly elections,'' says a party leader. The BJP is focusing on the Assembly elections, especially Uttar

For Mukherjee, Rashtrapati Bhavan is seen as a fitting end to a long and distinguished political career. Ansari is a close contender.
MUKHERJEE ANSARI

across party lines. Only Congress could have a problem since he is seen as independent. UPA Chairperson Sonia Gandhi could very well spring another surprise as she did with Patil's candidature. Patil, little known on the national scene till then, was governor of Rajasthan. Jaipur's Raj Bhavan is now occupied by Shivraj Patil, who could be another surprise candidate of UPA for the President's job. Steadfast in his loyalty to Sonia, the Congress could decide to reward him with a stint in the 340room Rashtrapati Bhavan. However, he may not be agreeable to Congress allies. Even last time, the Congress had to drop his name as the Left--UPA 1 allies--had raised objec-

Pradesh. A senior party leader says that they will definitely put up their candidate. He says that the party will not support any of the names currently in contention. BJP chief Nitin Gadkari is optimistic. "I am confident that we will be in a position to get our candidate elected as president. UPA will not find it easy this time since their alliance is in disarray,'' he says. In 2007, the BJP had supported the candidature of then vice-president Bhairon Singh Shekhawat. Once Pratibha Patil's candidature was announced, the BJP went into a tizzy digging up dirt against her. They even launched a website listing the various allegations against her. They may not need to do such a thing now. I

56

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

NEW

