UP FRONT

by DHANUSH

SOUP SONG FOR GLOBALSOUL
y now I think everyone knows how Kolaveri came people to write songs with similar lyrics, and I might write about. The director of the film 3, Aishwarya Rajini- something like this again. But this song has proved one point. Let it be north, kanth, music director Anirudh Ravichander, my co-star in the film (and singer) Shruti Haasan and I were south, east, west, country or the world, it is all within at a casual jamming session. Aishwarya wanted a song our reach. You can reach there if you make the right for a situation in the film where the guy is dumped by a attempt. Nothing is very far. The world is small. Now I'm sure Tamil songs, Tamil cinema and Tamilians can girl, he gets drunk and sings. Anirudh came up with the tune in 20 minutes and I reach nationally and globally if we make the right effort went behind the mike and sang the first words that came and if we join hands. That is something great to have to my head for the situation. Initially I came up with some realised through a silly song. If something becomes popular, it is natural that peoserious lyrics but Aishwarya wanted something fun. When I sang Why this Kolaveri di?, Anirudh said, "Bro that's it, ple will start dissecting it and any good thing has its own keep the rest of the lyrics like this." I made up the rest of demons to fight. Once I came to know this song was the song as I went along, in a manner of six minutes or so. becoming viral, I knew that people would sit, discuss and eventually dissect this song. Till today, I don't have a copy of the lyrics. For those who have misinterpreted it to be a song When I lapsed into Tamil with Kaila glass, the music director asked me to stick to English and we've retained against women, you have to clearly understand that I that in the song. Now that the song is popular, a lot of am not writing about all women. Neither am I writing on behalf of all the people who people are wondering what SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com are in love. Nor is the song `soup song' means. I derived targeted at any one particular that from the English phrase girl. The song was written for `to be in a soup'; thus, a `soup a situation in a film. The situsong' is one that arises out of a ation demanded lines like break-up. In the same vein, a these and, let us admit, whom `soup boy' is a guy who has are we kidding? We are in the been dumped. industry to make money. The People keep telling me that song has to sell. the video looks natural. It is Please don't criticise the because we were all just lyrics, and please don't give jamming. We are all next this song that importance. It is generation kids with no ego not a song about patriotism; it between us and open to each is not a song about love for the other's opinions. mother; and it's not a song I believe the lyrics are about saving children. Don't accessible to people. I think our give your precious time to honesty came through; we analysing this song. were not pretending to be I have got a few adverse something we are not. English comments. I also happened to is not my first language. There face a few poets who had are many people like me who taken offence to the song. I am are not fluent in English. This an entertainer and it is my song has definitely struck a duty to take everything that chord with them. But then, the comes my way with a pinch of song has struck a chord with salt. I take a bow and take the the native speakers of English compliments, and I take a bow language as well, proving that and take the criticism. I accept it is impossible to pontificate on The song has proved one point. everyone's point of view and I the basis of one song. respect everyone's opinion. What does the success of Let it be north, south, east, west, this song mean for lyrics from country or the world, it is all within now on? Nothing. Regular Dhanush is a Tamil actor. The our reach. That is something great lyrics will continue to be writarticle is based on his conversato have realised through a silly song. ten. This song might inspire tion with Shilpa Rathnam.

B

16

INDIA TODAY N JANUARY 9, 2012

