So ciety

NIGHTLIFE
CLOUD 9, A NIGHTCLUB AT CENTRE POINT HOTEL IN SHILLONG

BOOGIE BOOGIE NIGHTS IN NIGHTS SMALL TOWN SMALLTOWN INDIA INDIA
Celeb DJ nights. Bollywood specials. Pool parties. Move over metros, the weekend action has come to small towns.
By Asit Jolly

have had some hours to mingle. Hilltown Shillong, in India's North-east, similarly restricts its unabridged nightlife to weekends where Saturday night revellers head home just before sunrise. Like metropolitan India, which learnt to work hard and party harder more than a decade ago, smalltown India is rocking with its own nights of bedazzling lights.

SHILLONG

Saturday Night Special
Weekdays may be quiet, but fun brims over during the weekend

hen Raipur Mayor Kiranmayi Nayak, 46, clamped down on a pool party at the VW Canyon on August 25, many people called in to hail her for `preserving' Chhattisgarh's morality. But it worries her now that her actions may have alienated thousands of younger voters. Nayak is keenly aware that smalltown India is changing rapidly, unblinking under a zillion flashing strobe lights and shaking a leg to whatever is booming on the speakers. "What is the point of bringing in malls, five-star hotels and nightclubs if you're going to stand in the way of young people trying to have some fun?" asks Abhishek Goswami, 25. He and his friend Swati Verma, 26, classmates through school and college and now inseparable on the dance floor whenever they chance upon one, can't fathom Nayak's vehement objections to an event as commonplace as a pool party. Around 1,500 km to the north,

W

Ludhiana is similarly abuzz with a brand-new nightclub culture that is drawing scores of young business tycoons and professionals. "I hope this catches on," says 40-year-old Amit Jain, owner of export house Shingora Shawls. In just over a year the industrial hub has gone from being a purely private party town to being a place with multiple choices. The young tycoon and his French wife Isabelle are making the most of the new options. Culturally akin to Ludhiana, Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh is also gearing up to meet the globally inspired sensibilities of its professionals and corporate scions who are back in the city with an overseas education and exposure to western nightlife. "A Barista or a Café Coffee Day isn't enough," says Shagun Malhotra, 23, who launched her own nightclub, Dhuaan, to cater to people of her ilk. The southern town of Coimbatore has found a neat way of straddling the divide between the still conservative local culture and western mores--a selfimposed midnight curfew. The dance floors empty out after young couples

Shillong

Idyllic amid fragrant pine forests, lilting strains of church music with local Khasi verse and an undying love for Bob Dylan. The good people of Shillong, Meghalaya, are learning to live beyond the town's picture postcard perfection. The erstwhile Himalayan outpost of the British Raj is being visited by a never before spectacle-- Saturday night revelry that extends into the early hours of Sunday. Larsing Sawyan, 34, popularly known as Hming, always wanted to recreate his happy times as an undergraduate student at Bangalore's St Joseph's College of Commerce. He started organising standalone discotheque nights at Centre Point, a hotel run by his father Prabhat Sawyan in Shillong. Kick-starting nightlife in a hill town ravaged by insurgency and used to sleeping by 7 p.m. seemed like a tall order. But the very first event he hosted in 1999 featuring two popular DJs, Yudhisthira and Aiven, was a All roads lead to smashing success. "Over Cloud 9 at Centre 350 people danced through Point hotel, Déjà vu, the night," Hming recalls. It and Tango Bar. gave him the impetus to open Cloud 9, the NorthCurfew call east's first real discotheque Spontaneous and in Shillong in 2002. self-regulated. Unlike other small Usually 10 p.m. towns where night clubs on weekdays and remain an exclusive prepast 3 a.m. on serve of the affluent, Cloud Saturday nights. 9's patrons in Shillong Fly by night happily include a crossOut-of-town star section of townspeople. DJs charge up to Income tax officer John Rs 100,000 for a Sangma, 57, and his wife Saturday night gig.

50

SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

OCTOBER 15, 2012  INDIA TODAY

51

So ciety NIGHTLIFE
Agatha, 50, simply love the prospect of a couple of drinks, listening to a mix of familiar retro and contemporary numbers even as spirited youngsters dance into the night. "It's a great place to meet old friends and make new ones," Agatha says. Not far across town in Laitumkhrah, similar scenes are unfolding at Déjà vu, a new nightclub and lounge bar that has among its regular patrons Meghalaya Chief Minister Mukul Sangma. Started in 2009 by former Microsoft marketing manager Mark Rahmi Lyngdoh, 29, the place has quickly become the weekend choice of Shillong's Page 3 crowd. There's live music on Saturdays, where Lyngdoh and Phrang Kupar, 31, a professor of tourism studies at the Martin Luther Christian University, Shillong, belt out a medley of blues, jazz and the town's favourite genre--rock music. Patrons are encouraged to join in. Shillong is yet to evolve beyond Saturday nights. Most clubs and bars down shutters by 10 p.m. on weekdays. But on the weekend, bereft of the usual clubhouse brawls, Shillong's nightclubs pride themselves on having created a discernibly woman-friendly environment. "Female hostesses serve drinks. Women tend to be more comfortable with that," says Lyngdoh. It is getting close to 3 a.m. when Shillong's Women's College undergraduate students Zenifer Wary, 19, and Mitali Rabha, 20, who impressed all at Cloud 9 with their Shakira-like moves, decide to head home in their own cars. "Women's safety has never been a concern here," says Wary, thankful for the familiarity a small town of 150,000 people brings.

Raipur
Watering holes Ten Downing Street at the Magneto Mall; Club White at the VW Canyon. Curfew call Usually midnight but currently 10 p.m. following imposition of prohibitory orders after a pool party fiasco on August 25 where youngsters guzzling beer and dancing made it to the headlines of regional papers. It had the press and politicians up in arms. Music by demand All out-of-town DJs charge anything between Rs 50,000 and Rs 100,000 for a night.

POOL PARTYAT THE VW CANYON IN RAIPUR ON AUGUST 25
PRADIP SAHU

cantonment area, Kanpur's swish set makes its way from shiny sedans and SUVs to Dhuaan, the newest nightspot in town. The town's only Mediterranean bar and grill, Dhuaan is the current favourite address for its ubiquitous `private parties'. Tonight, the city is preparing to host three such bashes. Flush with cash, designer labels that would rival the French, endless supplies of rare imported spirits and an undying devotion to Bollywood: This is smalltown India at its lavish best. Money, as the leather town's hugely affluent elite will tell you, is no constraint. The latest fad, says avid partygoer and socialite Ronita Modi, 45, is to host exclusive bashes at downtown nightclubs instead of the usual sprawling suburban farmhouses; booking a floor for the night could cost up to Rs 250,000. Draped in Gucci and Cavalli with Hermes or Louis Vuitton clutch bags carelessly discarded on couches, the crowd at Dhuaan is itching for a change of pace. Obligingly, the DJ ups the tempo. Dinner is only served short of sunrise at 4 a.m. Live saxophonists
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

are now replacing the staple dance troupes and bands at dos in town. Between recreating an iconic Vegas casino, flying in skimpily clad, pale-skinned Russian dancers, or better still, outsourcing the entertainment quotient to guest appearances by Bollywood stars like Emraan Hashmi and Abhay Deol, the average night-out in Kanpur tends to run up quite a bill. Harsh Bhutani, a local DJ, says he's performed at a do where the overall tab for a single night came to an incredible Rs 10 crore. As Kanpur's most popular DJ, Bhutani employs his `celebrity' status to bring affluent patrons to Felix, the city's oldest nightclub in Rave 3 Mall, which was recently re-launched for the fifth time by actor John Abraham. Entry to the swank party place is strictly through individual memberships, costing Rs 225,000 for five years. Kanpur's elites from the leather, pan masala and detergent businesses spend big bucks to keep up appearances. It's a group that shuns the anonymity and impersonal nature of

KANPUR

Party Poopers Keep Out
The morality brigade hasn't stopped youngsters from unwinding in style

"Ashleelta ka nanga naach! Jaam chhalke (Naked dance of obscenity! Alcohol brims over)!" Regional news headlines on August 26 screamed outrage over an event that would be commonplace in any metropolitan city: A bunch of 20- to 30-year-old youngsters guzzling beer and jiving

to music at a private pool party at Raipur's lone five-star hotel, the VW Canyon, the night before. Barely an hour after the hawker had delivered the big news of the day, the moral police stepped in. This time, it was the Congress's one woman army in the Chhattisgarh capital. "Ghatiya aur vaahiyaat (In bad taste)," said Kiranmayi Nayak, Raipur's feisty mayor. "Barely clad girls were photographed drinking and smoking cigars. Item girls (dancers) had been flown in from Nagpur and Mumbai. All this is alien to Chhattisgarhi culture." Many of the "delinquent" revellers were summoned by the police. District Collector Sidharth Komal Pardesi ordered a summary ban on all pool parties and slapped a 10 p.m. curfew on the city's bars and pubs. Swati Verma, 26, a Civil Services aspirant, is aghast. "To me, the pool party only signals that Raipur's youngsters want to be part of a happening world," she says. Seated beside her at a coffee shop in the Central City Mall, Abhishek Goswami, 25, a social work student at

Kushabhau Thakre University, says the administration's response is a scary sign of things to come. Raipur, with a burgeoning population of over a million residents, is booming. The odd, ramshackle cinema halls have given way to plush multiplexes, which are a part of four huge malls, with five more under construction. It has more than 80 big and small hotels, all doing brisk business with steel, coal and power sector clients. Sanjay Nair, 38, heads operations at the 1.35 million sq ft Magneto Mall, Raipur's largest. "This place goes crazy on Sundays," he says, citing over 150,000 footfalls a day. Malls and multiplexes are the only source of entertainment in Raipur. They also make for a secure late-night environment in a city under threat from Naxalite insurgents. The Canyon fiasco notwithstanding, Raipur's young are already finding their way back to nightlife haunts. Less than a fortnight after the incident, Ten Downing Street atop the Magneto Mall was beginning to draw back patrons. There are steady streams of weekend

partygoers that throng Canyon's Club White, Club Marina at the Singapore City residential complex, the dance floor in Babylon Hotel and Fusion Bar at Jai Sthamb Chowk. Residents predict the city will come of age with the completion of Naya Raipur--a brand-new 8,000-hectare township coming up 17 km from the present city. The Rs 2,000-crore project will house half a million people and be Chhattisgarh's cultural, educational and business hub. Prices of two-bedroom flats here have already hit the Rs 40-50 lakh band, proof that Raipur is changing irreversibly.

FELIX, KANPUR'S OLDEST DISCOTHEQUE, AT THE RAVE 3 MALL

Kanpur
Coolest place Dhuaan, owned by 23-year-old Shagun Malhotra, and Felix, the oldest nightclub. Cash no bar Harsh Bhutani, the town's most popular DJ charges Rs 50,000 for a night. He has also played at a private party where the bill came to Rs 10 crore. Out with the old In the old days, only married couples used to frequent clubs. Now, it's youngsters, irrespective of their relationship status.

RAIPUR

Deluxe Delights
The leather town's elite pulls out all the stops on the entertainment highway

It's 2 a.m. on a hot and humid Saturday night. While partygoers, even in the bigger, more cosmopolitan metros decide to call it a night, revellers in Kanpur, intent on having a good time, are only warming up. At an upmarket address on Tagore Road, in the heart of the old

52

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

So ciety NIGHTLIFE
big-city life. Here, it is invariably a closed, privileged group that parties together, where the safety of women is seldom compromised. Kanpur's young, with the ability to straddle both the modern and the traditional, have never had it better. Shagun Malhotra, 23, who returned after studying interior design in London, launched Dhuaan to fill in for an obvious lack of `respectable' places for a night out. Her nightclub is a sellout every Saturday night, booked several weeks in advance. "Most of my contemporaries, like me, returned after completing degrees abroad. We needed night spots that matched our altered sensibilities," she says. Malhotra's parents, Geeta and Vikas, who started Kanpur's first disco, Heels, 17 years ago, say the shift in outlook is no less than seismic. "It was mostly married couples back then. Our children, single or attached, are now regulars at nightclubs," says Geeta. Ankit Nagory, a local business scion who recently flew home from New York, is thrilled with the "sea change" in popular attitudes. "When I left, people here would only drink or smoke in the privacy of their homes," he says. "Not anymore."

By Invitation Only
Parties could get cooler than Melbourne's, provided you have tickets

It is the beginning of a new sexual revolution in smalltown Punjab. Young men on a happy high and young women dressed in mini-skirts and dresses with thigh-high slits, in wilful defiance of long prevailing sartorial mores, have created their very own safe havens: An exclusive chill-out zone in the very midst of Ludhiana's impossibly traffic-snarled streets. "It's a great time to be alive," declares Sifti Riat, 25. A part-time manager at Akal Springs, a family run automotive parts enterprise, she cannot stop marvelling at how her once-boring hometown has metamorphosed. All this in the five years it took for her to complete her education in Delhi and Melbourne, Australia. "Ludhiana today is just as cool as Melbourne," she says.

Riat and her friends wouldn't miss weekends at Bar 148, the township's trendiest nightclub. Located atop AHotel, a mid-range inn on Ferozepur Road, the place has just what the hip young crowd is looking for--"Good music, a floor where you can dance your pants off and an environment where women will not be judged because they are smoking and having a drink," she says. The brainchild of Javed Grewal, 30, Bar 148 is among a recent crop of night spots in a city where the only nightlife hitherto consisted of `by invitation only' farmhouse parties. "It was that or trips to Delhi and Mumbai," says Grewal, who opened Ludhiana's first `couples only' nightclub with a lounge, a smokers' den, and a private dining area to pander to Punjab's VIPS. Balraj Singh, 24, a local entrepreneur, says, "You can safely take your girlfriend or fiancée to Bar 148 without being accosted by drunken hoodlums." Transporter Sunny Johar, 42, and warehouse owner Jasdip Bindra, 30, somewhat nervously opened The Hub in June. Despite its unlikely location in

Ludhiana
Critics' choice Bar 148 at A-Hotel, The Hub, Floyds at Mainland China, Splitzvilla at the Omaxe Mall and Chaos at Brewmaster. Lights out Never. Parties are largely by invitation, so you can dance till you drop. White mischief Ludhianvis love `goris' . Women bartenders from Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan are a big hit at private parties.

THE HUB, IN LUDHIANA, IS A FOURSTOREYAREA WITH A DISCOTHEQUE, BAR, MULTI-CUISINE RESTAURANT, CAFÉ LOUNGE AND ROOFTOP DINING

54

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

LUDHIANA

So ciety NIGHTLIFE
ore Coimbat
Coolest places Bike & Barrel (The Residency), Latitude (Le Meridien),Zero Degree (The Park Plaza),WXYZ (Aloft). Last order Used to be 11 p.m. earlier; now, clubs serve till midnight. Play safe Coimbatoreans avoid drunken driving and prefer to get their own drivers to pick them up, or ask the hotel to call a cab.
HK RAJESHEKHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

BIKE & BARREL, A BAR AND RESTAURANT AT THE RESIDENCY HOTEL IN COIMBATORE

the midst of the overcrowded Kumhar Mandi area, the four-storey nightclub, with a bar, a discotheque that boasts a one-of-its-kind CDJ 2000 mixer from Pioneer, a multi-cuisine restaurant, café lounge and rooftop dining, hasn't looked back. Bindra and Johar say The Hub is bringing in more cash than either of their family businesses ever did. "It cost us just Rs 4 crore and eight months to set it up," says Johar. At The Hub, Saturdays is celeb DJ night and sold out weeks in advance. The club opened to strains of Punjab's best known nightclub entertainers, Hari & Sukhmani. It continued to draw full house with DJs like Sharon, Jaya and the Trend Sisters. The biggest night to date was with Rabbi Shergill on August 4. "Every inch of the 5,000 sq ft floor space was thoroughly tested," Bindra recalls. Bar 148's Grewal does not quite like talking money but says he "could not be happier". COIMBATORE

Lights Out @ Midnight
Conservative Coimbatoreans learn to let their hair down

"Club can't handle me!" the final Flo Rida number quickly pulls once conformist Coimbatore's happy and suitably inebriated campers to the dance floor at the Bike & Barrel. It is the Saturday night crush before curfew is called close to midnight--and the last

chance to dance away your blues. That was the foot-stomping climax to another successful night at The Residency's popular restaurant and bar that doubles as a weekend nightclub. Twenty-five-year-old engineering student Alice Mujawase and Kwambo On, her Nigerian partner, delight onlookers with their loose-limbed `dirty dancing'. "It's been a long week," she explains, nonchalantly flicking away the sheen across her brow Ace driver Narain Kartikeyan's birthplace, southern India's very own `Manchester' is gleefully waking up to late nights. The Park Plaza, Taj Vivanta and Le Meridien opened for business in the past year, with more on the anvil. Brightly coloured love seats, impossibly large television screens and a kitschy red motorbike, all dimly lit to show off the enormous floor-to-ceiling line-up of rare single malts, dot WXYZ, the city's newest nightclub that opened at Aloft Hotel in August. There is an air of expectancy despite the thin attendance. "It's only 8.30 p.m. People usually come in after 9," explains Food & Beverage Manager Madhoosoodhan S. The growing stream of expatriates and regulars like businessman John Benedict, 32, grace the bar no less than three, even four times a week. Bike & Barrel gets as many as 150 dying-toparty customers on weekends despite its preferred `couples only' policy.

Ladies nights on Thursdays, Bollywood nights on Fridays and karaoke weeknights with Hindi and Tamil music lure party animals. Bike & Barrel even hosts a star out-of-town DJ once a month. "People will tell you this is the only place to be on a Saturday night," says Manager J.A. Saravanan. The crowd is young--between 20 and 40 years old. "Coimbatore gives me a sense of anonymity," says dentistry student Vinitha Kumar, 24, snuffing out a cigarette stub under her ballet shoe. It's impossible to have `fun' at home in Chennai where she is constantly looking out for "people who may know my parents", she says. Her schoolteacher friend Radha Mahesh, 27, agrees that the city nightclubs are "a good place to chill out where no one really cares what you're wearing". But there is not a bare leg in sight at both Bike & Barrel and WXYZ. Coimbatore is still dressing conservatively in designer jeans, leggings and party tops. The midnight curfew is sacrosanct here; the usual groans of inebriated frustration that accompanies the last dance missing. Business executive Shahil Mohammad, 26, agrees it is time to head home, because "my girlfriend's dad would kill us both if we stayed out any later".
with Manisha Pandey, Sanjay Dixit Lakshmi Kumaraswami, Kaushik Deka and Olina Banerji

56

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 15, 2012

