Na tion

MAHARASHTRA
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

CHHAGAN BHUJBAL WITH R.R. PATIL

not allowed ACB start its probe, but that it has discretionary right to do so. However, Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan's statement that "the consent must have come from the home minister", and that the file had not come to him, sets Patil up as the prime mover. A source in NCP said Patil is doing a favour to Deputy Chief Minister Ajit Pawar, who came to his defence after the August 11 Azad Maidan violence. Patil managed to save his chair after Pawar backed him. "It's time for Patil to return favour," he added. It's well known that Pawar and Bhujbal don't see eye to eye. The deputy chief minister sees Bhujbal, his party senior, as an obstacle to his becoming the next chief minister. A

KERALA

Expats Bail Out Chandy
Investors'meet draws tepid response. Non-resident billionaires come up with some of the biggest proposals.
CHANDY (SECOND FROM LEFT) AT THE EMERGING KERALA MEET

AN NCP SOURCE SAID PATIL IS RETURNING FAVOUR TO AJIT PAWAR, WHO DEFENDED HIM AFTER THE AZAD MAIDAN VIOLENCE.

C SHANKAR

BHUJBALFACES TROUBLE ATHOME
Cracks in NCP are wide open after Home Minister Patil permits probe into graft allegations against Bhujbal
By Kiran Tare

aharashtra Public Works Minister Chhagan Bhujbal is bearing the brunt of a struggle for one-upmanship in his Nationalist Congress Party (NCP). Home Minister R.R. Patil has given permission to the state's anticorruption bureau (ACB) to investigate charges of graft against Bhujbal by BJP National Secretary Kirit Somaiya. Somaiya has accused him of misusing his position to defraud the state of

M

Rs 10,000 crore in the award of a contract to build Maharashtra Sadan, the state's guest house in New Delhi. The contract was given to K.S. Chamankar and Co in 2006, which built the grand guest house over six acres on Kasturba Gandhi Marg in Lutyens' Delhi. Somaiya alleges that Chamankar appointed Ideen Furnitures, run by Bhujbal's daughters-inlaw Shefali and Vishakha, to supply furniture to the new guest house. Apparently, Bhujbal's PWD had handed over a prime plot to Chamankar in

Mumbai's upmarket Andheri, in lieu of which Chamankar agreed to build Maharashtra Sadan and renovate another guest house, High Mount at Malabar Hill, Mumbai, free of cost. Somaiya says Chamankar spent Rs 150 crore on these projects but could earn over Rs 10,000 crore by building a residential and commercial complex on the "gifted" plot. "In Andheri, residential rate is Rs 20,000 per sq ft, commercial rate is Rs 50,000 per sq ft. Chamankar's plot is 4.5 lakh sq ft. He will earn at least Rs 10,000 crore from selling it," Somaiya says. Bhujbal refutes the charges. "The contract was given to Chamankar by a group of three ministers during Vilasrao Deshmukh's reign. So where did I misuse my office? Let ACB probe. I hope truth will come out," he says. It is Patil's promptness in allowing ACB to start its probe that has raised many eyebrows, considering that he is sitting on a similar probe request against NCP'S Medical Education Minister Vijaykumar Gavit for more than two years. Patil clarifies he has

Patil supporter who doesn't want to be named, though, claims the home minister's decision will actually go in Bhujbal's favour, as ACB'S record is dismal, with only 10 convictions in the last 10 years. Also, no time frame has been given to conclude its probe. "By allowing ACB to conduct the probe, Patil has actually taken the monkey off Bhujbal's back," he adds. The Patil supporter points to an affidavit by Mumbai Police's Economic Offences Wing (EOW), under Patil's control, in Bombay High Court in July, in which EOW could not find any congnisable offence by Bhujbal and his family over allegations of misappropriated funds and misuse of property belonging to the Mumbai Education Trust (MET) that Bhujbal heads. Sunil Karve, a trustee of MET, had complained that Shefali and Vishakha used one of MET'S eight floors as their furniture showroom for eight years without paying rent, calculated at Rs 117 crore. It could well be that luck will once again play in Bhujbal's favour. 

n September 15, Chief Minister Oommen Chandy declared that the `Emerging Kerala' investors' meet held in Kochi, had attracted Rs 40,000 crore in 45 investment proposals. But on September 17, he had to partially retract his statement. It now turns out the only two major MOUS signed at the meet involved stateowned entities: A Rs 20,000-crore expansion plan for Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited's (BPCL) Kochi Refineries, and a Rs 700-crore ship repair unit in Kochi of the Union shipping ministry. None of the 11 mega projects showcased at the meet had found takers. What's more, Chandy's claim that Volkswagen India would invest Rs 2,000 crore in an engine assembly unit in the state was, within hours, rubbished by a local newspaper, which quoted a spokesperson from the automobile major's Pune headquarters denying any such plan. Chandy's explanation was that Volkswagen India had only made an expression of interest in the project. Chandy's faux pas comes close on the heels of criticism by the Opposition, environmentalists and even a section of the Congress, who claimed on the eve

O

of the meet that it was a ruse to hand over precious land to private investors. "The show is to promote real estate lobbies from in and out of India," thundered Opposition leader V. S. Achuthanandan on September 1. On the backfoot, the government withdrew 40 controversial proposals from its website. "No investment will be allowed without environmental clearance," said the Chief Minister on September 5. Expatriates saved Chandy more blushes. The meet's big investment proposals, apart from those of stateowned entities, came from Kerala's non-resident billionaires, and include ones for a Rs 4,000-crore shopping mall and convention centre by the Abu Dhabi-based EMKE Lulu Group, Rs 4,000 crore worth hospital complexes by Dubai-based Azad Moopen and K. E. Faizal Groups, educational institutes at an investment of Rs 800 crore by the Saudi Arabia-based Al Abeer Group, and a Rs 2,500-crore shopping complex by Oman's Manappat Group. But the proposal that got the biggest cheer was Air Kerala, a public-private partnership airline, which is expected to end travel-problems of Keralites to and from the Gulf. by M. G. Radhakrishnan

42

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

