NET FLUX
tumblr tales

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

star of the week

Dog Days
Ripping apart your books, peeing on your shoes, sleeping on your face-- these are just some examples of bad behaviour from our canine friends. Compiling most dog owners'frustrations is a blog called Dogshaming. Created by Chris Mohney, the editor and chief of microblogging platform Tumblr, Dogshaming has become a viral sensation with people posting pictures of their dogs along with signs explaining why they should be ashamed. Some signs include playing with skunks, eating wrinkle cream and turning on the stove.

Balpreet Kaur's Inner Beauty
Balpreet Kaur, 20, became the cynosure of all online eyes when her picture, revealing her facial hair, was posted on social network Reddit by `european_douchebag' . Kaur, a neuroscience and psychology student from Ohio and a devout Sikh, replied ".... by not focusing on the physical beauty, I have time to cultivate those inner virtues..." Kaur got instant support from the online world, eliciting an apology from the person who uploaded her photo.
BALPREET KAUR

app alert

Top of the Lot
Field Trip allows your phone's GPS to alert you when you are at an interesting location. Gyft lets you give and receive gift cards from retailers via social networks. So forget about the old plastic cards!

intertales
SAHIL RIZWAN'S TAKE ON HEROINE

There's something for the adventurous, the generous and the plain silly. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps.

viral video

Funny Picture

DEATH SCENE FROM KARAETECI KIZ

This week, the Web laughed at a hilarious death scene from the 1973 Turkish movie Karaeteci Kiz that involved screams of pain, guns and fake blood. Other popular videos included a mind reader shocking people with his forecasts, and a grumpy cat,Tard, being tickled by his owner.
Grumpycat

The Vigil Idiot, a movie review website created by freelance writer Sahil Rizwan, 24, tickled many a funny bone with its review of Kareena Kapoor's Heroine. It was shared over 16,000 times on Skitch is an easy-tosocial networks. Rizwan recreated use mobile application the film through stick figure drawthat helps you draw ings with dialogues dripping with shapes, arrows and text sarcasm. He also pointed out on photographs. obvious plot holes--like how did Kapoor's character get net point A-list brand endorsements when she had iStream could be India's answer to Netflix, not worked for the American website that, at a price, airs TV more than a shows and movies. Originally a regional partner year? for video-sharing websites like YouTube and Dailymotion, the site now has news, TV shows and movies in Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and English.

weirdonet
The Internet was flooded with quirky videos and findings that left people world-wide hooked to the cyberspace Seattle saw the world's first livetweeted hearing restoration surgery. Simon Cowell and Will.i.am's TV show will look for the next Steve Jobs. Researchers in Japan found that cute images help people focus better.

1.2 million
Death scene

10 million
Mind reader

4.2 million

Live Wire
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on October 1 West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who continued slamming UPA. India's win over Pakistan in the T20 cricket World Cup. A sneak peek of Challa, a song from Jab Tak Hain Jaan. Netizens revealed their hopes and dreams for October. Patriots compared Gandhi's values to that of young Indians on the eve of Gandhi Jayanthi.

MamataBanerjee
1,595,902

Indvspak
1,225,430

Challa
583,057

Myoctoberwish
416,843 15,151

Gandhivsyoungistan

*Figures denote number of followers

tweet tweet

