Na tion

BIHAR

KILLING FIELDS OF BIHAR VI LLAGES
Panchayats have become the latest battleground for the state's goons, with 34 mukhiyas killed in the last two years
By Amitabh Srivastava

n June 2012, when Baby Devi, 38, completed a year as mukhiya, she received a warning. Local criminal Ranvijay Pratap alias Bablu Singh told her to quit as head of the Gorkhari panchayat in Patna or face dire consequences. Bablu was angry with her ever since Baby defeated his wife Sangeeta Devi in the 2011 panchayat polls, and wanted her to vacate the post. As a precaution, Devi moved home from Gorkhari to Kurthaul, 28 km away from the panchayat she represented, and lodged a police complaint against Bablu. It wasn't enough. On July 25, four strangers visited her rented home at Parsa Bazar in Patna and shot her dead in front of her son Abhinav, 14. "We asked for security but the police failed to help us in time," rues husband Abhay Kishore. A month later, the Patna police arrested three contract killers who confessed to having killed Devi for Rs 2 lakh given by Bablu, who is absconding. Political murders in Bihar have found a new constituency: The panchayats. At least 34 mukhiyas have been murdered in less than two years in Bihar. INDIA TODAY has collected reports that show seven mukhiyas have been killed in Motihari, four in Begusarai, three in Muzaffarpur, two each in Patna, Sitamarhi, Aurangabad and Munger districts. The killing of at least one mukhiya has been reported from Siwan, Chhapra, Ara, Sheikhpura, Jehanabad, Nalanda, Gopalganj, Nawada, Banka, Madhubani, Katihar and Saharsa districts. Two incidents have been reported this month alone. On September 6, deputy mukhiya Dasrath Kewat was murdered in Nawada. On September 11, Shivmohan Singh, head of Sukhi panchayat in Vaishali district, was

I

ASHOK PRIYADARSHI

shot dead in Muzaffarpur district. Kishore, Devi's husband, says Bablu waited for a year in the hope that his wife would relent under pressure. "Perhaps he did not wish to kill a woman," he says. In other cases, political rivals have not waited this long to settle scores. In June 2011, Shivnandan Mandal, a newly elected mukhiya in Madhepura, was brutally murdered before he could even take oath of office. The spate of murders of mukhiyas began just before the 2011 pan-

SON ABHINAV HOLDS PICTURE OF SLAIN MUKHIYA BABY DEVI NEXT TO FATHER ABHAY

chayat elections, with contenders facing off far away from the electoral battleground. The powers a mukhiya enjoys in Bihar have attracted the best and the worst of talent. Many have been arrested for smuggling liquor, manufacturing illegal arms and ordering killings, apart from corrupt practices. Last year, cases were lodged against 227 mukhiyas in Sitamarhi district, for committing financial irregularities in the purchase

EACH MUKHIYA HAS A RS 80-90 LAKH AYEAR BUDGET, THAT CAN GO UP TO RS 1.5 CRORE. NEW

of solar lamps. Bihar Panchayat Raj Minister Bheem Singh told INDIA TODAY on September 19 that more than 100 mukhiyas out of 8,442 in Bihar are currently being investigated by his department for allegations of financial misconduct. The post of a mukhiya is much valued in Bihar because of the financial trappings and political clout that come with it. Mukhiyas control up to 31 development schemes, including MGNREGA and the Indira Awas Yojana. Along with block development officers, they can sign cheques and appoint panchayat teachers and many other government employees to the social welfare and health departments. Besides, these days they have a larger say in the implementation of the Indira Awas Yojana and rural road schemes of the Central and state governments. According to Bheem Singh, each mukhiya has a budget of Rs 80-90 lakh a year at his disposal. "The fierce struggle for the post is not without reason," the minister says. A senior district level officer, however, admits that the allotment for a panchayat, based on MNREGA requirements, can go beyond Rs 1.5 crore. Bihar accorded 50 per cent reservation to women in panchayats and local bodies to ensure their participation in grassroots democracy in 2006. The much lauded initiative, also adopted the same year by the Centre in 2011, has ended up largely with men usurping women's roles. Men act as the real power centres for wives or mothers, rendering them mere puppets. The Bihar Panchayati Raj department has only succeeded in preventing these men from attending official meetings in place of their wives or mothers, but they still take all decisions. 

INDIAN HIGH COMMISSION IN LONDON

MEA

Lost Visas Signal Security Breach
n a serious security breach, 6,000 blank Indian visas were reported missing in London earlier this month. This is the largest such loss reported by the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA). They had been dispatched by MEA in New Delhi to the Indian High Commission in Aldwych, London, on September 3. Adding to MEA'S discomfiture was the fact that they were the first consignment of 50,000 blank sticker-on visas with enhanced security features. They contain a ghost image of the applicant that holds personal details like name, passport number and date of birth. The blank visas had been printed and dispatched from Nashik's Indian Security Press (ISP) to the foreign ministry in Delhi on August 18. The shipment was received not by a staffer, but by a local courier at Heathrow airport, and transported to the high commission. MEA officials in London believe they were stolen on the way, when the courier made an unscheduled halt. "It shows the casual manner in which such important documents were being handled in London," an official in Delhi says. The high commission raised the alarm and alerted the Diplomatic Protection Group of London Metropolitan Police, who registered a case and

No trace of the 6,000 visas lost by the High Commission in London

I

are currently investigating the matter. The private courier had been employed because visas fall in the `B and C level' diplomatic bags, which are also used to send newspapers and periodicals to foreign missions. Only `A level' diplomatic bags are deemed `secret', and carried by government couriers. "We've revised all our procedures following this incident," a foreign ministry spokesperson told INDIA TODAY. "Now, prior information will be given of such a dispatch, and an official from the high commission will receive them," he said. The missing visas have been `hotlisted', meaning anybody using them could risk deportation when they arrive in India, the spokesperson said. Senior officials in Delhi say they are worried the visas could be misused by foreigners, especially in Africa, to enter India through unsecured border entries. The visas are part of MEA'S Rs 1,000 crore Immigration Visa and Foreigners Registration (IVFRT) project, started in 2010 to upgrade immigration services by establishing the identity of an immigrant at any of India's 169 missions, 77 immigration check posts and foreigners' registration offices. The London mission was part of the first phase of an attempt to link 60 Indian missions.
by Sandeep Unnithan

44

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

OCTOBER 1, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

NEW

