UP FRONT

NANI G. MAHANTA

AKASHMIR IN THE MAKING
hough Assam is used to ethnic conflicts, the current un- Bodo struggle since 2009. Though containment of violence and restoration of law rest in Bodoland is different in many ways. For the first time, dichotomy between the local and immigrant and order have become the parameters of sustainable peace Muslims has become sharper. There is also a tactical in Assam, there has never been any attempt to resolve strucalliance between the Bodos and non-Bodo indigenous tural issues such as encroachment of land by illegal groups such as the Assamese-speaking Rabhas, Koch- migrants and settlement of the foreigners issue through an Rajbangshis and Adivasis, who were otherwise fighting with updated National Register of Citizens. If representation is each other for space and identity till 1998. The divide the most important notion of democracy, then the present between the immigrant Muslims and the rest has become form of BTC must be modified by giving `distributive justice' substantial. Religious minority leaders such as Badruddin and adequate representation to the other stake-holders of Ajmal of All India United Democratic Front (AIUDF) have Bodoland. The killing and displacement of immigrant succeeded in bridging the gap between the local Assamese Muslims have a wider connotation. Muslims and immigrant Muslims. AIUDF chief Ajmal had already succeeded in taking the The origins of the 2012 violence lie in the very creation plight of the immigrant Muslims beyond the national borof Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) under the 6th Schedule der--thanks to the massive exodus of North-easterners from of the Constitution almost 10 years ago. BTC was born out of cities such as Bangalore, Mumbai and Hyderabad. Minority merciless killing and violence at the behest of the Bodo organisations have already done the unthinkable: They have Liberation Tigers (BLT), which was the sole signatory to the taken the battle of the Muslims to upper Assam districts Accord on behalf of the Bodos in 2003. Post-autonomy, the which are considered to be the epicentre of Assamese culBodo Tigers formed a new political party, Bodoland People's ture. They have also succeeded in creating an atmosphere of mistrust among indigenous Front (BPF), to suit the new SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Muslims by popularising the requirements of electoral polislogan `Islam is in danger'. tics. Though many guerrillas Policymakers should not ighave surrendered with their nore the geo-strategic signifiweapons, a majority of them cance of Assam and the rest of have kept their weapons with North-east, which are no less them. In 2006, BPF became a important than Jammu and coalition partner of the ruling Kashmir. There are many parCongress in the state. allels between the two. In Just because the Congress terms of the Muslim population is dependent on them, the BPF growth, Assam is the largest leadership has assumed that state after J&K. The region has `law and order' is actually what porous borders with China, they do, but not what they Nepal, Myanmar, Bhutan and ought to do to protect the conBangladesh. The massive flow stitutional `rule of law'. Major of arms itself has been acting challenges from within the as the motivating factor for the Bodo society and other insuraggrieved groups to fight with gent outfits were met with a the Indian State. Till now the series of `secret killings', remiMuslim groups are not heavily niscent of the killing of ULFA armed like the Bodos, the family members in Assam from Meiteis, the Nagas and the 1996 to 2002. The National Assamese. The ground has Democratic Front of Bodoland, now become fertile for free supposedly the most dominant Minority organisations have already done flow of arms and radical ideterrorist outfit capable of the unthinkable: They have taken the battle ologies. We just can't afford challenging the BTC authority, of the Muslims to upper Assam districts Assam becoming the second was silenced along with other which are considered to be the epicentre of Kashmir of India. Bodo civil society groups. After Assamese culture. They have also succeeded silencing major critics, BPF had in creating an atmosphere of mistrust among Nani G. Mahanta is an associate started a process of reconciliation with warring factions. professor of political science at indigenous Muslims by popularising the There has been a unified Gauhati University slogan `Islam is in danger' .

T

12

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 1, 2012

