Nei ghbours PAKISTAN
GETTY IMAGES

MALALAYOUSAFZAI

THE GIRL WHO SHOOK PAKISTAN
All Malala Yousafzai wanted to do was study. The Taliban attacked her to assert that the gun is more powerful than the book. It isn't enough to wake up Pakistan's political class.
By Madiha Sattar

n 2009 I interviewed the women and girls of two families of Swat refugees who had fled the valley during that year's military operation and sought refuge with relatives in a Pashtun neighbourhood of Karachi. They talked about how Swat had been taken over by Maulana Fazlullah, the head of the local chapter of the Pakistani Taliban. I remember them mentioning, only in passing, that girls' schools had been shut down by his militant group. As well-spoken and exposed as women from this former tourist destination tend to be, they were more concerned about the disruption to their

I

lives from the military operation than the fact that their daughters could no longer go to school. Or that, as they described, even their youngest daughters had to cover up more and had less freedom of movement than they did in their own youth, 40 years ago. Traumatised and angered by having had to flee at short notice with not much more than the clothes on their backs, they no longer had the fortitude to stand up for the futures of their daughters. Their girls seemed disappointed, but didn't have much to say. That is why Malala Yousafzai is different, and why her courage, and that of her schoolteacher father, is so remarkable. The youngster speaks out against the Taliban threat to girls' education in

her hometown, and returns after the military operation as determined as ever to continue her schooling. She becomes known in Pakistan and abroad for her dedication to the cause. Simply for that, she is critically wounded in an October 9 gun attack aimed at her and claimed by the North Waziristan-based Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), three years after a military operation in Swat was deemed to have been relatively successful in clearing the area of militancy. In the hours and days that followed news of the attack, horror at its cowardliness and evil was mixed with a strange kind of relief here in Pakistan. Finally, there was a public outpouring of anger. Finally an act of Islamist violence had stirred Pakistanis out of their

desensitisation or ambivalence. This ment for the deception that it is. TTP even really responsible for any act So although forced to condemn the of terrorism inside Pakistan? was not an attack on a military or police installation that some could argue attack, religious leaders and the heads It was the same insidious, paranoid was retaliation for state action against of religious political parties and right- and short-sighted rhetoric that has for militants in the tribal areas or for Pakis- wing groups, including the Jamiat years been both shouted and whispered tan's support of America after 9/11. It Ulema-i-Islam, the Jamaat-i-Islami into the ears of the Pakistani public. was not an attack on an alleged blas- and the Difa-i-Pakistan Council, have But perhaps the reaction of the rephemer that hardliners could position opposed a military operation in North ligious right should not have come as a as just punishment for insulting Islam. Waziristan and qualified their condem- surprise. What has been truly disapIt was not an attack on a Western em- nation. What about the children killed pointing is the reluctance of other pobassy for war in Afghanistan or the pro- in drone attacks, they ask? What about litical parties to take a loud, clear duction of an offensive film. It was not the female students killed in the 2007 stand. Note Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf an attack on a minority sect or religion operation against Lal Masjid? Why the chief Imran Khan's cowardly refusal enjoying little widespread sympathy. It media hype around this one girl? So to name the TTP in his initial reactions was not even the video of the public what if the TTP has claimed responsibil- to the attack, supposedly to protect flogging of a young woman in Swat that ity; that could have been a fake phone his party workers. His handlers have AFP PHOTO had helped turn the tide in been trying to deny this ever favour of a military operation since. Note that neither the there in 2009--many had president nor the prime minquestioned the authenticity of ister--representatives of the the footage and the timing `secular' Pakistan Peoples of its release. Party--have named the orThis was an attack on a ganisation. Nor has the army defenceless child. And Pakischief, who condemned the attanis have reacted with a tack in unusually aggressive widespread grief and anger words. Nor has Nawaz Sharif, never before seen in response the head of the main opposito an act of Islamist violence. tion party. Only the Muttahida Their leaders have had Qaumi Movement's Altaf less courage. For a moment, it Hussain has raised the kind seemed this could become a of anti-TTP hue and cry the turning point in Pakistan's attack warrants. struggle against militancy. What, then, of a military Surely with such outrage at operation in North Waziristan, home and abroad, political the headquarters of the TTP leaders and the army could (and refuge of various other take the decisive steps against Pakistani and foreign milithe TTP that were needed. This ACTIVISTS EXPRESS SOLIDARITYWITH MALALA, IN ISLAMABAD tants)? The military has passed the buck to the politioutfit is no potential foreign policy tool, no Afghan Taliban or call (the fact that the TTP has not denied cians--though it has undertaken plenty of operations in the tribal areas without Lashkar-e-Toiba. It is blatantly at war the claim seems to bear no weight). with the state of Pakistan itself, and It is a clear attempt to muddy the doing so before--and, for various reasurely this was the moment to finally do waters--which has always been sons including the upcoming elections something decisive about that. Pakistan's problem when it comes to and lack of political consensus, the But even as the attack on Malala and militancy and terrorism. Who are the politicians have chickened out. On the sustained public grieving in its after- `good' Taliban, who are the `bad'? Are October 15, the interior minister said no math seemed like generating a clear the Afghan Taliban good because they North Waziristan operation was being shift in public opinion, the religious might support us in a post-US planned at the moment. But even more worrying than the right was desperately trying to turn the Afghanistan? Can we ignore certain narrative around. Their rhetoric has militant outfits because they attack lack of military action itself is the lack of long revolved around American policies other countries, but not Pakistan? Are political will against extremism that is as the root of all of Pakistan's security the TTP good too, because they are ide- behind it. Despite the current public reproblems, including terrorism carried ological supporters of the war against action, this is not a moment of triumph out by the TTP, even though that organ- America in Afghanistan, or don't sup- for Pakistan. It is a moment of reckonisation is fighting not against the US but port Pakistan's alliance, however ing. And the state is failing to capture it. against Pakistan itself. The assault on troubled, with the US, or because they Malala threatened to reveal this argu- claim to be defenders of Islam? Is the The author is a Pakistani journalist

80

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

81

FINAL

FINAL

