Na tion
TRIBALS IN ANDHRA PRADESH

MEDIA

Voice of th e Party
ANDHRAPRADESH

Congress prepares to relaunch its national mouthpiece
GETTYIMAGES

DEO DILIGENCE
U

Union minister is determined to make governors exercise their right to intervene for tribal welfare

On April 7, while meeting Andhra nion Tribal Affairs and Panchayati Raj Minister V. Kishore Governor ESL Narasimhan, Deo subChandra Deo is determined to mitted a 25-page note on the need to take on governors who fail to safe- revoke licences to bauxite mines in guard the rights of indigenous and Paderu and contiguous areas for viotribal communities of India. If, as cus- lating the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled todian of tribal rights, governors are Area Land Transfer Regulation Act, reluctant to exercise their exclusive Panchayat (Extension to Scheduled powers, he wants such powers to be Areas) Act and the Forest Rights Act. Narasimhan took it up with the handed over to his ministry. Deo's tough stance came after state government rather than seize Andhra Pradesh mishandled the land the initiative as governor. On rights of its tribals and allowed firms September 28, Deo wrote to Chief that are neither owned nor controlled Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy and his Chief Secretary Minnie by local communities to Mathew: "You are aware freely mine in tribal lands. that the Alienation of Land "If this can happen when Transfer Regulation proI'm in charge of the Union hibits a non-tribal from tribal affairs ministry, purchasing or even getting what's the use if I can't land on lease in Scheduled question governors?" askAreas. Powers of the Goved Deo. "Let there be a deernor are as described by bate on what governors KISHORE Attorney General G.E. have done in the nine CHANDRA DEO Vahanvati--unfettered states where they are vested with special powers under and unbridled--and the state had no authority, whatsoever, to reach agreeArticle 244," he said. At the last conference of governors ments for mining on tribal lands." The called by the former president Prati- Andhra government had not only isbha Patil, Deo had first apprised gov- sued licences to Indian firms but also ernors about their special powers. He a foreign one. "Bringing in a Middle had pointed out that failure to use their Eastern company and others through powers and granting unlawful permis- the backdoor to mine in tribal areas sions for mining had engendered left- makes a mockery of the Constitution," wrote Deo. wing extremism in these areas. by Amarnath K. Menon

onia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi are the principal shareholders in a company that is set to relaunch National Herald, the Congress mouthpiece started by Jawaharlal Nehru way back in 1938. A private non-profit company, called Young Indian, was formed in March 2011, with Congress President Sonia Gandhi and her son Rahul holding 38 per cent shares each, with the specific aim of taking over the liabilities of Associated Journals Ltd (AJL), the parent company which owned National Herald and its Urdu version, Qaumi Awaz, all with money spent from the Congress's coffers. The two newspapers had folded up on April 1, 2008. AJL's liabilities of Rs 90.21 crore have been taken over

S

SONIA AND RAHUL GANDHI HOLD 76 PER CENT STAKE IN THE NEW VENTURE

by Young Indian for Rs 50 lakh, the entire amount paid by the Congress. Another Rs 1 crore, it is learnt, has been spent by Young Indian in renovating the newspaper's headquarters, Herald House, at 5 A, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. This amount too has been funnelled by the Congress as loan. While Sonia and Rahul hold 76 per cent stake in the new venture, the remaining shares are owned by Congress Treasurer Motilal Vora, who is also the chairman-cum-managing director of AJL, and party General Secretary Oscar Fernandes. Young Indian has been registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956. Veteran journalist Suman

Dubey has been designated as managing committee member in the new company. National Knowledge Commission Chairman Sam Pitroda too is a member of the committee. When asked, Congress spokesman Manish Tewari said he had no information about the project. Attempts to reach Vora and Fernandes did not yield any result. Rahul's political aide Kanishka Singh, however, denied there was any plan to relaunch National Herald. "Young Indian has no intention of starting any newspaper," he said. Documents filed by the Registrar of Companies point out that the company is "engaged in activities to inculcate in the mind of India's youth commitment to the ideal of a democratic and secular society and provides for application of its profits or income in pursuit thereof". The newspaper will try to achieve this aim.
by Devesh Kumar

KERALA

DIVIDED OVER TODDY
Courts and religious groups lead campaign against the government's inability to tackle rising alcoholism
erala's passion for the bottle has triggered yet another round of spirited political controversy. The high court and minority community groups have joined hands to blame the state government for Kerala's perilous lurch towards mass alcoholism. The Kerala High Court on September 20 called for a ban on toddy and closure of bars during day time. It castigated the government and the political class for not taking steps to check liquor in-

K

take. But except for the Muslim League, all parties have rejected a ban on toddy, saying it is Kerala's traditional drink, and the least harmful of alcoholic beverages. Kerala tops India in per capita liquor sale and intake (8.2 litres per year), accounting for 16 per cent of the total Indian Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) sold in the country. Liquor is the state's second largest source of income after sales tax, and rose from Rs 2,000 crore in the past 10 years to cross Rs 7,000 crore in 2011. Besides the 725 bars selling IMFL and 400-odd outlets of the state-owned Kerala State Beverages Corporation, which has a monopoly on IMFL distribution, the state has 4,000-odd toddy shops. Says B. Sugathakumari, poet and social activist, "Kerala's high suicide rate, road mishaps, mental ailments, divorces, domestic violence and crime can be traced to rising alcoholism." Even as they acknowledge the rise in alcohol consumption, politicians have hit back at the judges. State Excise Minister K. Babu said even as

the courts talk against alcohol, they continue to pass judgments in favour of the liquor industry by meddling in policy matters. "It's not fair for courts to meddle in the state's affairs, nor to decide what people should drink," says Babu about the high court's suggestion to sell beer instead of toddy. The high court has responded angrily, saying the minister is trying to mislead the public by misinterpreting
JHONEY THOMAS

A TODDY SHOP IN KERALA

its orders. "If people should be allowed to do whatever they like, why should there be laws on compulsory wearing of helmets by two-wheeler drivers?" commented Justice S. Siri Jagan on October 4. The liquor debate has also got a communal colour after vehement protests by minority groups against toddy. The Muslim League executive committee passed a resolution calling for a ban on toddy, while the Catholic church said it would ask people to vote against parties opposed to prohibition. "If the liquor lobby is driven by its vote bank, why can't we ask people to vote against it?" asks Archbishop Soosapakiam of the Latin Catholic Church. Many Hindu groups see in the antitoddy move a hidden minority community agenda to deprive some Hindu communities of their livelihood. "The ban on toddy would devastate lives of most Ezhavas, the traditional toddy tappers," says Vellappally Natesan, secretary of Sree Narayana Dharma Paripalanayogam (SNDP), the largest Hindu group. by M.G. Radhakrishnan

42

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

