Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

ARARE WOMAN FOR RAY
The story of the remarkable woman who let Satyajit Ray play out his genius
By Shohini Ghosh

B
MANIK & I: MY LIFE WITH SATYAJIT RAY
byBijoya Ray Penguin Price: RS 699 Pages: 624 BETWEEN THE COVERS Replete with anecdotes and delightful vignettes, the bookis most likely to be enjoyed bythose who alreadypossess sufficient knowledge about Rayand his expansive bodyof work.

ijoya Ray, wife of Satyajit Ray, was 84 when she started writing her memoirs to be serialised by the Bengali magazine Desh. Amader Katha (Our Story) appeared in 37 instalments between 2003 and 2004 and was later published as a book. A meticulous keeper of diaries, Bijoya has been able to construct an admirably detailed account of her life and times spanning a period of more than eight decades. Indrani Majumdar's careful and nuanced translation of Amader Katha has now made the book available for a much wider readership. Well-read and independent, the young Bijoya is a woman with an open mind and a spirit of adventure. Prior to her involvement with Manik (as Satyajit was called by family and close friends), she had been engaged twice. Both times, she chose the suitors herself but broke off when she felt the partnership would not work. It was finally her friend and younger first cousin Manik she chose as her life partner. Writes Bijoya: "It was while listening to (western classical) music every night in Manik's company that our friendship turned into deep love." The romance was heady but not easy. The family was gently pressing Bijoya to marry one of the many suitable boys around. She not only managed to reject them but continued to work in order to maintain her financial independence. She even tried her hand at acting even though the profession did not interest her much and Satyajit was not particularly approving. In October 1948, Bijoya and Satyajit got married at a quiet registration ceremony in Bombay. Next year, the couple was formally married according to Brahmo rites after Satyajit's mother, who was also Bijoya's paternal aunt, reluctantly gave her consent. Ray was not only an exceptional filmmaker but an extraorSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

dinary writer, illustrator and music composer. He revived and edited Sandesh, the highly-respected children's magazine and was a prolific writer of fiction for young adults. Feluda, his fictional detective, and Professor Shonku, his sci-fi hero, are household names in Bengal. Bijoya Ray's memoirs provide a fairly detailed chronicle of Ray's cinematic career but some readers may feel disappointed that there is relatively little about his fiction and design work. The royalties from his books constituted the family's main source of income. His films brought him awards but very little money. Replete with anecdotes and delightful vignettes, the book, however, is most likely to be enjoyed by those who already possess sufficient knowledge about Ray and his expansive body of work. The early chapters, depicting a time during which Bijoya was an essential companion to Ray's creative evolution, make for a riveting read. Their intellectual evolution, international travel, exposure to the world of music, art and film are fascinating. Particularly enjoyable is her account of their first trip to the UK and Europe. The later chapters, when Ray embarks on his brilliant career while Bijoya gets more enmeshed in domesticity, make for less interesting reading. After the birth of their son Sandip, the text is often weighed down by dull quotidian details. I also wish that Bijoya's original account of her crisis over Ray's famous extra-marital relationship had not been so severely censored. A fuller account would have given the protagonists far greater complexity. Satyajit's mother once asked Bijoya whether she would be able to do justice to the Ray family name. After reading this book, we could legitimately ask whether Ray's exceptional talents would have found such prolific expression had his wife not provided him a creative space that was so unfettered by household stress and responsibilities. The conventional marriage, no matter how unconventional the couple, has always privileged men. Bijoya spared no effort to ensure that Satyajit's work was not hindered in any way. In the history of creative arts, how many women would have enjoyed such privilege?
Shohini Ghosh is a professor at AJK Mass Communication Research Centre, Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi

64

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

