INDIAN AIR FORCE

HAWK THE BEST TRAINING SOLUTION FOR THE BEST PILOTS.
Produced in partnership with Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, the Hawk Advanced Jet Trainer complimented by a suite of ground based synthetic training aids has made a step change in Indian Air Force fast jet trainin; With high levels of reliability and serviceability the Hawk Training System is proving to be both a cost effective and highly productive solution; one which provides India with high quality front line pilots as well as high technology employment for the Indian aerospace workforce. www.baesystems.com

On a growth trajectory
rom being a small force of just four Westland Wapiti army cooperative aircraft, six RAF trained officers and 19 Hawai Sepoys, the Indian Air Force is now the fourth largest air force in the world. Making a humble beginning and playing a tactical role of supporting the Army 79 years ago, IAF has come full circle and is a well established strategic force today. It continued to play second fiddle till the Independence. On April 1, 1954, Air Marshal Subroto Mukherjee, one of the founding members of the Air Force, took over as the first Indian Chief of the Air Staff. Slowly and steadily, the IAF started transforming itself into a strategic force. And, the restoration of 16 Liberator bombers from amongst hundred or so destroyed by the British to deny the Indians a bomber and later the induction of Canberra bomber can well be seen as the beginning of the process. 80th anniversary is surely a landmark in the history of any combat force. Celebrations apart, it also serves as a quiet reminder to reflect on the journey so f a r . . . p r o g r e s s e s made over 79 y e a r s . . . commitment, ingenuity and selfless service of our exIAF personnel...their audacious vision, pioneering spirit and able leadership which put IAF on a growth trajectory. Always committed to respond to national commitments, the Indian Air Force stands today at the threshold of acquiring multi-spectrum capabilities synonymous with India's growing regional stature and expanding national interests. Resurrection of 220 squadrons with Su-30 aircraft is on top of lAF's agenda to sustain credible combat force levels, despite the phasing out of certain legacy aircraft. Unveiling ambitious expansion plans forthe Indian Air Force (IAF), Air Chief Marshal N A K Browne in his customary press conference ahead of the Oct 8 Air Force Day said, "Seventy-five percent of the IAF will be highly modernised by 2022, while the acquisition process of 126 medium multi-role combat aircraft (MMRCA) was on track and would be finalised by the March 31, 2013," adding "The IAF is witnessing an unprecedented phase of modernisation and capability enhancement and can effectively respond

F

to any attempt at undermining India's national security. The transformational change can be witnessed across the capability spectrum that includes notonly combat platforms butalso induction of force multipliers and air mobility platforms to provide strategic reach and operationalflexibility." To mark the 80th anniversary, the IAF showcased its latest acquisitions, which include the indigenous Airborne Early Warning and Control [AEW&C] radar plane and a Russian-origin Mi-17V5 cargo helicopter, at the Air Force Day parade at Hindon Air Base on the outskirts of the Capital. The AEW&C radar on a modified Brazilian Embraer plane will be on static display at the parade, while three Mi-17V5 will fly over the parade ground in a Vic formation carrying the national flag and the Air Force ensign. The AEW&C plane was inducted into the IAF last month in Bangalore. Two more such planes will come from Brazil by next year-end and their full integration with the IAF will take about two years. It also witnessed a flying display of other air assets such as the Mi-25 and Mi-35 attack helicopters, C130J plane for special force, and MiG-21, MiG-29, Mirage-2000 and Su-30MKI fighter jets. The Mi-17V5 helicopter is the lAF's latest purchase from Russia. It will facilitate the ferrying of troops and supplies to remote and mountainous areas. As many as 80 helicopters were ordered in 2008 for $1.34 billion and their delivery started in September 2011. Russia has delivered nearly half of the 80 helicopters so far. Be it undertaking disaster relief missions to our distressed countrymen in any part of the country, or providing operational support to our paramilitary forces engaged in various operations, or carrying out sustained air maintenance missions for our Jawans under adverse conditions, the Indian Air Force (IAF) has done it all with all its virtuosity--versatility, adaptability and agility. The lAF's 'air warrior spirit' faced each of these challenges head on and converted them into opportunities for the growth of the Service. Notwithstanding three wars with Pakistan, China and the Kargil clash since Independence, the IAF has undertaken several United Nations peacekeeping missions.

BAE SYSTEMS
REAL PARTNERSHIP. REAL ADVANTAGE.

nnllTlP - , -* I

CTfeature t

KNOT r

,,:.,,,

It has never occurred before in a MiG-29 aircraft. No one knew how to prevent possible catastrophic damage to the strategically important and vital petrochemical installations of national importance and save several innocent people on ground. It warranted extraordinary acts of courage against ail odds....even defying logic. All this came to the fore in Sqn Ldr Ajit Bhaskar Vasane, who went on to get Shaurya Chakra, one of India's highest decorations for gallantry in peacetime.
n Oct 10, 2011, Sqn Ldr Vasane was authorized to lead a two aircraft Supersonic Practice intercept mission. Lining up for departure, the sortie promised to be an enjoyable one. Endless blue skies punctuated with puffs of white clouds. What more could an aviator ask for? As Sqn Ldr Vasane, along with his wingman, Sqn Ldr Rohit Singh climbed to an altitude of 9 kms as per the profile of the exercise. Under the control of Ground Controlled Intercept (GCI) radar, the pilots commenced their exercise. At a distance of 85 km from base, rolling out a hard right turn as vectored by the GCI, Vaas, as his friends know him, noticed the Head Up Display (HUD) of the aircraft flickering. The HUD is the pilots' interface with the elements around him, giving him his flight parameters, altitude and other vital information he needs. Vaas knew it was just a matter of time before the HUD blanked off and he would have to resort to his flight instruments in the cockpit. And sure enough, the green lines on the HUDflickered one last time before blanking off. Immediately thereafter, the nauseating smell of toxic smoke filled his nostrils and fire emanated from the base of the HUD. The situation deteriorated rapidly with noxious fumes and smoke filling the cockpit. In addition, other glass-plastic material and cables quickly caughtfire, depositing heavy soot on the windshield, thus severely restrictingfrontal visibility. A fighter pilot is at his comfortable best within the confines of a fighter cockpit but in this case, the same cockpit quickly transformed into a dangerous metallic cell, filled with smoke and threatened his existence. Vaas frantically tried to

O

douse the fire with his hands, but had to discontinue the attempt as molten plastic started to burn his gloves and fingers. With cool clarity of thought and judgement, he initiated emergency recovery of the aircraft. The route back to base implied a flight over the vital petrochemical installations in the vicinity. The intensity of the fire rapidly increased not only amplifying pilot's discomfort in the cockpit but also imposing grave personal risk to Vasane. An ejection at this stage would be very high in the list of logical actions. But courage defies logic and especially so when several innocent people on ground would be endangered. Therefore with exceptional presence of mind and courage of highest order, he chose to avoid over-flying various petrochemical installations in the vicinity, even though his prolonged flight endangered his own life. Notwithstanding the reduced frontal visibility, he skillfully positioned himself for an emergency landing and executed the same in flawless manner, without any further damage to the aircraft. After landing, he further guided and helped the crash crew in quickly dousing the cockpit fire. The pilot's action in handling such unforeseen critical emergency, which is neither documented nor has ever occurred before in a MiG-29 aircraft, not only saved him and the aircraft, but also prevented possible damage to the strategically important and vital petrochemical installations in the area.

-f

J

0} djipapeai AijiEnb apwoid o\s 8e|j am 0} ami UIEUISJ oj no/(

Ijjjds JOUJBM JIB 3P4 am sazi|oqiuAs A|}dB 'MOJ B ui auij} puoass sm jo^ Aqdoji }ua3ui)uoo 3uiqojE|/\ jssg apejBd Qy am jo SUIUUJM am PUB ami} pjoaaj u| |3uuBq3 qs||3u3 am |o sja^BM Suizaa4 am jo BUISSOJO 'SBABIBLUJH am ui s>|Bad snojsqoBajj p 3ui|BDs au.i 'sppo aiqEjunouunsuj ^o BOB} am ui }mds ,aip ABS JSABU, s,jvi panqi^a BABIJ Aam 'uieSE pus aiuii ·sjassB |B3J jno BJB spuBiuap 3u|3j3UJ3 jo BOB) am u| A|pmb ateAouui 0} pnjjjdE pus aoua||aoxa oj }U3w:pwoo iBuondaoxa jjaqj m!M 'SJOUJEM i\e no 'a|doad jno-aojnosaj }sa3§!q jno 0} snoo^ jno mqs pEajsuj PUB i|as|M azquoud o) paau aw 'A3o|ouyoa} jsnt uo Smsnooj AJJOAO jo pBajsui aAjpadsjad paouB|Eq B UIB^UJEUI jsnuj aw 'juaiuaouBijua 4!l!qBdEo )3]BJ3|300B p asBqd sim u| lio)S!i| jno u| asByd SujUjjap B Suuajua aje 3^ ·aouBjjoduji |Bp^o si s)3ssB a|qBn|BA asaifl j^o Ajunass pue Ajs^s ~ ajsAs PUB lusujdinba IJB am y> sws sm m!M psisnjjua uaaq aAEi) 3 loojd uotiBzmjspouj jno o) jjoddns ps^uiisun sy Ag ·ssi^iiqBdBD jno ] jo 33j33p i|3!q B sasodsj UOHBM jno 's>|jOMiau jaqAo PUB uopuuoj, OjjBjado jno jo A^unoas am 01, uoi}U3}jB JBino^Bd AEd 0} JOIJJBM JJE
ia nnp iinpa iiaHva ncip i ·IIIPII%A iiipniai sABM|B 0) Sn SJUBJJBAA

^sppo 9|qeiunoujjnsu! p 8DEj aiji m ijjjds ,ajp ABS jaAau, s\\ SPL| jvi 'umSe pun aoiji 'sjassp |paj jno SJE A|>|Dmb ajEAOuui 01 apnjjjdE puE 9Dua||a3xa oj IUSLUIJLULUOD [EuojjdaDxa jjaqj LJIJM 'SJOUJEM JJE JHQ,,
ajniE8llD

dUJP

