imp CTF

L

lira Usher m

mo
exclusive 8.5 acre landscaped park with putting greens, foolproof security arrangement in this gated community and not to mention all the sports and lifestyle amenities of the Uniworld Resorts township. When you need to unwind with your friends, the premium clubhouse will offer you more ways than one to do that. You can either be playing a game of Lawn Tennis or working out at the gymnasium or enjoying a game of Badminton, if not Basketball or swimming. And there is no reason why your kids should feel left out as the clubhouse also offers an exclusive kids' play area. Talking about kids, some of the best world-class schools in the NCR such as Shikshantar, the Shri Ram School, DPS, Heritage, Amity International, Pathways and GD Goenka are all within a radius of 15 minutes drive from the Villas. To put in other words, the Villas is a world of luxurious amenities which could become your own world. The more you explore about the luxurious amenities, the more convinced you will be of the fact that the Villas is all about blissful exceptionality intended for the aficionados of an indulgent lifestyle. The Villas at Uniworld City is a magical place where everyday feels like a holiday. SOME OF THE KEY FEATURES ARE 1) 3 floors of spacious living with attached basement 2) Personal elevator, party terrace with Jacuzzi Home automation system with mood lighting Space for your own gym, bar & home theatre Landscaped park & putting green

t a time when you start thinking there is no escaping the hustle and bustle of the city life and the humdrum of daily routine, the Villas by Unitech feels like a respite for your Jy and mind. Ensconced in the pristine township of Uniworld Resorts, the Villas is a highly sought after residential project from Unitech. Located in Sector 33, Gurgaon, it is just a fifteen minutes drive from the international airport in Delhi on the national highway 8. Created taking inspiration from the original concept of a villa, everything about the Villas will appeal to the elite who appreciate living a good life in a landmark location. It presents four floors of spacious villa living with a host of premium features in every part of each living unit including a personal elevator. The centralized VRV air-conditioning system will keep a tab on the room temperature and make sure you feel 'at home1 all times. Amenities are attentively designed around you to give you the lifestyle you have always wished for and this is what differentiates the Villas from other projects of its kind. From a clean green environment that promises to keep you in the best of moods at all times to a personal spa meant to soothe your body when you feel you need it, this signature project has everything that you would only be proud of to have in your home. Each villa comes with a personal lap pool/ Jacuzzi for your pleasure. Other exquisite features of the Villas include the

To know more please call: Amit Siddhartha - +91 9654888813

nnllTIP

CTpeature

U

nitech Golf and Country Club is an ultra luxurious Golf Course Residential project located along the premium Noida Expressway. Just a hop away from the posh colonies in South Delhi like Maharani Bagh and New Friend's Colony and adjacent to Amity Business School, Noida; at the tri-junction of DND Flyway, KalindiKunj flyover and the Noida Expressway, it has excellent connectivity to the rest of the National Capital Region (NCR). Imagine living in an integrated township with luxurious residential spaces, schools, medical facilities, commercial and retail centers, just 15 min ride from South Delhi. The nearest Metro station in Noida sector 18 is at a distance of 2.5 kms. UGCC prides itself in having an amalgamation of the world's best architects and designers who have envisaged and brought to life some of the world's most imposing and elegant architectural wonders. Eloquently rising over Noida and spread across 347 acres of prime land at one of the most prime locations that Delhi NCR has to offer - Unitech Golf and Country Club is a varied selection of upscale residential structures overlooking a signature 9 hole Golf Course. It would be one of the lowest density projects in the entire region, offering residents a picturesque and tranquil surrounding along with world-class amenities and facilities. It is truly a community of titans - for achievers and accomplished personalities in their own right who have been blessed with unbridled success and who yearn for a lifestyle that is best described as "Club Class Living". You can now play golf under the starlit sky, with state-of-the-art floodlights that render a natural carpet of light and take night golfing to a new high first of its kind in Delhi and Noida. Unitech Golf and Country Club offers two architectural marvels for the connoisseurs of good living. "Amber" is the first phase of UGCC and "Burgundy", the newer and more opulent option with ultra-spacious 4 bedroom apartments. Amber is brilliance in itself with 7 exquisitely designed towers that rise up to 31 levels high. The towers in Amber are arranged in an elliptical curve to allow maximum numbers of apartments panoramic views of the golf course. A state-of-the-art clubhouse with a fully equipped gymnasium, a multipurpose hall, a large swimming pool ensures you a modern lifestyle. The Burgundy towers are a defining statement in ultra-luxe living that truly reflects an international standard of style and elegance. Perfected to the tee to match up to the stature of its residents, these 4 bedroom magnificent apartments are present in iconic towers that are up to 43 storeys high. These towers hold beautiful apartments which have been built using the 2- to a-core unit philosophy -- every floor at Burgundy will have only two apartments, thereby opening up the available space on each floor and allowing for more comfort and privacy for its residents.

Your Invitatio

imP

CTfeature

nar

PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS
Fantastic skyline with iconic towers rising from 19 to 43 storeys Awe inspiring exterior designed by the renowned architectural firm, Callison Inc, USA Landscaped gardens adorned with exquisite water bodies Signature 9 hole Golf Course with well-equipped golf clubhouse & night golfing Integrated sports complex with all weather swimming pool, spa & gymnasium 24x7 concierge service, luxury car wash bays, banking & currency exchange facilities on site

To know more please call: Amit Parmar - +91 9654888893

