SIMPLY DELHI

Anniversary special

CURRY CORNER
There is a good reason why Karim's is probably the mostwritten about Mughlai eatery in town. The answer to this lies neither in the restaurateur's claim that their culinary heritage can be traced back to the kitchens of the Mughal emperors, nor in the reasonable pricing of all the sumptuous offerings here. Instead, it is probably mixed up somewhere amidst the exquisite coming together of spices and meat of their signature preparations like the mutton barrah or their Jahangiri qorma. Karim's is more than just a good place to dine out, it's an eating experience. Be sure to work up a healthy appetite before you head down to this eatery. The décor is as simple as the food is complex, with the rich tastes of the Mughal kitchens shining through in even simple preparations like their peeli dal. The interiors are fairly plain, and the emphasis is not on ambience, their focus is simply the food. A downside at Karim's is the waiting time, as it could take up to half hour for a table. AVERAGE MEAL FOR TWO Rs 800 including taxes AT No 16, Gali Kababian, Jama Masjid. TEL 23269880
NARENDRA BISHT//www.indiatodayimages.com

TourDe
As SIMPLY DELHI turns nine, we bring you a list of things you must not miss in the city

DELHI
THE MASTERPIECE
Akshardham temple is a world of its own. With several features like a musical fountain, exhibition halls, a large-format movie screen and boat rides, among other attractions, many tourists and even Delhiites throng the temple everyday. Arguably one of the most extravagant temple complexes in the country, it took more than 7,000 builders, masons, and polishers to construct this sprawling enterprise which is built to withstand major quakes. Built over 30 acres on the banks of the Yamuna River, this temple is dedicated to the 18th century sage, Bhagwan Swaminarayan. The main temple is built of pink sandstone and white marble. It has nine domes, 20 pinnacles, 234 pillars and over 20,000 sculptured figures. There is also a food court and a souvenir shop. Weekends here are choc-a-bloc with visitors from all across the country thronging to visit this brilliant showpiece of Indian architecture. AT NH 24, Noida Mor TEL 22016688, 22026688; akshardham.com

s-22

HEMANT CHAWLAT//www.indiatodayimages.com

SIMPLY DELHI  OCTOBER 2012

OCTOBER 2012  SIMPLY DELHI

s-23

SIMPLY DELHI

Anniversary special

FINE BITES
Coming to us all the way from New York, serving arguably the best European food in town, one year old Le Cirque has already won itself an impressive number of loyalists. Unlike its parent restaurant in New York which was adorned with monkeys, tents and circus balls, the Indian version is an extremely sophisticated, plush, fine dining space, catering to the crème de la crème of Delhi. Start your meal with one of their crowd pleasers--the tuna tartar with spiced mango and fennel dressing, perfect to get those digestive juices flowing. Main course here is a no-brainer--it's got to be their Wagyu steak served with foie gras, truffles, potato rossini and creamed spinach. Full of rich flavours, delicious ingredients and impeccable pairings, this one is a runaway hit. Don't leave without trying their signature dessert, Floating Island. A visual treat, it comes on a bed of dry ice and is a combination of meringues floating in a bowl of creme anglaise. AVERAGE MEAL FOR TWO Rs 9,000 plus taxes AT The Leela Palace, Chanakyapuri TEL 39331234

CHILL OUT ZONE
It is not just about coffee--it's an experience. At almost any time of the day, groups of office goers, students as well as couples with their toddlers can be spotted gorging on the grilled sandwiches, cheese balls and patties along with cold coffee at this tiny shop located in the bustling Janpath market. De Paul's introduced many Delhiites to the coffee drinking culture in 1969 and the fan following of this refreshing strong coffee served in little plastic bottles only seems to get stronger by the day. COST Rs 20 for cold coffee AT 22, Janpath Bhawan TEL 2332821

VIKRAM SHARM,A//www.indiatodayimages.com

THE CITY ON WHEELS
Pressed for time, but still want to check out Delhi's landmarks and historical spots? Get on the Hop-on, Hop-off bus or the HOHO bus as they call it--and let them do all the work for you. The HOHO rides, an initiative developed during the 2010 Commonwealth games cover over 19 destinations across the city and apart from the traditional tourist spots, spaces such as the Saket malls and the Lajpat Nagar market have been included in the fold. The HOHO buses run every 30 minutes and their distinct violet colour makes them easy to spot. You can get off at any of the stops and just board the next bus to continue your tour. The buses also have guest relation executives who provide information while on the bus, both in Hindi and English. TICKET Rs 300 per person, available on the bus and on hohoindia.com AT Various location across the capital. Main office is at Baba Kharak Singh Marg

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR//www.indiatodayimages.com

s-24

SIMPLY DELHI  OCTOBER 2012

