Spe cialReport

JAMMU AND KASHMIR
Photographs by T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

UMERA JAAN, 12, AND HER SISTER SOBIYA, 7, AT THEIR SRINAGAR HOME. THEIR FATHER MOHAMMAD SHAFI TELI, DEPUTY SARPANCH OF BARAMULLAH'S NOWPORA JAGIR VILLAGE, WAS SHOT DEAD ON SEPTEMBER 23

STUDENTS OF BURN HALL SCHOOL, SRINAGAR

Disillusioned with Omar Abdullah, the new generation just wants jobs and economic prog ress, not government oppression or religious extremism
By Asit Jolly in Srinagar

YOUNG AND ANGRYIN PE ACEFULVALLEY
Omar Abdullah's latest bid to come good on his election promise of luring big-ticket private sector investments to create fresh jobs in the Valley. "It was no more than a photo-op," he adds. His words sum up the disenchantment of his generation, which constitutes half of the state's 11 million population. The disillusionment coincides with a growing radicalisation amid the gradual but steady spread of puritanical Wahhabism in the Valley. Ahl-eHadith, a cash-rich, Saudi-supported organisation which now claims 1.5 million adherents across J&K, is drawing scores of young men from the dominant Hanafi Sunni community to more than 700 new mosques built over the past five years. Aamir is not one from the stonepelting gangs of Nowhatta--Kashmir's very own `Gaza Strip' in downtown Srinagar. He is not a Wahhabi. Nor is he an adherent of the separatist Hurriyat Conference. He is an earnest student looking to land a decent job. He refuses to be photographed. "That would be the end of my career," he says, claiming students have been picked up and jailed under the state's draconian Public Safety Act (PSA) simply for posting what the government deems "unsuitable" on Facebook. Almost four years into his six-year tenure, Chief Minister Omar Abdullah, 42, has become the source of anger for a generation of youngsters who once adored his bluntness and youthful flair. He presses on in a wobbly coalition with the Congress, getting the occasional appreciative pat from New Delhi as well as veiled slurs from the Congress rank and file in the Valley. "His predicament is not different from that of Manmohan Singh," says Engineer Rashid, 45, an in-

wenty-two-year-old Aamir Khan was left out of the list of 1,500 youngsters handpicked by Kashmir University to attend an on-campus interaction on October 5 with Rahul Gandhi. He joined angry protesters outside the university convention centre as Rahul "built bridges" between corporate India and Kashmir's youth inside. "This was the biggest farce yet," says the MBA student, summarily dismissing Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister

T

dependent legislator from Langate in Kupwara district who is part of a growing tribe that believes the Chief Minister draws sustenance only from the Gandhis at 10 Janpath. "Like Singh, Omar is desperate to hold on to his job and faithfully toes the line Delhi draws for him," he says. "There is too wide a gap between what the Chief Minister has been able to deliver and what people expected of him," says Mohammad Yousuf Tarigami, the state CPI(M) secretary and legislator from Kulgam. The new Islamic University of Science and Technology (IUST), nestled

on a prominent hilltop in the Anantnag district township of Awantipora that is also the location of the Valley's second airfield, best showcases the impatient yearnings of the new Kashmiri youth. Instituted by the Mehbooba Mufti government in 2005 adjacent to revered Sufi saint Hazrat Syed Hassan Mantaqi's shrine, IUST's scenic campus includes all shades of informed opinion and ambition. Dress codes here are passé, cappuccinos at the Café Coffee Day on Srinagar's Durganath Road are a treat and the hijab is often employed as a fashion statement. "It's nobody's business to tell us what we ought to wear," says second-year MBA student Asima Altaf, 24. IUST's students, says journalism department head Monisa Qadri, 27, are drawn from Kashmir's socially backward areas. But even here, the Chief Minister is rapidly losing faith. "He's a

32

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

Spe cialReport

JAMMU AND KASHMIR

INTERVIEW OMAR ABDULLAH

"I am who I am and that is the way it is"
After nearly four years as chief minister of Jammu & Kashmir, Omar Abdullah tells Assistant Editor ASIT JOLLY that he is trying to cope with the growing aspirations of the youth. Q. What are the changes that your government has implemented after the disturbances of 2008-2010? A. We've made changes in both administrative and political response, and the way security forces handle situations. The biggest lesson is that we don't take anything for granted anymore. Q. But there's been a great deal of public restraint too. A. Yes there has. It would be easy for the government to take all the credit for the two summers of relative peace, but it also goes to the people who do not want a repeat of 2010. I believe we have been able to grow the constituency for peace with the increase in tourism. Q. Do more tourists mean more revenue for your government? A. The government does not earn from tourism. We don't have luxury taxes, we don't even charge an entry tax. The situation has been so fluid that we wanted all the income to flow directly to the people. Q. You have been described several times as "aloof". A. When the chips are down, everybody has something negative to say. To an extent, I have learnt from the personal criticism in 2010. But I am who I am and that is the way it is. Q. What is on your `done' list nearly four years into your tenure? A. Legislations that we wanted to bring in, particularly on Information Commission and RTI Act, Vigilance Commission, Public Service Guarantee Act. Also some infrastructure projects that we wanted to see fast-tracked, in particular four-lane roads of the national highway between Jammu and Srinagar. Q. These are long-term ventures. A. We have also made a start in empowering people through panchayats by conducting elections in 2011. Blocklevel elections will be held in October. By next year, we should have the district boards. That will be a huge step forward in empowering people. Q. But sarpanches have been gunned down. Devolution of powers is stuck. Is your big success in peril? A. Some weeks ago, 35 sarpanches were killed in Bihar. Yet somehow three killed here became international news while Bihar got buried. Jharkhand has had more sarpanches killed. I am not suggesting we overlook what happened here, but what is the need of blowing it out of proportion? Q. You have promised Kashmiris--one half of who are young--the world. A. I promised that we would try and revive the economy. It is unfortunate that our term in office coincided with one of the worst slowdowns of the Indian economy but I think we have created an atmosphere where industrialists are looking closely at Jammu & Kashmir. Q. Can you now give a timeframe when the opportunities will arrive? A. They have already started coming, which is one of the reasons why I was critical of Mamata Banerjee and Akhilesh Yadav for opposing FDI. Don't have FDI in retail in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, but why deny us the opportunity if we believe it is the right way to go for a state like ours where a lot of horticulture and agriculture takes place? Q. Young Kashmiris are incensed with you for blocking Facebook, Twitter and other social networks. A. I log on to Facebook, Twitter and YouTube on my cellphone, and I have a regular BSNL connection. No instructions have been given to block YouTube or Facebook or Twitter. Q. Are you still firm on revocation of Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act? A. Absolutely. Every day that passes is another day we have not needed to use the Army in the areas where I have been talking about revoking AFSPA. Q. Where do you see Jammu and Kashmir at the end of your tenure? A. In terms of the political solutions, I think a lot will depend on Delhi. It is fair to say that the current state of flux in the Capital doesn't lend itself to any sustained political dialogue here. On development, I believe we will be a lot further ahead than we are today. On the violence front too, I believe we will make significant progress in terms of further reducing the level.
For full text of interview, visit: www.indiatoday.in/omar

STUDENTS FROM THE ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AT THE AWANTIPORA CAMPUS

well-meaning guy but he blocked the social networks--our last forums of free expression," says Salman Irshad, 22, incensed at being robbed of his daily dose of Facebook and Twitter. Irshad sees the ban, imposed in the wake of public protests against a recent YouTube video that offended Muslims all over the world, as oppressive: "If the American who uploaded the video could do so because he enjoys the right

to free expression, then why are we not free to express our outrage?" The Chief Minister however claims no site is blocked. "We only asked service providers to slow down the networks to make access to sites carrying the offensive video difficult," he says. Home Minister Nasir Aslam Wani concurs: "We only asked Google India to take the film off." The truth lies somewhere in between. SMS services are still blocked

on prepaid mobile phone connections, used by an overwhelming majority of youngsters in the Valley. Young BlackBerry users like Mohammad Arafat of Kashmir University's political science department must show a full year of "responsible" usage before any service provider allows them to use the messenger service. Young Kashmiris view the mobile phone restrictions as "discrimination". Zilhuma

Shah, 22, a second-year MBA student at IUST, says she constantly feels like a "second-class citizen" discriminated against both by the Indian Government and the state administration. Omar's promise of disbursing stipends to unemployed youth also faces the problem of plenty. SKEWPY (Sher-e-Kashmir Employment and Welfare Programme for Youth), a statewide scheme envisaging stipends

and small loans to jobless educated young people, was rolled out on December 5, 2009, the late Sheikh Abdullah's birth anniversary. Beginning with 24,548 beneficiaries in 201011, the state government had to rejig budget allocations to include more than 33,000 recipients the following year. Besides delays in monthly disbursals, the scheme has reached barely half of the 80,529 jobseekers registered with the state's employment exchanges in December 2008 in its third year. Omar himself estimates the number of educated jobless Kashmiris at more than 600,000. This, in the face of nearly 100,000 unfilled vacancies in the government, is hardly something to be enthusiastic about. Omar's only real claim to success, the panchayat elections of April 2011 in which nearly 85 per cent of all rural

Kashmiris voted to improve life in the villages, may be in peril due to a lack of consensus on devolution of powers to local bodies. More worryingly for him, militants have recently put sarpanches in their sights, killing two of them in September. On September 23, two men shot Mohammad Shafi Teli, the 38year-old deputy sarpanch of Baramullah's Nowpora Jagir village, at point blank. This and the identical September 10 killing of Palahalan village sarpanch Ghulam Mohammad Yatoo, 60, quickly revived fears of militancy in north Kashmir, prompting dozens of panches and sarpanches to announce their resignations. "We have stopped stepping out of the house alone," says Nowpora resident Sadiq Rahi, 21. Police investigations however suggest that while both killings were carried out by suspected Hizbul Mujahideen cadres, they were contract killings to settle scores. Police officers say the presence of

34

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

OCTOBER 22, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

Spe cialReport

JAMMU AND KASHMIR

STUDENTS OF ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYAT A CAFETERIA IN SRINAGAR

nearly 20,000 former militants, back in their villages after serving jail terms, must not be treated casually. "These fellows are part of the cocktail for future trouble," warns S.M. Sahay, inspector general of police (IGP) responsible for the Kashmir Valley. While both infiltration and militancyrelated incidents are down to their lowest since 2001, these men, mostly in their 40s or older, are inciting the young to violence. Sahay points to the shockingly young age of three boys arrested for lobbing hand grenades in Sopore over the past two months: 12, 13 and 14. Omar Abdullah's evident success in bringing peace back to the Valley must be counted as a feat. Over a million tourists had visited the Valley by this July in addition to an unprecedented 625,000 who undertook the Amarnath yatra this summer. Enthused by the prospect of substantial earnings

from tourism, Kashmiri youth are perceptibly hesitant about joining street protests that had become a daily feature through 2009 and 2010. Youngsters similarly refused to pay heed to Jamaat-e-Islami spokesman Zahid Ali's call for action on July 4 against foreign tourists dressed in "skimpy" attire. Srinagar has also turned a new leaf, with eateries staying open for business well past the 7 p.m. curfew call. At Khayam Chowk, carefree tourists line up for their share of chargrilled tikkas and steaming rogan josh. There is an Uzbek food festival on at the Broadway Hotel and suddenly the Ahdoos Hotel is not the only place in town where the famished can find wazwan past midnight. The summer turnaround has brought new hope to young entrepreneurs like Khurram Hussain, 31, who looks after his family-owned boutique

YOUNG ENTREPRENEURS KHURRAM HUSSAIN (LEFT) AND KASHIF AHMED KHAN

hotel, Dar-Es-Salam, on the Nageen Lake shore. Part of the group that met with Rahul Gandhi, Ratan Tata, Kumar Mangalam Birla and other industrialists at the Taj Vivanta luncheon on October 5, he awaits a mid-1980slike situation "when you could share a bottle of beer on the Boulevard". Still he fears that rising radicalism will remain a stumbling block to Kashmir's tourism industry. Kashif Ahmed Khan, 21, gave up a lucrative career in electronics to launch Kashmir Box, an e-commerce portal that is helping thousands of artisans and craftsmen update designs and technology to sell their products overseas. "Young Kashmiris are no longer seeking role models in Bollywood. They have new ones in men like N.R. Narayana Murthy," he says. 

36

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 22, 2012

