Soc iety HARYANA
KHAP MEMBERS DISCUSSING THEIR STAND ON RAPE AT CHHOTU RAM'S JAT DHARAMSHALA IN SONEPAT, HARYANA

marriages are incestuous." Any violation can lead to notorious diktats and exemplary punishments. "Hookah-pani bandh (Social and economic ban)," he says. The reality is much more primal. They excommunicate families, take over property, even sentence people to death. "We live by our moral codes. People can kill, or be killed, to protect maryada at any cost," he says. "Nobody understands this and we get branded as Taliban or dabang." The combination of that code of honour with an economic crisis makes an explosive cocktail. Central to that is Jat identity as an agrarian community.

ASK WHY MOST OF THE RAPE VICTIMS ARE DALIT WHILE THE PERPETRATORS JAT, AND THEY CLAM UP. "IT'S POLITICAL PROPAGANDA."
Photographs by VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE MEDIEVALWORLD OFHARYANAKHAPS
A flagrantly anti-woman mindset is part of why there have been a series of rapes in the state.The men who run the caste councils believe invoking honour can defeat modernity.
By Damayanti Datta

R
82

ohtak Road branches off into rickety lanes. One leads to Arya Nagar in Sonepat, Haryana. On Saturday morning, October 13, it is clogged with tractors. Houses painted in fluorescent colours crowd the sidewalks. Angrezi bolna sikhe (Learn to speak in English) is written on

a wall flanked by a gym named, Iron, and a photo studio called, Lovely. On a narrow cobbled road, women sit in groups, attending to children. Where is Chhotu Ram's Jat Dharamshala? Phulpatti Devi, mother of two, points to an orange building. "What's going on there," she asks. Sarv Khap Mahapanchayat, the meeting of all khaps from across Haryana. "What are

they talking about," she enquires, idly. They are talking about women. There is a pandemic of rape cases in Haryana: 16 in the past one month, 367 between January and June, 733 last year. Khap panchayats, or the all-male caste councils that act like kangaroo courts and enforce extralegal norms on Jat villagers under them, have touched a national raw nerve by proposing a

medieval solution: Young men and women should get married very young so that their "sexual desires find safe outlets". Phulpatti doesn't really care. She lives in a world where men make deeply personal decisions for women. She just knows that there are few men, let alone women, who would dare to lose property, honour and even life by going against a khap diktat. "Khaps go back to the days of King Harshavardhana of Thanesar in seventh century," says Satbir Singh Malik, a Sonepat village head belonging to the Malik clan. The word can be traced back to satrapy, or clan domain, in the first century BC. Today, khap is a lose union of clans, castes and subcastes, or gotra, across villages. What gives it power is an ancient code of honour. "Khap abides by the codes of maryada (honour) set by king Harsha," says Satbir. "We believe that same-gotra

"We have traditionally formed about one-third of the state's population and owned over 60 per cent of land," says retired Army Major Om Pal Singh of Arya Nagar, a member of the Malik khap. That is due to the Punjab Land Alienation Act of 1901, which had given land ownership rights to Jats and denied Dalits, among others. With Dalits taking advantage of affirmative action in jobs and education in recent years, their rising prosperity has become a point of tension. And a possible explanation of why most of the victims of rape in Haryana are Dalits. From 10 a.m., the dharamshala begins to fill up. Besides the five biggest clans--Malik, Dahiya, Hooda, Nain and Dalal--there are representatives from around 100 panchayats across the state and almost all the 300 gotras. They come, stomping their curved walking sticks, clad in white dhoti-

kurta, white hair neatly covered in crisp white turbans. They embrace each other, settle down on charpoys, and smoke hookah together. A few, mostly retired Army officers, come dressed informally in shirts, caps and sport shoes. A tea stall has been set up. In a sea of old faces there are just a few young men. They wait on the elderly chiefs, lighting their bidi, positioning their hookah. As clansmen wait for their leaders, they huddle in private groups. A young man in yellow turban is moving from group to group, holding forth. One can catch phrases: "Government should not mess with khap, especially on marriage. Even the Hindu Marriage Act says customs are sacred...", "Khap should be given the status of Lok Adalat." Elders nod appreciatively. "Sonia ko bata de (Tell Sonia)," says a member of the Kanwar clan. "Khap is never unjust. Without a bit of force, how can society be preserved?" This is in response to Congress President Sonia Gandhi's comment, "Khap cannot decide law," during her October 8 visit to a Dalit rape victim's family in Jind. But ask them why most of the rape victims in Haryana are Dalit, while perpetrators are Jat, and the members clam up. "It's political propaganda against Jats," they say. "Our lips are sealed. These days only the media and courts speak." Om Pal Singh explains how the heads of clans constantly keep in touch with their constituency, "by home visits and by phone", the "extreme care" with which khaps ensure the wellbeing of all under their jurisdiction. "If someone finds it difficult to get a daughter married, we take responsibility of funding the wedding," he says. "From misbehaviour to murder, khap justice is the cheapest and the best." He recalls a case of multiple murders between two families in a village over property disputes that escalated into revenge-seeking. "We brought the two families together, after three years of consistent effort," he says. "We said, you have to hold hands and eat together. If you don't, we won't eat as well." Khaps work better than courts, he claims. "If you bring people face to face, how long can they lie? But if you go to court there

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

OCTOBER 29, 2012  INDIA TODAY

83

Soc iety HARYANA
DADA BALJIT SINGH MALIK

is endless possibility of distortion. The Government should learn from us." Leaders come one by one. Dada Baljit Singh Malik and Ranbir Dahiya, heads of the two biggest clans, Malik and Dahiya, are the last to arrive. A burst of activity breaks out. Khap members jot down notes, circulate papers, whisper in each other's ears and confer across groups. Some pass around printed pamphlets to reinforce their views and statements. They crack jokes and spar in mock verbal fights. Sube Singh Samain, the Mahapanchayat spokesperson, sounds out an alert: "Don't use the microphone. Talk amongst yourselves as you would during a panchayat. Reporters are here." Nafe Singh Nain, president of the Mahapanchayat, furnishes the topics under discussion: Rape, reservation and image of khap. With the permission of Nain, one by one the members stand up and wax eloquent on rape: "Unless girls give signals, men won't come near you", "If you go around in a two-inch chaddi, you invite rape", "Rape is rising because of television and the media. There is a culture of obscenity all around." As voices grow strident against women, Government and the courts, Dada Baljit Singh Malik suddenly changes the agenda

and mood by announcing over the microphone: "We side with the Government. If the state says 18 is the age of marriage for women, we support it. Rapists have no age, religion or caste. We condemn them all. We think female foeticide is murder and we condemn it. Haryana does not top the nation in rape cases. Nor do we have any VIP involved in rape." A minute of stunned silence and then the buzz grows into an all-out roar. At the first hint of battle, the organisers break into sweat. Satbir Singh shouts into the microphone: "Hey, brother, quiet. Shut up. Is this a panchayat or something else?" A lull falls. Those who had spoken most ferociously against the Government,

RAPE IS RISING BECAUSE OF THE MEDIA AND TELEVISION. THERE IS A CULTURE OF OBSCENITY ALL AROUND, SAY KHAP MEMBERS.

courts or women, do a volte-face. Santosh Dahiya, the solitary leader of the women's wing of Sarv Khap and professor of Kurukshetra University, silent so long, now starts off: "We never said change the age of marriage. Beti beti hi hai (A daughter is always a daughter). We just want to say that a woman has to keep her own honour. The media is responsible for distorting our views." At the end of a long day, Dada Baljit Singh Malik, courteous and friendly, goes around greeting members. Amid his volatile colleagues, he comes across as low octane. A tall and trim 61, he was born into an elite, landed family, and owns over 100 acres of land. Although educated as a lawyer, he has held a range of top posts in state government units. Without the turban, he looks like a Delhi politician. But it's by the power of the turban that he rules over his clan. It has belonged to his family for generations, passing down to the first-born after a chief's death. In charge of the Malik clan since 1993, he too will pass it on to his eldest son, an engineer and a pilot, one day. "Old tradition is not necessarily a bad thing, but it has to be relevant to the times," he says. No wonder, his daughter, an MBA, works as a manager in the corporate sector. He has also used khap social pressure to bring about reforms: against alcoholism, unnecessary extravagance during weddings, dowry and for widow remarriage. Still, the coming years are sure to test the power of khap, he feels. "My pagri is my izzat but it's more of a duty and obligation to my people." What happens when one forgets how to put the clock forward? One is forced to say, "My time is the right time. My clock is the best." Inside the mind of the khap is a clock that is ticking away at the same place over and over. Faced with a world that refuses to wait for them, they have lost trust in all institutions that make for a modern nation: State, courts, the media. And by holding on to a piece of the past, they are alienating their own women. The khaps can only timetravel to the future or implode. The choice is theirs. 

84

INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 29, 2012

