Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Family Ties
How many Nagas is too many? Samantha Ruth Prabhu, 25, will soon find out. The Chennai actor will share screen space with three generations of the Akkineni family in Vikram Kumar's bilingual Thrayam--Nageswara Rao, 88, his son Nagarjuna, 53, and grandson Naga Chaitanya, 25. Slots for two female leads are vacant. Will her mother and grandmother be interested?
PRABHU

SECOND SHOT AT MUMBAI
Tamil actor Vega Tamotia, 24, is back to testing her fortunes in Bollywood. She has found a place alongside Manoj Bajpayee, Nawazuddin Siddiqui and Barry John in Bedabrata Pain's Chittagong. She plays Pritilata Waddedar, a revolutionary. Raised in Sydney, she did theatre in Mumbai before making her film debut in 2008 in the title role of Venkat Prabhu's Tamil film Saroja. Her other Tamil films Pasanga and Vaanam fared well but her last Hindi movie was the forgettable Aamras, about a bunch of teenagers. She should be easier to remember this time.
TAMOTIA

Going UP
The salary of workers at Maruti's Manesar plant, with an average raise of Rs 18,000 a month. The ranks of star children.A big welcome to Akshay Kumar and Twinkle Khanna's baby girl. Box office collections for Anurag Basu's Barfi!, which crossed Rs 100 crore within 10 days of its release.

Woman from Mars
Getting photographed with Hollywood stars isn't all that she does. Mallika Sherawat has turned up in a music video with American pop singer Bruno Mars. Set to Salt-N-Pepa's song Whatta Man, it has a series of spoofs, and she holds a gun to his head in a sequence where he plays a spy. There isn't even any dirty dancing. Not the Sherawat we know.
GETTYIMAGES

SHERAWAT

Going DOWN
Sunny Leone's appeal, at least off screen. She is having trouble finding a home to rent in Mumbai. Takers for Madhur Bhandarkar's brand of films. Even Kareena Kapoor couldn't salvage Heroine. Shoojit Sircar's image. Cribbing about the producers of Vicky Donor after India's Oscar entry was announced wasn't very bright.

Goodwill Hunting
Step aside Angelina Jolie.There's a new, good-looking humanitarian in town. Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, 38,has been appointed as a UN Goodwill Ambassador RAI BACHCHAN for UNAIDS.She also commemorated International Day of Peace on September 21 in New York along with UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon,rubbing shoulders with actor Michael Douglas,and with Naomi Watts at a panel discussion.Sounds fancy,but Ash says that she will give it her all to help eliminate new HIV infections among children by 2015.From Cannes to Cambodia?
I

Compiled by Nishat Bari and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

88

Volume XXXVII Number 41; For the week October 2-8, 2012, released on October 1

FOTOCORP

