Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE FELINE REPUBLIC
Nilanjana Roy's fable of cats holds up the ideals of honour and compassion
By Gillian Wright

THE WILDINGS
byNilanjana Roy Aleph Price: RS 595 Pages: 312 BETWEEN THE COVERS Royhas created a savage,dangerous world parallel to our limited,self-centred human one.It is a world of heightened senses and myriad species,a world that seems tangiblyreal.

t is a novel for all seasons and all ages. Its shiny metallic green cover showing a ferocious-looking black tom cat with red eyes is visually stunning, and the black and white illustrations inside are even more so. The artist Prabha Mallya has been given the freedom to roam the book from endpaper to endpaper, and her large, imaginative illustrations of The Wildings world from moth to mongrel would ensure success for a much duller book. The Wildings is, however, anything but dull. Nilanjana Roy has created a savage, dangerous world parallel to our limited, self-centred human one. It is a world of heightened senses and myriad species, a world that seems tangibly real. The Wildings of the title are the stray cats of Nizamuddin West, the Delhi colony that adjoins the basti surrounding the shrine of Hazrat Nizamuddin. Living in the neighbourhood, I can confirm that there are in fact a lot of cats, no doubt encouraged by the rich scavenging possibilities provided by the numerous butcher shops and the countless eateries of the basti. This non-fictional setting for this novel gives it a particular authenticity despite the fact that the characters are talking animals. The author herself is clearly potty about cats, and years of love and observation have paid off in the creation of a range of well-defined and beautifully described felines that, while being human-like in speech and emotions, are also very cat-like. Not all of them are strays. The most talented is a pet kitten, Mara, and the cruellest is a perverted clan of `inside' cats called the Ferals. Some cats inhabit the zoo. Taking this world and these characters Roy has woven their story with the universally appealing patterns familiar from so much literature from

I

earlier times to C.S. Lewis's Narnia, Tolkien's Middle Earth, and to Harry Potter. There is a battle between good and an evil that threatens a just and balanced social order. There are the themes of childhood, and leaving childhood behind, of going out into the world. The book holds up ideals of honour, of correct behaviour and hospitality. Peace is to be attempted with your enemy, and you should never attack but only fight in self-defence. Compassion for other creatures, even when you plan to eat them, is the norm. Then there is the element of a young innocent (in this case, the kitten Mara) who is fated to be a key figure even though she has no understanding of her own powers. In this scheme of things, good generally triumphs in the end, but it is the journey to that end that is important. Roy has her readers on the edge of their seats, their disbelief perfectly suspended, as they travel through the many perils of the plot. Fear and friendship, predators and prey are deftly portrayed. And there are plenty of lighter touches too. Roy plays with her characters' names--Affi and Davit are the Supreme Court cats and humans are simply Bigfeet. The local pariah kites are the avian equivalent of fighter pilots. Cats communicate through whisker transmission--a reference to the early radio known as a `cat's whisker'. Roy refers to this wireless communication as "a web". It has to be said that her grasp of natural history is not as strong as her knowledge of cats. Langurs don't have prehensile tails, owls in Nizamuddin aren't the hooting kind, and pariah kites don't "stoop" to catch their prey. But these details don't seem to matter at all in comparison with Roy's achievements in this, her first, novel. And I challenge anyone to walk in Nizamuddin after reading this book and not find their senses sharpened to the animal world around them. Suddenly you will notice the cats and when they look you straight in the eye, you will almost hear them saying, "So I suppose now you think you understand us too." I

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

OCTOBER 8, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

77

