Sp ort

CRICKET

THE GREAT GAME
CRICKET AT THE FRONTIERS OF LIFE AND DEATH
The gentleman's game has emerged as an unlikely unifying force in war-torn Afghanistan. Its national team dreams of becoming a world-beater by 2020.

By Lynne O'Donnell

REUTERS

T

AN AFGHAN BOY BOWLS ON A FROZEN LAKE IN KABUL

hey are not giant-killers yet, but Afghanistan's cricketers are certainly not lacking in ambition. Allrounder Karim Sedeq says by 2020, his team will be ranked at the top. Judging by how they pushed India to a tight 23-run win at the World Twenty20 in Sri Lanka on September 19, he could be right. Afghans have raced to rank 14 in the world, up from 39 in 2005. They may not have marked their card yet in four World Twenty20 games--in 2010 against South Africa and India in the West Indies; and in September against India and England. But they are fearless, spirited players with an unshakable belief that cricket will save their war-torn nation. "It's more than a game for us," says Hamid Shinwari, the

head of the Afghan Cricket (AC) board. "The happiness of the Afghan people is at stake. Through this game we can establish peace in Afghanistan." Shinwari, 30, is an earnest man whose mission is to ensure Afghanistan is the good news story of world cricket. The country's history as a battleground where poverty, misery and ignorance are the norm, makes the triumphant march of their plucky cricket team in the midst of a protracted war a heart warming tale. It has been made into an award-winning documentary called Out of the Ashes, which concentrated more on the inter-personal politics of the team than its cricket-playing prowess. Even as los-

The march of Afghanistan's plucky cricket team in the midst of a long war makes for a heartwarming tale.

Sp ort

CRICKET

ers, the Afghans get the winning share of media coverage. The International Cricket Council (ICC) picked Afghanistan and Ireland as the two developing members to play with the big guys in the World Twenty20 in Sri Lanka. They were drawn with India and England, while the Irish were grouped with Australia and the West Indies. After talking up a big game, the Afghans rattled India with some fine batting and bowling. Openers Sehwag and Gambhir were lost cheaply to an exhilarating burst from the tall left-arm pacer Shapoor Zadran, and a famous upset didn't look impossible. But they were let down by sloppy fielding, and India survived four dropped catches to post 159/5. The inexperienced Afghan batsmen then fell to Indian spin. Two days later, England came prepared and slammed them for 196/5, before bowling them out for 80 in 17.2 overs. Afghanistan were saved from utter humiliation--which looked likely at 26/8--by a welcome 44 runs from Gulbodin Naib.

or Shinwari, AC'S chief executive officer, being picked for Sri Lanka is in itself a victory. "A few years ago, we were playing Jersey (the English Channel island)," he says. The team's success, for a country desperately in need of it, has propelled cricket into the national consciousness. Players, officials and fans insist it's now Afghanistan's national sport. That's a significant claim. Afghanistan is divided along ethnic, tribal, linguistic and religious lines. Until recently, cricket was associated solely with Pashtuns, and shunned by the Tajiks, Uzbeks and Hazaras who make up the rest of the 30 million population. All national team members are Pashtuns, whose territory straddles the border with Pakistan. They learned to play cricket while living in refugee camps there, among the millions who fled the country when the former Soviet Union invaded in 1979. Most remained in Pakistan during the civil war that followed. When the Taliban fell to the US-led invasion following 9/11, many
REUTERS

F

refugees returned, and brought cricket with them. Star batsman Sedeq's family fled Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan when he was three years old. Upon arrival at a refugee camp in Peshawar, he says, "Every day, Pakistani TV had live telecasts of cricket, so every day cricket was entering my mind. So I started playing." Sedeq played club cricket in Peshawar, and eventually established a team of refugees that he says did so well--finishing runners-up in a local club tournament--that they were thrown out of the league. "They said this is Pakistan, and you don't play here. So we were banned," he says with a wry smile. By this time, the Taliban had been routed and Sedeq's family returned to Jalalabad. His older brother, Taj Malik Alam, established the national team with the endorsement of President Hamid Karzai, and became their first coach, launching Afghan cricket on the path to the 2010 World Twenty20 in the West Indies. Today, the team is supported by ICC'S global development programme. Grants of US $700,000 (Rs 3.7 crore) a year are supplemented with advice on playing, coaching, umpiring and administration, as well as opportunities to compete. Afghanistan is an "affiliate" nation in the global hierarchy; promotion to "associate" is likely at the ICC'S annual general meeting in mid-2013. Tim Anderson, ICC'S global development manager, said apart from a boost in annual funds to $1 million (Rs 5.3 crore), associate status will make little difference to the team. "If you're a good affiliate, you get the same as a good associate. No affiliate is anywhere near as good as these guys, so they are in a unique situation. They don't play affiliates, but play Ireland, The Netherlands, Kenya, Scotland and Canada--the best associates." Shinwari bemoans that Afghanistan have played only two ODI matches--against Pakistan in February and Austra-

Until recently, cricket was linked with the Pashtuns and shunned by the Tajiks, Uzbeks and Hazaras.

MEN PLAY CRICKET IN FRONT OF THE RUINS OF THE DARUL AMAN PALACE IN KABUL

Sp ort

CRICKET
GETTYIMAGS

THE AFGHAN TEAM AT THE 2012 WORLD T20 MATCH AGAINST INDIA IN SRI LANKA

Authorities plan to have players drop surnames that denote ethnicity, and use cricket for national unity.
lia in August, and wonders aloud why the regional powerhouses, including India, will not give them a game. "Afghanistan is the only affiliate which has the capacity to play against any international team," he said. Both ODI matches were played in the United Arab Emirates, where the Sharjah Cricket Club share their 25,000-seater stadium with Afghanistan, so the team have somewhere to call "home" when playing international matches as long as war at home continues. Afghanistan lost both matches, but not without putting up a valiant fight, validating their brag--as they did in Sri Lanka--that they will soon be a force in world cricket.

hey have a long way to go before they join the Testplaying league. ICC'S Anderson says he understands Shinwari's impatience, but he notes there is "a big gap between associates and full members. Afghanistan wants to play the big boys, but they're not big boys yet". The "big boys", such as India and Australia, have packed international cricket schedules, as well as IPL commitments--and rarely have time to squeeze in matches they don't have to play. All this cricket, says Anderson, means the powerhouses are too busy to accommodate minnows. "Ultimately, members have to agree to play each other," he says, adding: "Everyone wants to play India, and the Indians have to decide what's right for them." Though the Afghan squad has been professional since 2009, AC declined to give details of salaries, beyond a statement by spokesman Nasratullah Wafa that "it is a good amount". Back home, the team spend most of their time practising and watching videos of their associate rivals and Test teams, Wafa said. Half-a-dozen batsmen had spent

T

time at the privately run Global Academy in Pune in late 2011, but AC hopes India would be as generous as Australia in its support for cricket in Afghanistan. Shinwari says, "So far, India's support has been minimal. Their government has promised to help us build a few stadiums in a couple of years, but is yet to sign the agreement." Australian star Michael Hussey compares the impact of cricket on Afghan society with that in Australia, where shortened forms of the game have led to soaring popularity. "It's about bringing people from different cultures and nations together. There are many cultures and nations represented in Australia, and T20 is a vehicle to bring a diverse range-- old, young, different colours, women, races-- into something we can enjoy and fall in love with," he says. "Cricket has great values-- being part of a team is very important. There's the old saying, that you can have a champion team and a team of champions, and the champion team will always win. It's about playing together, the values and ethos of team membership and cooperation. To have something like cricket that everyone can play, participate in, watch and enjoy, gives them hope." Figures from AC suggest Afghanistan is starting to mirror the rest of South Asia--where any patch of rough, empty ground is transformed into a pitch by youngsters using homemade bats and balls. Across the land, village teams are playing matches, and even in remote towns, a carpet thrown over a patch serves as a pitch. Kabul, the capital, and Jalalabad are leading the development: Both cities have stadiums that the Taliban used as execution grounds, but which now attract huge crowds--8,000 in Kabul and 15,000 in Jalalabad--when the national or Under-19 teams play. At least 2,000 teams play at the senior level, including in provincial, regional and national tournaments, and AC plans a weekly competition in Kabul for 10-15 teams from next year, which it hopes will become the national template. It wants to develop a premier league to feed talent into the national side. Already, it says, many schools have introduced cricket, with 20,000 boys and 1,000 girls playing in junior tourneys. There are teams in 32 of the country's 34 provinces, and selector Raees Ahmadi says around 600 boys turned up in Kabul for a recent tryout for the Under-16 team. So far, they are mostly playing the shortened forms of the game. Authorities are doing their best to make the game a force for national unity--planning, for example, to have players drop surnames that denote ethnicity or tribe. Sedeq, whose brother Aftab Alam is in Afghanistan's Under-19 side, says it is natural the national team is made up of Pashtuns as "we went to Pakistan during the war and learned cricket; others fled to Iran where there's no cricket". He has no doubt where his team is headed. "Maybe in 2020, Afghanistan will be world number one, two, or three," he says. I

76

INDIA TODAY N OCTOBER 8, 2012

