Na tion JAIPALREDDY

THE COST OF POWER
hen Sudini Jaipal Reddy replaced Murli Deora as Union petroleum minister in January 2011, his mandate was obvious--the upright minister was to clear the ministry of controversies that had been created in the five-year-long tenure of his predecessor. The biggest controversy swirled around Reliance Industries' KG-D6 natural gas block in the Krishna Godavari basin of Andhra Pradesh. Within months of Reddy taking office, a draft CAG report alleged several irregularities in the execution of the production sharing contract between Reliance and the Government. The CAG hinted that RIL may have artificially inflated its costs of exploration--known as gold plating--raising them by an unusually high 117 per cent between 2004 and 2006. It cost the Government revenue, because the contract allowed Reliance to recover its costs of exploration before any revenue was shared with the Government. The CAG also said that Reliance had been allowed by the Government to retain unexplored areas when it moved from Phase I to II, and from Phase II to III of the exploration, when the contract said unexplored areas had to be surrendered after each phase. Reddy went on an overdrive to correct perceptions of favouritism towards RIL. He refused to allow RIL to recover its full costs, because he argued that the output was falling. In his press conference on October 31, Arvind Kejriwal said that falling output was RIL'S strategy to hoard gas and force the Government to agree to its terms. Reddy also did not grant approval to RIL'S cost estimates for exploration in the new phases. RIL argues that his actions led to a fall in output, as it was not possible to explore further without approvals. The most contentious dispute between Reddy's ministry and Reliance was the revision of gas prices. The price of $4.42 (Rs 237.80)

Reddy's ouster shows it's time for Government to dispense with its arbitrary regime

W

JAIPAL REDDY
QAMAR SIBTAIN

per unit of gas was set by the Government through an EGOM in 2010. It was to be revised only in April 2014. Reddy insisted that it would not be revised upwards, as it would inflate the price of power and fertilisers, in which gas from KG-D6 is a key input. In the midst of these disputes, Reddy was shunted out of the Ministry of Petroleum to the insignificant Ministry of Science and Technology on October 28. The inference made by Opposition parties and Kejriwal is that he was shifted out because of these disputes. From the Prime Minister and the

THE OPPOSITION AND KEJRIWAL FEEL REDDY WAS SHIFTED BECAUSE OFTHE DISPUTES WITH RELIANCE INDUSTRIES.

Government's point of view, perhaps the impasse was hurting a crucial infrastructure sector. India has a peak power deficit of over 10 per cent, and gas is a crucial input to several power plants. The Government cannot afford to see its biggest gas field, KG-D6, drop output so drastically--it has fallen by 50 per cent in the two years between March 2010 and April 2012. Also, the uncertainty in the oil sector is deterring investors. The Government's most recent New Exploration and Licensing Policy VIII in 2009 found bidders for less than half the 70 blocks put up for commercial exploitation. There is a lesson for the Government in the controversies in the oil and gas sector. It must move away from a discretionary regime to a transparent, market-based system. Then it can defend itself more easily against charges of cronyism. by Dhiraj Nayyar

42

INDIA TODAY  NOVEMBER 12, 2012

