SURVEY 2012

GUEST COLUMN FAMILY
concepts that we would "deal with" when the time came, one hundred years later, for sure. Not as freeloving as the long haired, unwashed hippies of the '60s, my generation was playing with a different kind of fire: Money plus independence. Just one generation earlier, in a "small town" called Lucknow, my parents had neither. Responsibilities like putting food on the table, educating siblings, and getting sisters married were issues of real consequence. Obedience to parents' wishes wasn't questioned. Family obligations, cultural traditions, and building a secure future on a meagre salary trumped any idle ponderings of the meaning of happiness. Their lives had distinct structure. Roles were defined and rarely questioned. Women managed the house and children; the man brought home the bread. Dissatisfaction was tolerated like annoying weather; it will pass or else we'll adapt. But were they not happy? I've seen enough pictures of my dad in Beatlesstyle bellbottoms and my mom laughing with her friends after visits to the salon, to know they were just normal youngsters like us with the same ideas of immortality. But with no Internet or cellphones, the world was smaller and things seemed simpler. Today, the big bad cities are different. Where arranged marriages were the norm less than 30 years ago, love marriages are not only expected in the metros, but also come with a buffet of options for experimentation, before the need to settle down. Commitment phobia is delaying marriages, as we explore ourselves in each other, seeking "perfection" in a partner, a mirror to all our wishes and none of our flaws. Child bearing is invariably losing priority, as we battle our fear of divorce. We want to be settled in our careers, explore our sexuality, know who we are before another person enters the frame. Divorce. Our parents' generation has already started this trend. They may have had children in their 20s but they also discovered happiness. More importantly, its acute absence in a marriage. Isolation in a relationship, depression, restrictive gender roles were issues that often didn't get the necessary personal or medical attention and were juggled while putting kids through college and paying off a mortgage. Did women of my parents' generation get a chance to reach their personal potential? Their college diplomas collected dust, as they planned family meals for decades. Did our fathers ever resent the responsibility that came with their breadwinner status? Despite these necessary sacrifices, I wonder today if they would switch places with us, for all our freedom and financial savvy. Today, without as much cultural pressure to marry, the fear of a marriage's dissolution and money to spend on anything we desire, a new breed is emerging: The independent, still-searching singleton. Late into their 30s, driving gas-guzzling European cars, adorned in designer accessories, living in flats that they have purchased in the best parts of town, their definition of family is now a close circle of carefully curated friends, rather than a spouse and children. The responsibility of caring for ailing parents has crept up on this generation, but hasn't had the side-effect of cornering them into happily married procreation. Is this the new happiness? As early as a decade ago and still into present day, late 20s was nearing expiration for a woman to be married. Today, age is becoming a number rarely discussed. Physical fitness is keeping us all young and healthy longer. Science is allowing for later child bearing. Sex is more a connection with someone or a social sport, more than a reason to reproduce. Orientation is explored as we decide where we fall in the gay-straight spectrum. Varying degrees of acceptance to everything is allowing us to go where our parents never did, unintentionally breaking their hearts along the way.

AN EMBARRASSMENT OF

CHOICES
Our parents found solace in their structured lives. The buffet of pleasures has bred the independent, still-searching singleton.
By Tulika Mehrotra

The writer is the author of Delhi Stopover and Crashing B-Town

TIME TO TALK

Are you in favour of live-in relationships?

22% 64%
NO Don't Know/ Can't Say
*Across metros and small towns

YES

14%

om! Seriously." I huffed, my lip curled in the know-it-all condescending smirk of a pompous 20-something adult-child. "You just wouldn't understand." I can't remember what we were arguing about. I just knew I was right. "You're 25 years older than me!" I rolled my eyes and turned away with the glory of my stinging, closing remark. I didn't make it out of the kitchen before my fatal mistake unleashed the wrath of the reality-check gods. My mother cleared her throat. With the confidence of an all-knowing sage, she answered. "23." She smiled. No further comment. I froze, acutely aware of my sudden impotence. I had no cutting remark. No retaliation. Nothing. The ground stubbornly refused to swallow me up. The words left unspoken taunted me with the stark contrast of our realities. She had been married at 22, pregnant the next year, and completed her master's degree with me as a breastfeeding newborn on one arm. I, on the other hand, was 24, unmarried, single, over-educated, recently unemployed, and had just moved back home with my parents. I believe the politically correct term for my condition was simply, loser. I might have considered leaving the suburbs of Chicago, away from all the gossipy, nothing-betterto-do aunties, and moved to Africa where no one knew me, if it wasn't for another unavoidable truth: I was not alone. My social condition, in other variations, was quickly becoming the norm for 20-somethings in major metros. Most of my friends were unmarried, had been dating since they were teenagers, were focused on their careers, hell-bent on finding happiness, and drinking away the weekends in the pursuit of fun. Responsibilities like marriage, children and mortgages seemed like academic

M

F

SEALTHE BOND

64%
RESPONDENTS THINK CHILD ABUSE IN FAMILIES NEEDS TO BE REPORTED TO THE POLICE. 73% DON'TTALK OPENLY ABOUT SEXWITH THEIR CHILDREN AND FAMILY.

86%
RESPONDENTS IN MUMBAI DON'TTALK OPENLYABOUT SEXWITH CHILDREN. 53% IN DELHI ARE OKAYWITH THE IDEA OF LIVE-IN RELATIONSHIPS.

44%
RESPONDENT S IN AIZAWL WHO HAVE CHILDREN HAVE TALKED TO THEM ABOUT SAFE SEX. KOTA FOLLOWS WITH 29%.

or those in this generation who are choosing our parents' path to building a nuclear family, the definition of marriage and gender roles are evolving as well. Both partners generally earn, while occasionally the breadwinner is the woman. Dissatisfaction within a relationship is leading to affairs or open marriages. Resistance to divorce has already begun in the form of delayed marriage, but is further attacked with marital counselling, sometimes prior to the wedding. Arranged marriages still exist in the bigger cities, but are more the exception than the norm. Inter-race, inter-faith, inter-gender relations are all categories our generation is diving into without hesitation. Our parents may not have had a chance to explore as much as this, but they did find their identities with pride. I recognise the look in their eyes, the hope for our happiness. The truth is, this generation can't control the fire we're playing with. Loneliness is a new concept that the last generation didn't often have to deal with. The buffet of infinite choices has given us too much. But there is truth that comes from the darkness. We've burned our fingers and learned our lessons, if not continue to do so. In the years that have passed since that argument with my mother, I have found my path in the alchemy of words. Like many of my friends in the major metros, I know that wife and mother is right around the corner for me as well. Every generation walks through a storm. It's just that our umbrellas change along the way. 

IMAGES BAZAAR

44

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

