GLASS HOUSE

by PRIYA SAHGAL

THAROOR TRIPS, YET AGAIN

OVERHEARD

S

hashi Tharoor, who clawed his way back into the reckoning after his political fall, had another in Kerala. This time it was a MEMU (Mainline Electric Multiple Unit) train that did him in. The minister flagged off the Kollam-Nagercoil MEMU service and clambered aboard, getting onto a soapbox each time the train reached a station. He apparently forgot that MEMUs don't wait for ministerial rhetoric to end before moving on. At Paravur station, the 56-year-old almost fell, doing what millions of cattle class Indians do every day: Running after a moving train. Tharoor chased the departing train with the microphone still in his hands, quite forgetting that the end was still plugged to a battery in the train. He nearly tripped trying to jump in, until bystanders raised a din and alerted the train driver.

An Opposition MP asked Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav why his party was constantly bailing out the Government. Pat came the retort: Give me a guarantee that the Government will fall if we vote against it and we will.Talk about politics of expedience.

Vets Know Best
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

BUZZ
OF THE

No Bombs for Mamata

WEEK
Suresh Kalmadi may not get the Congress Lok Sabha ticket from Pune for the next elections. Instead the seat may go to Maharashtra Forests Minister Patangrao Kadam's son,Vishwajeet, a Youth Congress leader. Of late,Vishwajeet has been spotted touring the constituency rather extensively.We hope he has no interest in running sports organisations.
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

H

ow long does it take to explain nuclear physics to West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee? More than a year, for sure. In 2011, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh awarded a synchrotron research project to the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics in Kolkata.The institute needed land from the state government to work on the high-energy particle accelerator.At first Mamata promised 100 acres of land, only to dither later. According to a state minister, she was worried that this might be a dangerous project and could perhaps lead to a nuclear explosion. She has now been convinced otherwise by atomic energy experts and has approved the allotment.
MAMATA
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

NIRUPAM (LEFT); SAYEED

C

Pakistan's Poster Boys
he battle of Bihar has crossed borders."I am more popular than Nitish Kumar in Pakistan," declared RJD chief Lalu Prasad Yadav at a public meeting recently.The Bihar Chief Minister had visited Pakistan in November, and Lalu had been there in 2003. Nitish is now planning to issue a booklet on his visit. If it's a way to woo the Muslims of Bihar, it may be more than a tad misguided.

T

LALU

ongress veterans can still teach the newcomers a thing or two. Congress MP Hamdullah Sayeed, 30, got up to ask the Health Minister Ghulam Nabi Azad a question in Parliament on November 29. Only, he ended up making a confused speech. Azad heard him out and said caustically, "I think the honourable member has totally lost track of the question." Later that day, the 48-year-old Sanjay Nirupam, a not-so-young GenNext leader, was reprimanded by P. Chidambaram. While Chidambaram was answering a question on National Investment Board, Nirupam asked the finance minister to talk about Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) as well. Pat came the put-down. "I would be happy to speak on FIPB, provided a separate question is put on FIPB." Ouch.
DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

NEW

11

GLASS HOUSE
FREE FOR ALL
by R. Prasad

Fear Factor

JAGAN

T

SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com

Aiyar's Ire
hy does the Congress need an Opposition when Mani Shankar Aiyar is around? On November 3, Cabinet ministers Kapil Sibal and Anand Sharma briefed Congress MPs on FDI in multi-brand retail at AIYAR Jawahar Bhawan in the Capital. Since the briefing was a day before the FDI debate began in Parliament, Aiyar thanked the ministers for briefing the party at what he said was the "11th hour and 59th minute". Not one to let a snub go unretorted, Sharma said Aiyar should be more patient with the compulsions of governance, especially since he's been a Cabinet minister. Perhaps it was too long ago?

W

Trinamool's Hot Potato

he Congress wants to finalise its Lok Sabha list by June next year. Party emissaries are being sent to various states to scout for possible candidates. But in Andhra Pradesh, the selection criteria is a little different. In addition to their own qualifications, the possible candidates are being asked to analyse the threat perception from Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy's party. Clearly, Congress is more worried about the winnability of Jagan's candidates than its own.

M

amata Banerjee now wants an industrial policy for West Bengal. And she has chosen party leader Saugata Roy to draft this anachronism. The Trinamool Congress MP and former Union minister has sent letters to various industrialists, asking for suggestions. The Tata Group has not been asked for its views. What a surprise.

Birthday Secrets
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

MALHOTRA

B

Modi's Four Favourite Women
SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

ujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi is quite particular about which party office-bearer appears on to debate G the Gujarat elections. He has given the central leadership
TV BJP

his wish list of four office bearers. Coincidentally, all are women. The chosen ones are BJP spokesperson Nirmala Sitharaman, Mahila Morcha President Smriti Irani, her deputy Meenakshi Lekhi and National General Secretary Vani Tripathi. What's the matter Mr Modi, why the sudden need for gender endorsement?
MODI

JP leader V.K. Malhotra celebrated his 81st birthday on December 3. His supporters issued full-page newspaper advertisements and splashed hoardings all over the city congratulating him. Only, the greetings left out a very pertinent piece of information. His age. Perhaps with Delhi Assembly elections around the corner, the veteran leader doesn't want to be ruled out as BJP's chief ministerial candidate on the grounds of old age.

with AMITABH SRIVASTAVA, DEVESH KUMAR, BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA, AMARNATH K. MENON AND NAYANATHARA N.G.
DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

13

