ELECTIONS 2012

GUJARAT
THE VIRTUAL NARENDRA MODI AS PART OF HIS 3D CAMPAIGN

THE LAST VIRTUAL PUSH OF FORCE MODI
In the last leg of his campaign, Modi outmanoeuvres his opponents and dominates the field in a three-dimensional flourish
GETTY IMAGES

Sushma Swaraj, Nitin Gadkari and Arun Jaitley, had addressed 125 public meetings. Swaraj's statement on December 1 that Modi had all the qualities to become prime minister gave the last-minute push. The much-touted Keshubhai Patel factor--influential in the Leuva Patel vote, ranging between 12 and 14 per cent--remains the only point of speculation. Will Keshubhai divide the BJP vote or will this factor, with its caste appeal, bring non-Patels into the Modi fold? Naresh Patel, a Leuva Patel community leader, asked Patels to vote for GPP or the Congress. But various pre-poll surveys have indicated GPP will not do much damage to BJP. The reason why the caste appeal is unlikely to wash with the community is that the Patels have been the biggest beneficiaries of Modi's developmental work, as farmers as well as businessmen. Political analyst Arvind Bosamia says, "The Keshubhai Patel factor is

MODI IS AS GALVANISING A FIGURE VIRTUALLYAS IN REALITY. IN HIS SLOGANS, THERE IS ONLY ONE HERO: HIMSELF."OUR CAPTAIN IS MODI, WHO IS YOURS?"ASKS ONE.
over-emphasised. At the moment, Modi is the only factor." Before the ticket distribution exercise began, the Congress was in a combative mode despite pre-poll surveys predicting a thumping victory for Modi, aware that Gujarat could be a do-or-die battle between Congress General Secretary Rahul Gandhi and Modi for the top job in 2014. Another victory in Gujarat would catapult Modi to the status of a formidable opponent against the Congress scion at the national level. Lopsided distribution of tickets may have marred their prospects in the last phase but Congress leaders are putting on a brave face. Gujarat Congress chief Arjun Modhwadia says, "The result in Gujarat will surprise one and all." Leader of Opposition Shaktisinh Gohil adds, "Many are missing the micro picture reflecting a strong undercurrent in

By Uday Mahurkar

or Narendra Modi, an election campaign is war, and every step is intended to outmanoeuvre the enemy. As Force Modi races towards a predictable finale, the enemy camp has already become a wreck: The Congress and Keshubhai Patel's Gujarat Parivartan Party (GPP) are gasping for oxygen. Modi defied conventional wisdom by keeping 75 per cent of his MLAs in the fray and denying a single seat to Muslims. Both were calculated moves. The no-seat-to-Muslims move was aimed at neutralising Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) and GPP, which had plans to portray Modi as a betrayer of the Hindu cause. The strategy nevertheless put a question mark on his Sadbhavana campaign last year that sought to erase

F

his anti-Muslim image and prepare for a prime ministerial bid in 2014. A private survey by Modi indicated a proMuslim campaign would prove damaging electorally. The decision unsettled the BJP Minority Morcha leaders, who were mollified by Modi later. A BJP leader close to Modi said, "A section of VHP, with a behind-the-screen understanding with GPP, had kept a campaign ready to project Modi as antiHindu if he gave tickets to Muslims. The Chief Minister had to choose between anti-Hindu and anti-Muslim labels. He chose the latter, assuming he could go for course correction later." That emboldened traditional Modi-baiters. Hanif Lakdawala, a social worker, said, "Modi has shown his true colours." Equally surprising was Modi's decision to retain more than 75 per cent of his 117 MLAs and all ministers. Keshu-

bhai Patel had plans to entice possible BJP rebels. Feedback from the Vivekanand Yuva Vikas Yatra two months ago convinced the Chief Minister that dropping the MLAs would be more harmful than tackling possible antiincumbency in an election where he would seek votes directly for himself. A poll-eve speech at Sanand near Ahmedabad underlined Modi's strategy. "Do you want those plundering public money in Delhi to loot Gujarat too? If not, then vote for BJP. For 11 years, I have functioned as a chowkidar of Gujarat's treasury and used public money for ushering in meaningful development, which has benefited all sections. The Gujarat poll results will give a new direction to the country. Look at me and not the party candidates as you go out to vote. We have to take Gujarat to still greater heights," he said. His manifesto is an ap-

peal to the youth, women, agriculturists and what he describes as the "new middle class created out of the poor classes" as a result of the economic benefits from his development schemes. Living up to his image of the moderniser, he used technology as a weapon. The 3D campaign was a first in Indian electoral history. The virtual Modi is as galvanising a figure as the real Modi. In his slogans, there is only one hero: Himself. "Our captain is Narendra Modi, who is yours?" asks one. On BJP's poll channel Namo Gujarat, programmes have titles such as "Modi no manas (Modi's man)". Significantly, BJP's central leadership closed in behind him in his crucial hour, forgetting the prime ministerial candidature issue. By the first week of December, two dozen central leaders, including L.K. Advani, Rajnath Singh,

the form of opposition to the Narendra Modi government's misrule, corruption and dictatorship." Many would disagree, but only a few can deny that the two leaders, along with veteran Shankarsinh Vaghela, have remained largely united in their opposition to Modi. They have spared no effort since mid-2011 to oust Modi by organising effective programmes to gain support among electorally powerful sections such as the tribals and the fishing community. The efforts, in fact, created an atmosphere of diffidence in a section of BJP until Modi came up with the Vivekanand Yuva Vikas Yatra in September and changed the mood. Two Congress schemes that created a flutter in the BJP camp were Ghar Nu Ghar (Own Your House) for poor urban women and 100-yard plots with 30 sq yard houses for the rural poor. The first, floated in August, promised lowcost housing in the form of a written undertaking if the Congress was elected. About 30 lakh forms were filled for each scheme. "My constituency saw an unprecedented turnout in political programmes after these schemes were announced. How can such a response not produce results?" asks Paranjayaditya Singh, Congress MLA. The fact that Modi himself promised 50 lakh new houses for the poor in the BJP manifesto underlined the Congress strategy's impact. Congress leader Himanshu Vyas, contesting from the Vadhvan Assembly constituency, says, "A vigilant Congress hasn't left a single area untouched in its election preparation. Our hard work will not go unrewarded." In fact the party's Disha Badlo, Dasha Badlo (Change Direction, Change Your Fortunes) campaign against the Chief Minister did have an initial impact until the Modi blitzkrieg outshone it. The Congress campaign matured early while Modi's was timely. What could benefit Modi the most is the delimitation of constituencies. The map of constituencies has been redrawn to his advantage, creating 18 new urban seats and 22 semi-urban. The Modi cult rules stronger in cities than in the countryside. 

38

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

