SPE CIAL REPORT

FOREIGN UNIVERSITIES

John Wright

GUEST COLUMN

Why New Zealand?
 The country has eight universities, seven of which were ranked in the World Top 500 by QS in 2012.  Small class sizes of 18-20 students ensures personal attention.  Immigration and permanent residency rules are less stringent than its neighbour, Australia.

Beyond Hobbits and Wine
njoy a seaside barbecue, play cricket in a hidden valley or just glide off a cliff top--in New Zealand, your academic experience is not just E limited to the blackboard. New Zealand is the ideal place to get a worldclass education and get away from it all at the same time. This is a country where every student receives personalised education in a friendly and caring environment. Choosing a university is a bit like playing cricket. You have to be sure whether you are comfortable with it or not in order to succeed. Institutions like Southern Institute of Technology (SIT) in New Zealand go out of their way to ensure that all international students are at ease from the day they land. The university provides comprehensive orientation programmes to help students learn about New Zealand's culture and laws as well as accommodation and job markets. At SIT, foreign students also get free airport pick-up, two weeks' accommodation, meals on arrival and health and travel insurance at no extra cost. There are many local clubs that students can join to fill their spare time. Indian students are also allowed to work part-time 20 hours a week. I would like to invite students from India to pursue their higher studies at SIT in New Zealand through my scholarship scheme.
STUDENTS CATCH UP AFTER CLASS ON THE PICTURESQUE GROUNDS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OTAGO

Top Picks
1 UNIVERSITY OF AUCKLAND

Average tuition fee Rs 12.84 lakh
per year 2 UNIVERSITY OF OTAGO Average tuition fee Rs 3.12 lakh per year 3 UNIVERSITY OF CANTERBURY Average tuition fee Rs 2.85 lakh per year 4 VICTORIA UNIVERSITY OF WELLINGTON Average tuition fee Rs 11.17 lakh per year 5 MASSEY UNIVERSITY Average tuition fee Rs 11.60 lakh per year

John Wright is the former coach of the Indian cricket team and brand ambassador of SIT, New Zealand.

The Other Down Under
If you want to study abroad and stay on for work, New Zealand is the go-to place
ack in 1999, when Peter Jackson first chose to shoot The Lord of the Rings in Wellington, he was one of the select few to acknowledge New Zealand's fast progressing academic infrastructure. Jackson's prediction was not wrong. The secluded mountains, beaches and valleys of this tiny island country, home to just over four million people, now attract over a million international students every year. As the excited batches make their way down south, a life of adventure sports, Maori artwork, lazy barbecues, hobbitmania and thriving university campuses awaits them. According to education consultants EGE Global, the number of student applications to New Zealand in 2012 has nearly trebled since 2001. "Ten years ago, no Indian parent would even con-

B

sider sending their child to a country as remote as New Zealand. All we knew back then about New Zealand was in terms of tourism and cricket. Today, the country is actually preferred by Indian students due to its friendly immigration and post-study work visa policy. Students see it as a haven for skill enhancement courses, which will lead to jobs in the country and ultimately permanent residency, while spending a fraction of what they might spend studying in the US or the UK," says Rajiv Gupta, CEO, EGE Global. With over 13,000 Indians applying to New Zealand in 2011, the country must be doing something right. The India-New Zealand Education Council (INZEC) is one such initiative that has egged students to pursue their higher education in New Zealand. INZEC, set up last year under the supervision of Prime

Minister Manmohan Singh and his New Zealand counterpart John Key, has a jointly funded budget of $1 million (Rs 5.47 crore). The council facilitates sharing of research between the two countries, holds periodic university fairs across India and executes academic agreements between universities in New Zealand and India. "Young and free from constricting traditions, New Zealand encourages inventive thinking and teaching techniques that reach far beyond traditional rote learning," says Irene Hamer, senior communications adviser, Education New Zealand. The presence of the Kiwis in India has also gone up, thanks to a number of student and faculty exchanges that have been set up between the two countries. In October this year, INZEC supervised the signing of four MOUs in India. These included agreements be-

with actually helps you study better," tween Massey University and Delhi alised classes and modern facilities. For some, New Zealand's person- says Suraj Girijashanker, 23, an alumUniversity, the Waiariki Institute of Technology and Punjab Technical alised style of teaching has left a lasting nus of Auckland College. But the zest to live life to the fullest University, the Victoria University and impression. "I once read a poll that said Jawaharlal Nehru University, and Open people in New Zealand are the worst is what students claim to love the most Polytechnic of New Zealand and IGNOU. dressed in the world. I am not surprised. about New Zealand. It is not uncom"We have a lot to gain from their educa- The environment is so relaxed that one mon to chance upon groups of students tion system just as they have to gain can be as scruffy or as distinguished as barbecuing some lamb meat and porfrom ours," says Dinesh Singh, vice- one likes. As a student these little things ing over class notes at the same time on make a huge difference. Being in an en- one of Auckland's many beach walkchancellor, Delhi University. But the biggest boon to education in vironment that you are comfortable ways. "In New Zealand, everyone is a free spirit and people New Zealand has been student just let you make feedback. Indians who have your own decisions. experienced student life in Survival Speak It's so liberating to be New Zealand often return HE AHATE UTU? the master of your home with thrilling stories How much is this? own life. Education of mountaineering, state-ofhere is holistic," says the-art research labs, kayakKAPIRANGI KOE KI TE Delhi- based Amit ing, and bird watching, which KANIKANI TAHI TAUA? New Zealand is one of the Kasturba, 28, graduhave inspired others to give Would you like to dance best destinations for eduate of University of universities in New Zealand a with me? cation. If you are bored Auckland who is go. "To be specific, feedback with the classroom, go for AROHAMAI planning to pursue a from students on the quality of a walk down the gleaming I don't understand PhD in Sociology education, faculty has been blue coastline and you'll be HAERE MAI Welcome from the London the most positive," adds Gupta. ready to study in no time." School of Economics With only 18 to 20 students OÙ DONNER DE LAFÊTE DE KOSHYJOHN, Alumnus, next year. per classroom, students in KIAORA Cheers Victoria University of Wellington New Zealand enjoy personby Sonali Acharjee Works as a Software Engineer
in Seattle, Washington

58

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

59

NEW

