SIMPLY DELHI

Food

INGOODTASTE
BY INSIYAH VAHANVATY

There are few things that celebrate Delhi's winters more than a luxuriant brunch of exotic food and drinks under the crisp winter sun on a lazy Sunday. SIMPLY DELHI brings you the best this season

ITC Maurya
The concept of the Grand Mauryan Champagne Brunch is a unique one, in which you can eat at all three of their restaurants--Westview (European), My Humble House (Oriental) and Pavilion (Coffee Shop) at the price of one. Grab a table at either Westview's charming terrace or at My Humble House's large terrace with glass facades, offering a breathtaking view of the Ridge. We recommend the wasabi and mayonnaise prawns to start with--creamy, soft, yet with the kick of wasabi, this one's a winner. Move on to the grills for main course--choose from a table-long variety of meats, seafood and vegetarian options that will be grilled for you on the spot. They also have a Peking Duck roasting on a spit, which is a must-try. Overall, the meal is flawless, even for the fussiest of brunchers. Of course, you cannot leave without trying dessert- not only do they have a large variety, but they also make sure they use top quality ingredients. At the end of the brunch, the proof really is in the pudding! Cost Rs 3,250 per head (plus taxes) Where ITC Maurya, The Luxury Collection, Sardar Patel Marg Tel 49422222

ThreeSixtyOne Degrees
A setting like no other, ThreeSixtyOne Degrees' brunch is best enjoyed out on the deck. Bright yellow tables and chairs set on a makeshift wooden pier jutting into a large water body reflecting the crisp afternoon sun certainly start things off on a good note. The staff is helpful and polite, happy to help you select a drink from the list of 10 champagnes and cocktails they offer as part of the brunch. Start your meal with the salad bar, which is truly extraordinary--apart from the usual suspects, they have an exotic spread of cured meats ranging from tuna carpaccio and smoked turkey to oysters paired beautifully with Bloody Mary shots.Their dimsums are also worth a try--it's the specialty of their Oriental selection. They also have a sushi and teppenyaki counter that is a must-visit. Fresh ingredients, subtle flavours and delicate preparations mark this brunch--one that we predict you'll be going back to. Cost Rs 3,950 per head (plus taxes) Where The Oberoi, 443, Phase 5, Udyog Vihar Tel 0124 24512345

Café Uno
Perhaps one of the most child friendly Sunday brunches in town, Shangrila-La's Café Uno offers a lavish spread, accompanied with unlimited champagne. Done up in wood and glass, with a buffet that extends from one end of the room to the other, the vibe of the restaurant is relaxed yet luxurious. Find yourself a table in their lawns, under a parasol on a crisp winter afternoon and set your kids free to explore their special kid's menu as well as activities. Make sure you get here with an appetite and on a leisurely afternoon-- the buffet choices vary from meat grills and exotic salads to an extensive seafood bar that could give the French a run for their money--do try their smoked salmon with cream cheese and caviar, as well as grilled tenderloin. Café Uno's brunch is about celebrating the winter and spoiling its patrons. The variety they offer, coupled with the high quality of their food makes for an unfailingly good experience each time. Cost Rs 2,250 per head (plus taxes) Where Shangri-La's Eros Hotel, 19, Ashoka Road, Connaught Place Tel 41191010

s-10

SIMPLY DELHI  DECEMBER 2012

