LEISURE
FA S H I O N CINEMA T R AV E L BOOKS FA S H I O N CINEMA T R AV E L

An intimate portrait of the charmed as well as cynical world of Rajiv and Sonia Gandhi by an insider who dared to sneak
By Swapan Dasgupta

THE OTHER SIDE OFCAMELOT
he term `people like us' or PLUs was first popularised in India in the late 1980s during the heyday of Rajiv Gandhi. Inspired by the label "one of us" used by the devotees of Margaret Thatcher, the PLUs stood out as a status group--the relatively privileged, but not vulgarian, cosmopolitan, English-speaking elite who had attended the same schools and universities. During the high noon of socialism under Indira Gandhi, the PLUs, with the possible exception of the old maharajas, had kept well away from public life, preferring the world of convivial dinner parties where they met each other and exchanged `in' gossip. Two things happened to change this vacuous but settled world. First, in 1980, a few months after Indira Gandhi's comeback election, her heirapparent Sanjay Gandhi died in a plane crash. A distraught Mrs Gandhi fell back on her elder son Rajiv, a pilot with Indian Airlines who had led a private life well away from public gaze, to carry forward the dynastic mantle. Secondly, in October 1984, Mrs Gandhi was assassinated and Rajiv Gandhi sworn in as prime minister. The Rajiv years witnessed a dramatic shift in the social composition of India's power elite. Overnight, the PLUs were catapulted from the social fringe into the heart of the political establishment. An inexperienced Rajiv banked heavily on his old pals from Doon School and Cambridge for direction and India came to be ruled by what Romesh Thapar impishly dubbed the "babalog government". As a journalist and a PLU who had the right friends and attended the right dinners, Tavleen Singh enjoyed a ringside view of the new durbar. Even while they were private citizens, she had got to know Rajiv and Sonia Gandhi intimately, hosted small lunches and dinners for them at her Golf Links barsati, and was on first-name terms with the crowd that became the new movers and shakers--until

E X C E R P T S
 WHEN we got close enough for Sonia to say hello to Naveen (Patnaik) and for me to be introduced to her, Naveen, in a feeble attempt at polite conversation, decided to compliment her on her white frock. `Is it a Valentino?' he asked with a friendly smile, to which she said unsmilingly, `I had it made in Khan Market by my darzi'. There was something in the way she said this that prevented further conversation. 

T

RAJIV AND SONIA GANDHI AT INDIA GATE IN 1971
CORBIS

DURBAR
byTavleen Singh Hachette India Price: RS 599 Pages: 312 BETWEEN THE COVERS Rajivcomes out as an understated and fundamentallydecent individual who lacked the vision to translate his sound impulses into policyinitiatives.It is Sonia who is cast in the most unflattering of colours.

she was unceremoniously "dropped". Durbar is a personalised account of the India that underwent turbulence and change from the declaration of Emergency in 1975 to Rajiv's tragic assassination in 1991. As a political memoir that blends the ugly world of bigotry, poverty, violence and corruption with the naïve earnestness and cronyism at the top, it has few Indian parallels--Raj Thapar's All These Years centred on Mrs Gandhi's infamous `kitchen Cabinet' comes closest. It is an enthralling narrative, peppered with telling anecdotes that will leave many powerful people squirming and red-faced. Rajiv comes out as an understated and fundamentally decent, if naïve, individual who lacked the vision to translate his sound impulses into policy initiatives. His real folly, Tavleen believes, lay in his unabashed indulgence of cronyism (the friends who became rich overnight and the infamous Q who openly boasted his ability to secure government contracts for businessmen) and in allowing fawning courtiers (and she names quite a few) to cocoon him from happenings outside Lutyens' Delhi. But Tavleen also depicts a very cynical dimension to Rajiv's character. In dealing with the aftermath of the anti-Sikh massacres in Delhi after Indira's assassination in 1984, Rajiv was quite willing to pander to the basest instincts of those who wanted the Sikhs to be "taught a lesson". There is a telling anecdote of Romi Chopra (a fixture of the Gandhi family durbar) telling Gita Mehta at small gathering that "the Sikhs are on trial. They have to prove their loyalty to this country". It was this mindset that shaped the Congress' shrill propaganda in the 1984 election. However, it is Sonia who is cast in the most un-

SHE had absolutely no interest in politics. The only comment on politics I remember her making was on a night when Rajiv and she were dropping me home after a dinner party. I asked her if she would like her children to be in politics some day, and she said, `I would rather my children begged in the streets than went into politics.'

 By Rajiv's second year in power, stories about Sonia's shopping sprees began to circulate in Delhi's drawing rooms... Then, from diplomatic sources in distant Moscow, where the prime minister and his wife made their first foreign visit, came the story of Sonia buying an expensive sable coat... According to the story I heard Sonia's tastes in fur coats was so refined that she was not satisfied with Soviet tailoring and had the coat sent to Rome to be redesigned by the Italian fashion house, Fendi...

flattering of colours. Tavleen traces the evolution of this awkward, slightly forbidding but inherently friendly housewife who once swore that she would rather have her children beg than enter politics. Once she became the First Lady, Sonia changed. Tavleen narrates the colourful stories that did the rounds of PLU circles of Sonia's shopping binges during Rajiv's frequent foreign visits. She comes close to painting Sonia as a parvenu who, had she not been white and European, would never have got the social acceptance that comes with class and pedigree in India. Sonia, Tavleen maintains, was never interested in politics during Rajiv's lifetime. According to her she even lacked a social conscience and was emotionally disengaged from India. At the same time, she exercised total control over Rajiv--particularly in shaping his likes and dislikes. Tavleen's portrayal of the pre-political Sonia is in sharp contrast to some contemporary projections of the Congress president

(LEFT) SONIA AND RAJIV AT SOLANG VALLEY IN 1969; TAVLEEN SINGH WITH RAJIV IN DELHI IN 1985

as a blend of Mother Teresa and Mother India. Tavleen ends her story with the death of Rajiv. But her description of the scene at Teen Murti House where people gathered to pay their last respects to the coffin containing the remains of the former prime minister is worthy of a Kitty Kelly: "Sonia's dark brown hair was tied back and covered with her cotton sari and her face was carefully made up. Even the lower eyelashes she painted on to make her eyes look bigger were in place... When our eyes met, she looked at me as if I were a total stranger." If, between the gossipy lunches of the early1980s and Rajiv's final journey in 1991 Tavleen had become a "total stranger" to the first family, Durbar is certain to elevate her to the status of a public enemy. Tavleen's crime, as the Consigliere of 10 Janpath will doubtless point out, is not about fact and fiction. Her offence, as Princess Margaret once explained in the context of a Royal nanny who dared to write a tell-all book, is worse: "She sneaked." 

74

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

NEW

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

75

