SURVEY 2012

GUEST COLUMN PORNOGRAPHY
From their writing, it would seem that Roth has sex all the time and Naipaul never. And what Salman Rushdie's hugely entertaining new MEN ACROSS memoir Joseph Anton proves above all, is that you can never stop a great METROS AND writer from being a perennial chickSMALLTOWNS HAVE WATCHED magnet. Fatwa or no fatwa. And in the midst of all this, as A PORN FILM recent sex surveys by modern-day OR VIDEO Vatsyayanas prove, Indians are havCOMPARED TO ing more sex than ever, and how. 33% WOMEN. More women on top in Delhi, more rear entry in Kota, more threesomes AMONG in Ratlam, more hand jobs in INDIVIDUALS IN Jamnagar. And Kota, well they are SMALLTOWNS, really pushing the envelope over there, as students from all over India descend to the dusty little town to IN RATLAM FEEL play out their desperate middleclass dreams of joining IITS and AIIMS, PORN HAS AN INTEGRAL ROLE and bringing with them unprecedented prosperity. IN SEXUAL Well, all this may be great news ACTIVITY, for us, but it is absolutely shattering FOLLOWED for the world. What? One billion BY 61% IN more Indians by 2030? Get out of MORADABAD. here. The day is not far away, when Indians will have to pay congestion charges every time they forget to slip on a condom. There is also some talk of a UN embargo on Indians under 40 having sex; and to pop a Viagra, you will need special OF METRO MEN dispensation from the president of WATCH PORN, the United States. Oh, dear! What BARELY LEADING will we do on Karwa Chauth? SMALLTOWN Well, dear countrymen, forget about Viagra and all artificial mood MEN AT 82%. enhancers, we do not need them. Photo Imaging SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com After all we invented sex, among so men, than reams of print which describe the many other ancient things. We are Indians. Our traditions run deep. Let us go back to nature, to lyricompromised polity that is India. In my lifelong quest for exhilarating sexual con- cism, to poetry, to literature. To the redoubtable tent, I would discover Vladimir Nabokov and Gün- Kashinath Singh, in one of whose short stories, if I ter Grass. In spite of myself I would get culture remember correctly, the hero reads from The through sex. I would discover the great Philip Roth, Communist Manifesto to his young bride on their in whose novel Indignation, a young man would lose wedding night to get into the mood. On second his life because of a perfect blow job, or Everyman, thoughts, let us not go back to Singh, he sounds a where a man's obsession with the other woman's bit extreme. Let us go back to Ramdhari Singh bottom would make him give up his marriage and Dinkar and his Veer Ras. Try Rashmi Rathi, preferthe most secure part of his life. How we have sex tells ably `Krishna Chetavani'. Works for me all the time. "Yachna nahin, ab rann hoga a lot about us. It is as basic as food and as important Jeevan jai, ya ki maran hoga." as religion. Writing about the sexual act is not easy ("No pleading now, [dear girl], but absolute and many have faltered at its altar, but the key to it, I guess, lies in giving the reader the impression that war/ Triumphant life or glorious death is you yourself derive great pleasure from the act. what "I wish for.") 

MALE THING

INNOCENCE
Trawling oceans of porn helped many in the 1970s and 1980s discover literature
By Siddharth Chowdhury

HOW DEBRAWINGER ENDED MYWORLD OF

82%

The writer is the author of Day Scholar, shortlisted for the Man Asian Literary Prize, and Patna Roughcut

F

SPICE IT UP

Does porn play an integral role in sexual activity?
YES

45%

NO

36%
19% Not specified

*Across metros and small towns

or many boys growing up in the India of the 1980s, the iconic Richard Avedon photograph of an 18-year-old Nastassja Kinski wrapped around a python was a gateway to sexual heaven and a lifetime of appreciation of the female form. But the equivalent visual touchstone of raw, provocative and nakedly lyrical celebration of beauty and lust in my childhood happened when I came across in an annual number of Life in my Patna home, left behind by a friend of my elder brother, a devastating photograph, by Annie Leibovitz, of a topless Debra Winger cavorting on the floor with a stunned Alsatian, in White Sands, New Mexico. Since I already loved dogs, it was only natural that after my perusal of this childhood shattering snap, I would start adoring women too. I am often asked whether my parents read my books or not, pointing to the fact that often my novels contain explicit and disturbing sexual content. Well, they do, and even if they are embarrassed by them, they have never let it on to me. Only thing, whenever anyone related to the family or their friends ask about the novels, whether they are available in Patna or not, they quickly mention it as being "out of print". So well, you never know. Like in most Indian families, sex was never openly discussed in mine too, and I am very glad about it. One inflicts so many injuries on one's parents while growing up that at least they should be spared dinner-time discussion on the birds and the bees. One could, after all, learn more from one's contemporaries and Mastram out in the wider world. Like the fact that nine-inch penises were de rigueur for men and Mamiji always bathed with the window open. Well, my parents may have been stiff upper lip about sex, but there were never any restrictions on me. I could read, watch, play and hear any-

thing I wanted to. The only book ever confiscated was my beloved copy of The Betsy, found in my Class V school bag by my brother. I got it back, covered in brown paper, when I reached the Class X. "You will appreciate it more now," my brother told me pointedly and I did. The right book at the right time, you can say. The well-read Indian of the 1970-1980s was not the one who had read all of Saul Bellow, but of the other Jewish master, Harold Robbins. I am sure the same is true even today. And so, it was from trawling in oceans of porn that I developed my intense love for literature and cinema. Marlon Brando and the butter dish in Last Tango in Paris made me realise how to accentuate realism using talismanic props. People remembered the props. The rumour that The World According to Garp was full of salacious content, led me and four of my friends to pool Rs 80, buy the novel and read it with awestruck minds. Hain? Was this really possible? Our eyes couldn't believe it, to say nothing of our testes. Sure, the graphic sexuality was life affirming, but the storytelling was brilliant. That is what stayed in my mind. I would never miss a novel by John Irving in the years ahead. Sexuality, when used by a serious writer in his novels, can say as much about the socio-cultural space that his characters inhabit as a well-laidout dinner scene in a Satyajit Ray or a Luis Bunuel movie. A woman who shouts "Jai Mata Di" or "yes please", or better still, "aur tani jor se" in throes of sexual congress, is worth pages of description of the furniture in the bedroom. Or a feisty girl, who demands in a languorous yet philosophical tone of her Maoist lover, in a landmark story of the same name by Ritwik Ray, "Could You Kindly Please Stroke My Lotus With Thy Hand, Could You Kindly Please?", can say as much about the mango republic she inhabits, surrounded on all sides by banana

65%

83%

40

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

41

