SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story
hake a leg, find your highs in the martinis and the music and party the night away as SIMPLY DELHI goes clubbing to the most happening nightclubs in town. Rooftop lounges and drinks made by mixongineering are keeping Delhi's nightlife buzzing with DJs spinning the best mix and live gigs becoming a rage around town. While cigars and Scotches are in demand at upscale nightspots, experimental food and drinks steal the show.
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

ROCKON
PUT ON YOUR PARTY SHOES AND GROOVE ATTHESE HAPPENING NIGHTSPOTS IN THE CITY B-BAR

S

Uber chic
Barely two months old, b-bar is Delhi's newest and hippest party destination. And this experience begins from the moment you park your car. Located on the 4th floor of Select CityWalk, there's a special parking slot for b-bar's customers, and a red carpet leads you to the golden gated elevator which swiftly takes you straight to the club. Opulent interiors and a cheery staff welcome you inside. Spread over 25,000 square feet, b-bar is dimly-lit and done up in warm tones, with huge Buddha statues adorning the lounge. The bar placed under the 65 feet high atrium grabs immediate attention. But, if you visit on a weekend, then the thumping music beats everything else. On most weekends it's difficult to get a table, so most people just get themselves a drink and

groove to the electrifying music, around the bar. Here, you will find people of all ages. The music, of course, is trademark Buddha Bar music, and the DJ churns out some interesting mixes which also include some Bollywood notes. Serving Asian cuisine, the food here is exquisite and so are the drinks. The cocktails are spectacular; we suggest the Pineapple Spicy M--Thai chili infused vodka, with pineapple juice and syrup, the drink ends with a note of chili that explodes in the mouth. As the night sets in, the DJ puts up a spectacular sound and light show in sync with the music, which is truly worth waiting for! BAR Pineapple Spicy M MEAL FOR TWO Rs Rs 2,500 plus taxes AT 4th Floor, Select CityWalk, Saket  by Ekta Marwaha TEL 46098989

s-4

SIMPLY DELHI  DECEMBER 2012

SIMPLY DELHI
SKOOTER

Cover story
ARDOR

Retro rocker Before you head to Skooter, Delhi's
newest nightspot, we suggest you grab your bell-bottoms, bright coloured floral skirts or a golden minaudiere to match your drape gown and headband as retro is in full effect here. The club aims to revive old school nightclubs, so expect smoke on the dance floor and laser lights as these are the real attractions here. The colours pink and black dominate the décor; everything from the walls, lights and even the furniture are done up in these two colours. Open till wee hours, at

Skooter you can step in post-midnight, just to dance the night away. DJ Vishal Malik plays the right mix of house, hip hop and of course Bollywood to create a wicked weekend dance floor. Expect a crowd of chic clubbers that are, like the club's vibe, casual and effortlessly sexy. The finger food here is also worth a mention. Try the tomato and olive crostini or chello kebabs with your fresh fruit martini. BAR The flair bartenders here make some of the best martinis COVER CHARGE Rs 5,000 for a couple WHERE Hotel Samrat, Lodi Estate, Chankyapuri TEL 24121842  by Ekta Alreja

Cozy comfort
Opened just a few months ago, Ardor is one of Delhi's newest nightclubs, spread over two levels. While the first floor is a fine dining section, the lounge is on the top floor with a tiny al-fresco dining space too. There's a little dance floor which can accommodate a small crowd even as the DJ belts out house, and Bollywood numbers. The dimly-lit area is cosy yet spacious. You could grab a table for two in a corner or sit just near the dance floor if you're in a big group. And while you enjoy some sumptuous finger foods like tortillas or a mezze platter, do try their range of speciality cocktails including sake, wine and champagne. Once you're ready for dinner, step down to the first floor for main course. Sample their pizzas, pastas or sumptuous Indian dishes. BAR Ardor fizz punch--A mix of absinthe, vodka and sparkling wine MEAL FOR TWO Rs 1,500 WHERE N 55-56, Outer Circle, Connaught Place TEL 49422211  by Rewati Rau

RAASTA

Hyper-casual
Popular with clubbers who enjoy reggae and dubstep, Raasta is a funky lounge inspired by the everlasting Rastafarian culture. It pays tribute to legendary talents like Bob Marley, Jimmy Hendrix and Jimmy Cliff who have contributed to the musical genre. Stop by for their bombastic karoke nights or sing along with late reggae artist Bob Marley's son, Rohan Marley at Raasta. The laidback at-

mosphere and dim lighting may seem lazy at first, but once the live gigs begin, you will realise that the warm lounge in bright hues of green and gold is the perfect place to relax, indulge in light conversation and most importantly, enjoy some music. BAR Chili Mojito (mojito infused with green chilies and lemon) and strawberry delight MEAL FOR TWO Rs 1,500 plus taxes WHERE 30-A, First Floor, Hauz Khas Village TEL 40623028  by Marcia Rodrigues

s-6

SIMPLY DELHI  DECEMBER 2012

SIMPLY DELHI

Cover story
THE DIRTY MARTINI ZARA
back door entry with a password and the narrow alleys leading you into the 20s styled bar is exciting. The ambience is seductive--the lights are dim, cocktails are served in vintage tea cups, throaty jazz numbers are sung live, women can be spottedsmoking cigars even as you make yourself comfortable in a stacked barrel chair and rickety table covered with a checkered table cloth. BAR Olive Style Gin Fizz MEAL FOR TWO Rs 3,000 plus taxes WHERE One Style Mile, Mehrauli TEL One Style Mile, Mehrauli


Vintage fun
Inspired by the concept of speakeasies of the 1920s--illegal bars which usually had a secret back door entry through dirty alleys, trapdoors and basements, access to which was screened through passwords, Olive's new avatar The Dirty Martini takes you back to a different era. You have to make your way from the back door, through the kitchen and enter the stylish new bar. Even though it's all legal, the dramatic

by Rewati Rau

BLUE FROG STRIKER

Beer it!
With most clubs playing EDM and hip-hop, Striker has become a favourite haunt for rock lovers. It is a place for a casual evening with friends, and of course to enjoy freshly brewed beer. At Striker, you can walk in wearing shorts and a T-shirt, and no one will give you the stink-eye. Dimly-lit, the place is done up in black, and has LCD screens that play performances of bands like AC/DC, creating the aura of an actual gig. Grab a beer and sing along. Don't come here if you hope to have a conversation; it's all about music and beer. The service is good and

Live wire
speedy--order a drink and some finger food (try the beer batter prawns) as you head bang to Led Zeppelin. The beers at Striker are named after different genres of music and what we liked best was their Weiss Blues, a light wheat beer. Those who enjoy live performances should be here on Thursdays. Fridays and Saturdays are all about rock and retro remixes. BAR Beer on tap and Long Island Iced Tea MEAL FOR TWO Rs.2,000 plus taxes WHERE Global Foyer Mall, golf course road, sector 43 Gurgaon TEL 0124 4040101  by Ekta Marwaha It's been a year since blueFROG opened its doors to Delhi's party-goers, and it's still considered the go-to place for electrifying, live gigs. The USP of the club is that they play a different genre of music on different days of the week. So one day you

might sing along with Parikrama or some other music band, while on the other, you would just dance the night away to progressive house music. The food here is a tad disappointing, so we suggest you stick to the bar snacks (try the bruchetta) to accompany your cocktails, which, unlike the food, are quite good. For rum drinkers, we recommend the Razzmatazz--a nice blend of lemon, mint, rum and green apple. BAR Razzmatazz COVER CHARGE Rs 300 per person on weekdays, Rs 600 per person on weekends WHERE blueFROG, The Kila, Seven Style Mile, Opposite Qutub Minar, Mehrauli TEL 26645298 by Ekta Marwaha

s-8

SIMPLY DELHI  DECEMBER 2012

