NA TION

HONOUR KILLINGS

ONE OF THE COUPLES AT A LOVE COMMANDOS SHELTER IN DELHI

`They Will Come After Us'
Runaway couples at a Delhi shelter fear their defiance will exact a deadly price
t a secret location in the Capital, a group called Love Commandos has set up a shelter for married couples living in fear of their own families. Having supposedly tarnished family honour by marrying the `wrong' person, the supplicants for shelter know they are past the point of no return. A couple has just arrived from Meerut, Uttar Pradesh. Love Commandos Chairperson Sanjoy Sachdev and his colleague Harsh Malhotra are all ears. The man and woman belong to the Tyagi community. Though their gotras were different, the girl's family was opposed to the marriage. They had been living-in for a few years and married in January. The woman is now seven months pregnant. The man tells Sachdev and Malhotra he approached police officers of the level of IG, DIG and SSP, but was told by one, "The problem will be solved only if both of you die." His mother went to break the ice with his in-laws but returned with head injuries. This fits an eerie pattern. On June 3, a man called Abdul Hakim ap-

A

peared on actor Aamir Khan's TV show Satyamev Jayate. The episode was on khap panchayats. Khan had invited to the show members from Love Commandos and people in its care, including Hakim and his wife, Mehwish. Hakim admitted his life was in danger. On November 24, he was shot dead in his village near Bulandshahr. Many more Abdul Hakims expect they will be killed. Kamal and his wife Rajkumari have been with Love Commandos since November 24. They were neighbours in Mathura and fell in love. Kamal has sutures in the web of his right hand as goons hired by his inlaws beat him up some months ago. "I tried talking to Rajkumari's parents, but they threatened me every time," says Kamal. It was worse for

HAKIM APPEARED ON AAMIR KHAN'S SHOW SATYAMEV JAYATE ON JUNE 3. HE WAS SHOT DEAD ON NOVEMBER 24.

his wife. "My aunt said if I married Kamal, the family would consider me a prostitute," she says. Rahul Rastogi, 27, and Nooreen, 27, are also on the run. They both worked for Nokia in Moradabad and fell in love. Rastogi sought her family's approval several times but they did not budge. "I said I was willing to convert to Islam to marry their daughter, but they refused." Rastogi and Nooreen came to the shelter on November 24. Rastogi's house in Moradabad was subsequently raided; his family doesn't live there anymore. He has stopped using email and the cellphone. "It has been announced at mosques in Moradabad that Rahul and I should be killed," claims Nooreen. The couples at the shelter are shaken after Hakim's death. Rastogi hasn't slept well for nights and gets so edgy he has to wash his face every half hour. They all agree on one thing. "Hum sab Abdul Hakim ki copiyan hain (We're all copies of Abdul Hakim)," says Rastogi. Kamal nods. "They will come after us," he says. by Rahul Jayaram

72

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

