LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

HORSEMEN OF THE HINDU KUSH
William Dalrymple tells the back story of the still unfolding Great Game in Afghanistan
By S. Prasannarajan

t is the most treacherous place on earth where history and geography are joined in a permanent conspiracy against the invader. Its beauty, accentuated by craggy mountains and winding valleys, continues to be smudged in blood. It is the land where the big powers of the time play out the Great Game, driven by the strategic urge to control and colonise. It is a game in which kings and wazirs, warriors and mercenaries, emissaries and spies are given only the choice between ephemeral victory and gory death; it abhors the twilight zone of peace. It is where the horsemen of tribal bloodlust contain the worst instincts of the foreigner, and where the green flags of jihad strive to flutter over the wreckage of imperial temptations. Afghanistan is a hard place; the wind blowing from the Hindu Kush carries the whispers of the dead and the follies of empires. Even as this review goes to press, elsewhere in Washington, the finer details of American troops' pullout from the Afghan battlefield in 2014 are being worked out, though the first war of the twenty-first century is far from over. For the war-scarred land beyond the Indus, it is just another endgame, yet another dangerous pause between retreat and

I

RETURN OFA KING: THE BATTLE FOR AFGHANISTAN
ByWilliam Dalrymple Bloomsbury Price: RS 799 Pages: 608

BRITISH LIBRARY

retribution. And it is into this theatre of eternal passion play of power that William Dalrymple enters for his latest historical drama. Return of a King takes us to the beginning of the Great Game. The king of the title is Shah Shuja ul-Mulk of Sadozai dynasty, the luckless ruler of Afghanistan in the early nineteenth century. His destiny shuttles between absolute power, humiliating defeat, picaresque of escape, exile and homecoming. The book begins with the covenant the besieged Shah makes with the British East India Company--and it is a pact that will be betrayed and renewed as the Game gets bloodier in the snowy remoteness of what Afghans call as "Yaghistan"--the land of rebellion. As the king, keeper of the precious Kohi-Nur, now deposed by rival clans, begins a long journey of exile and mobilisation across India, the terms of the Great Game have already been set in Afghanistan by the imperial masters. The king will be a pawn in this game, most dispensable. The game itself, begun as a counterpoint to the Russian advance in Afghanistan, will become a war between the British occupation army and the natives. The triumph of Dalrymple, a master storyteller who redeems history from sepia-tinted stillness, is that the battle for Afghanistan on his pages becomes an epic saga of human frailties, populated by men for whom life is a balancing act between duty, honour and vengeance. It is not the speed of the cavalry but the velocity of passion that provides the rustle to the pages of Return of a King. In that sense, it is a book of finely etched portraits. The imprisoned Shah's wife offers the Sikh Maharaja Ranjit Singh, the Lion of Punjab, the Kohi-Nur in exchange for the freedom of her husband. Once the diamond is in his hand, the maharaja reneges on his promise. Ranjit, a great warrior and an ally of the Company with a passion for horses, is an inquisitive observer of manners. "He could not understand why the Governor General gives himself the trouble of drinking seven or eight glasses of wine when one glass of whisky would do the same work." In the end, no king will survive the game, but the precious stone will. The Afghans who pass through the book are warriors powered by tribal rivalry, and most of them have an ancestral score to settle. The dashing Akbar Khan, son of Dost

WILLIAM DALRYMPLE IN AFGHANISTAN; (LEFT) AFGHAN INSURGENTS PREPARE AN ATTACK ON THE BRITISH CANTONMENTS OUTSIDE KABUL

Mohammad Khan, the winner after the British retreat in 1842, is a sex symbol as well as a smart warrior prince avenging his father's humiliation. But he is believed to be poisoned to death by his father. The English players, burdened by white man's mission, are either arrogant or naïve, cunning or foolish, wise or wayward. Both the brightest and the devious of them won't survive the Game, which in its finale is tribal bloodlust aggravated by the call of god. The King, Shah Shuja, will return home in 1839, but as the Company's puppet, to be abandoned by his benefactors and finally killed by his own godson. For

those who learn their anti-imperialist lessons from history, Afghanistan circa 1842 is a kind of prototype of Afghanistan 2012. In the first, the British retreat through the killing snows is the most humbling picture of imperialism. The Game repeats itself, says Dalrymple at the end of his Afghan story. Hamid Karzai in his puppet status is Shah Shuja all over again; the Taliban venerate Dost Mohammad. We can only agree with Dalrymple when he quotes Mirza Ata, "It is certainly no easy thing to invade or govern the Kingdom of Khurasan." That said, it is certainly no easy thing to survive the barbarism of

76

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

77

LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

the tribes. No amount of anti-imperialist romance can justify the gore and grotesqueries of the freedom fighters. Here goes the end of Sir Alexander Burnes, age 36, brilliant explorer, soldier and spy: "The trunk of Burne's headless body was left in the street to be eaten by the dogs of the city. For nearly a week, no one even thought to try and save anything of his mangled remains." Sir William Hay Macnaghten, another scholar diplomat and adviser to the

Governor General, will have an equally gory end: His severed head will be displayed on a spear. Afghanistan in mid-nineteenth century was a story of imperial hubris and tribal horror. Today, courtesy imperial intervention, it is a better place, in spite of the return of the Taliban and because of the empty caves of Tora Bora. William Dalrymple tells the back story of the Great Game in a narrative that matches the best of historical fiction.

E XC E R P T

NO EASYPLACE TO RULE
SHAH SHUJA (1786-1842) WANDERED ACROSS NORTH INDIA AS A FUGITIVE BEFORE RECLAIMING HIS THRONE IN AFGHANISTAN

T

he year 1809 opened auspiciously for Shah Shuja ul-Mulk. It was now March, the very beginning of that brief Afghan spring, and the pulse was slowly returning to the veins of the icy landscape long clotted with drifts of waist-high snow. Now the small, sweet-smelling Istalif irises were pushing their way through the frozen ground, the frosted rime on the trunks of the deodars was running to snowmelt, and the Ghilzai nomads were unlatching their fat-tailed sheep from the winter pens, breaking down their goat-hair tents and readying the flocks for the first of the spring migrations to the new grass of the high pastures. It was just then, at that moment of thaw and sap, that Shah Shuja received two pieces of good news-- something of a rarity in his troubled reign. The first concerned the recovery of some lost family property. The largest diamond in the world, the Koh-i-Nur, or Mountain of Light, had been missing for more than a decade, but such was the turbulence of the times that no attempt had been made to find it. Shah Zaman, Shuja's elder brother and predecessor on the throne of Afghanistan, was said to have hidden the

gem shortly before being captured and blinded by his enemies. A huge Indian ruby known as the Fakhraj, the family's other most precious gem, had also disappeared at the same time. So Shah Shuja summoned his blind brother and questioned him on the whereabouts of their father's most famous jewels: was it really true that he knew where they were hidden? Shah Zaman revealed that nine years earlier he had hidden the Fakhraj under a rock in a stream near the Khyber Pass, shortly before being taken prisoner. Later, he had slipped the Koh-i-Nur into a crack in the wall of the fortress cell where he was first seized and bound. A court historian later recorded, `Shah Shuja immediately dispatched a few of his most trustworthy men to find these two gems and advised them that they should leave no stone unturned in their efforts. They found the Koh-i-Nur with a Shinwari sheikh who in his ignorance was using it as a paperweight for his official papers. As for the Fakhraj, they found it with a Talib, a student, who had uncovered it when he went to a stream to wash his clothes. They impounded both gems and brought them back in the king's service.' The second piece of news, about the arrival of an embassy YEARS LATER SHUJA from a previously hostile neighbour, was potentially of more REMEMBERED ONE present use to the Shah. At the that particularly delighted him: practical age of only twenty-four, Shuja `a large box producing noises was now in the seventh year of like voices, strange sounds in a his reign. By temperament a reader and a thinker, more inrange of timbres, harmonies terested in poetry and scholarand melodies, most pleasing ship than in warfare or campaigning, it was his fate to to the ear' . The Embassy have inherited, while still an had brought Afghanistan adolescent, the far-flung its first organ. Durrani Empire. That Empire,

}

NATIONAL ARMY MUSEUM, LONDON

LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S
ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM, UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD

founded by his grandfather Ahmad Shah Abdali, had been built out of the collapse of three other Asian empires: the Uzbeks to the north, the Mughals to the south and to the west the Safavids of Persia. It had originally extended from Nishapur in modern Iran through Afghanistan, Baluchistan, the Punjab and Sindh to Kashmir and the threshold of Mughal Delhi. But now, only thirty years after his grandfather's death, the Durrani Empire was itself already well on its way to disintegration. There was, in fact, nothing very surprising about this. Considering its very ancient history, Afghanistan--or Khurasan, as the Afghans have called the lands of this region for the last two millennia--had had but a few hours of political or administrative unity. Far more often it had been `the places in between'--the fractured and disputed stretch of mountains, floodplains and deserts separating its more orderly neighbours. At other times its provinces formed the warring extremities of rival, clashing empires. Only very rarely did its parts happen to come together to attain any sort of coherent state in its own right. Everything had always conspired against its rise: the geography and topography and especially the great stony skeleton of the Hindu Kush, the black rubble of its scalloped and riven slopes standing out against the ice-etched, snow-topped ranges which divided up the country like the bones of a massive rocky ribcage... In many places blood feuds became almost a national pastime--the Afghan equivalent of country cricket in the English shires--and the killings they engendered were often on a spectacular scale. Under the guise of reconciliation, one of Shah Shuja's chiefs invited some sixty of his feuding cousins `to dine with him', wrote one observer, `having previously laid bags of gunpowder under the apartment. During the meal, having gone out on some pretext, he blew them all up.' A country like this could be governed only with skill, strategy and a full treasure chest. So when at the beginning of 1809 messengers

RANJIT SINGH, THE SIKH RULER AND GREAT ENEMY OF DOST MOHAMMAD, CREATED A POWERFUL KINGDOM IN THE PUNJAB

arrived from the Punjab bearing news of an East India Company embassy heading north from Delhi seeking an urgent alliance with him, Shah Shuja had good reason to be pleased. In the past the Company had been a major problem for the Durranis, for its well-disciplined sepoy armies had made impossible the lucrative raids down on to the plains of Hindustan which for centuries had been a principal source of Afghan income. Now it seemed that the Company wished to woo the Afghans; the Shah's newswriters wrote to him that the Embassy had already crossed the Indus, en route to his winter capital of Peshawar. This not only offered some respite from the usual round of sieges, arrests and punitive expeditions, it potentially provided Shuja with a powerful ally--something he badly needed. There had never been a British embassy to Afghanistan before, and the two people were almost unknown to each other, so the Embassy had the additional benefit of novelty... Reports reaching Shah Shuja indicated that the British were coming laden with gifts: `elephants with golden howdahs, a palanquin with a high parasol, gold-inlaid guns and ingenious pistols with six chambers, never seen before; expensive clocks, binoculars, fine mirrors capable of reflecting the world as it is; diamond studded lamps, porcelain vases and utensils with gold embedded work from Rome and China; tree-shaped candelabra, and other such beautiful and expensive gifts whose brilliance the imagination falls short in describing'. Years later Shuja remembered one present that particularly delighted him: `a large box producing noises like voices, strange sounds in a range of timbres, harmonies and melodies, most pleasing to the ear'. The Embassy had brought Afghanistan its first organ. Shah Shuja's autobiography is silent as to whether he suspected these British bearing gifts. But by the time he came to write it in late middle age, he was well aware that the alliance he was about to negotiate would change the course of his own life, and that of Afghanistan, for ever. 

80

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

