NA TION

2G SCAM

CAUGHTIN THE NUMBERS GAME
Contrary to what retired official R.P. Singh and the Congress claim, CAG was not adamant on the 2G loss of Rs 1.76 lakh crore. It left room for estimates from Rs 31,000 crore to Rs 40,000 crore.
By Dhiraj Nayyar

WHAT CAG SAID
Contrary to common perception,in his November 2010 report on the 2G scam Vinod Rai gave four different estimates for presumptive loss,based on four different methodologies.The calculations for all four methods include the loss caused by 122 underpriced GSM licences (later cancelled by the Supreme Court),35 underpriced dual-technology licences given out in 2007 and underpriced spectrum beyond the stipulated 6.2 MHz to existing players (both of which were overlooked by the Supreme Court).
THE 3G METHODOLOGY THE STel OFFER

Rs 1,76,645 cr
Based on the prices companies paid for 3G spectrum in an auction in 2010, computing what they may have paid in 2008 if an auction was held for 2G spectrum.  It assumes equivalence between the value of 2G spectrum (used mostly for low-profit-margin voice services) and 3G spectrum (used mostly for higherprofit-margin data services).


Rs 67,364 cr
In December 2007, just before A. Raja made his allocations, STel promoter C. Sivasankaran made an voluntary offer to pay Rs 13,750 crore over 10 years for a pan-India licence.  CAG estimated the discounted present value of the offer at Rs 8,825 crore, compared to Rs 1,658 crore Raja charged. The difference was extrapolated for 157 licences and spectrum beyond 6.2 MHz.


he nation needs to know how Rs 2,645 crore of loss turned into a presumptive loss of Rs 1.76 lakh crore," thundered Information and Broadcasting Minister Manish Tewari at a press conference in Chandigarh on November 24. A day earlier, a retired director-general in the Comptroller and Auditor General's (CAG) office, R.P. Singh, repeated his earlier claim that by his methodology, rejected by CAG head Vinod Rai, the presumptive loss from the 2G spectrum allocation was only Rs 2,645 crore. Singh insinuated that the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, BJP's Murli Manohar Joshi, had influenced CAG's calculations. Joshi denied the allegation. Singh's allegation was enough to prompt Congress chief Sonia Gandhi to make her first com-

T

THE UNITECH SALE

THE SWAN SONG

Rs 69,626 cr


Months after it won 22 licences, Unitech sold 67.25 per cent equity to Telenor for Rs 6,120 crore. That valued the joint venture, Uninor, at Rs 9,100 crore.  The difference between the market valuation of Uninor and the price paid for licences was used to arrive at the overall loss figure.
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

 A few months after it acquired 13 licences, Swan sold 50 per cent equity to the UAE-based Etisalat for Rs 3,600 crore, valuing the company, which had only spectrum as an asset, at Rs 7,200 crore.  The fee paid for the 13 licences was just Rs 1,537 crore.The difference was extrapolated for 157 licences and spectrum beyond 6.2 MHz to arrive at the final loss figure.

Rs 57,666 cr

ment on the 2G scam, accusing the opposition BJP of standing exposed after Singh's revelations. Singh later withdrew his insinuation. He said he had been "misquoted" in the press. That didn't stop the Congress from once again trying to establish Kapil Sibal's infamous zero-loss theory, two years after it was completely discredited. Instead, the party exposed itself. Contrary to Tewari and Singh's assertions, CAG never said the loss from the scam was precisely Rs 1.76 lakh crore. That figure was just one of four estimates provided by CAG in its report (see box: What CAG Said). A close reading of page 54 of the report reveals that CAG was far from adamant on insisting that any of the four estimates was the absolute truth. Says the report, "Audit reiterates that specific value of 2G spectrum could have been discovered only through an efficient market drawn process and, in its absence, these (four estimates) are the indicators available which give the hints towards the loss Government could have suffered." CAG is equally transparent about its motives. "The attempt by audit is only to highlight that the price discovery of spectrum through an open market mechanism would have fetched a much higher value and thus increased receipts for the Government," says the report on page 56. If Tewari had read chapter 6 of the report, he would have also found that while CAG asserted in no uncertain terms that there was a loss, he welcomed an open debate on the estimates. "The fact that there has been loss to the national exchequer in the allocation of 2G spectrum cannot be

R.P. SINGH
PTI

VINOD RAI

WHATTHE GOVERNMENT SAID IN 2011
THE SIBALTHEORY

WHATTHE GOVE RNMENT SAYS NOW
com executives,blaming them for a conspiracy to cause a loss of Rs 31,000 crore to the exchequer.  CBI calculated the loss on the basis of dealings of only the three companies (not all, as CAG did) it chargesheeted first: Uninor, Swan and RCom.

Zero loss


In January 2011, Telecom Minister Kapil Sibal said there was "zero loss"from predecessor A. Raja's policies. He argued that the

Government was following TRAI recommendations and the practice of the NDA government, which did not necessitate an auction.  Sibal argued the Government's aim was to maximise teledensity and not revenue.

CBI SUBMISSION

Rs loss


31,000-cr

FLOP RE-AUCTION OF 122 2G LICENCES
Government collects only Rs 9,000 crore from the Supreme Court-ordered re-auction of cancelled licences in November 2012, uses that outcome to ask the question: Where was the big loss in the first place?


THE FLAWS
Following TRAI recommendations, only one-fifth of the spectrum given out by Raja in 2008 was put up for re-auction. So, there can be no direct comparison between 2008 and 2012. If the entire spectrum was put up for re-auction, the loss from Raja's allocation would have been more evident.


 The financial situation of telecom companies is much worse in 2012 than in 2008. High debt and falling margins have constrained their ability to bid aggressively. 

SONIA GANDHI BACKS R.P. SINGH'S INTERVENTION

THE FLAWS
Singh insinuates PAC Chairman M.M.Joshi influenced CAG's calculations, then withdraws his charge. The timing of his appearance for TV interviews two years after the CAG report is questionable.  He rejects CAG's four estimates but provides no market mechanismbased estimate of his own.


Rs 2,645 cr
is the loss estimate made by the former CAG director-general.
 Singh arrives at this figure by indexing Raja's 2001 price of Rs 1,658 crore with inflation.

In April 2011, CBI filed a chargesheet against Raja, Siddharth Behura,R.K. Chandolia and several tele-

In early 2008, the economy was growing by more than 8 per cent. It is now growing by around 5 per cent.That would dampen all sectors, including telecom.

64

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

NA TION

2G SCAM

FORMER CAG'S FLIP-FLOP

V.K. Shunglu attacks the turf he once defended
ing the CWG projects on schedule. Incidentally, the report on CAG was not part of the Shunglu Committee's terms of reference. Shunglu wrote he did not include that in his main committee reports "because doing so would immediately place the matter in public domain, generate a debate with more fervour than foresight and tend to compromise the standing of certain institutions envisaged by the Constitution/Parliament". In addition to recommending a three-member audit board for greater transparency, Shunglu said CAG accounts should be audited by a professional auditor appointed by the Public Accounts Committee, and suggested that the CAG be selected by a collegium. Cabinet Secretary K.M. Chandrasekhar had written to CAG Rai on April 23, 2011, seeking his comments on the Shunglu Committee's suggestions. Rai replied on May 6, 2011, rejecting them outright and placing on record Shunglu's own earlier views.
by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

F

our months after CAG Vinod Rai laid the 2G spectrum allocation report in Parliament, unleashing a war of words over the controversial loss figure of Rs 1.76 lakh crore, former CAG V.K. Shunglu recommended clipping of the organisations's wings by making it a multi-member body, like the Election Commission. Ironically, Shunglu, who was CAG from 1996 to 2002, had himself resisted such a move when Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah, heading the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC), had suggested SHUNGLU the same in 2001. CAG Shunglu, in response to the draft NCRWC report in September 2001, had strongly rejected the recommendation for a multi-member audit board. His argument then was that in 34 Commonwealth countries, the auditor general was the singular head of the audit institution. Further, the process of the

audit report went through various levels before being approved by CAG and, consequently, there was no inherent defect in the system, which called for a collegial decision on audit findings, Shunglu had said. In view of Shunglu's strong views, the NCRWC recommendation was never acted upon. It was as good as buried till Shunglu himself changed his mind and termed CAG "a monocracy no longer conducive to efficiency, outcome and accountability", in his secret report submitted to the Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh, on March 29, 2011. Shunglu was appointed head of a two-member committee to probe allegations of corruption in the conduct of the Commonwealth Games (CWG) in October 2010. He gave a series of six reports on wasteful expense, fund misuse and mismanagement in organising the Games. He decided to give a seventh, criticising CAG for not audit-

denied. However, the amount of loss could be debated," said the report. Of the four estimates finally provided by the auditor, Singh claims he rejected all in a written submission to his boss in May 2010. He said he had dropped the estimate based on the open offer from STel because the offer had been withdrawn in a high court. He rejected the base figure of the Rs 1.76-lakh-crore estimate. That figure of Rs 1.02 lakh crore, for only 122 licences, excluded the loss (Rs 74,000 crore) having arisen from the 35 dualtechnology licences given away in 2007 and spectrum allocated above the stipulated 6.2 MHz. His chief reasoning: 2G spectrum prices were not comparable with 3G spectrum prices, an argument rejected by the Supreme Court in February 2012 when it can-

celled 122 GSM licences. Singh even rejected the two most reasonable of CAG's four methodologies. Two of CAG's estimates were based on the dilution of equity by Unitech and Swan to foreign investors within 12 months of acquiring the licences. Singh's argument was these were legitimate FDI infusions approved by the finance ministry, which resulted in no gain for private companies or any losses for the Government. Singh's argument holds little water. Neither firm had any asset, or even any expertise in telecom, except the spectrum. That Telenor and Etisalat paid significant premiums above Rs 1,658 crore (the fee then telecom minister A. Raja charged) for their equity stake in October and December 2008 suggests the market valued the

spectrum at a rate much higher than what Raja did in 2008. CAG's loss estimates based on equity dilution in Unitech and Swan are Rs 57,000 crore and Rs 69,000 crore respectively. If one ignores CAG's inclusion of total losses on account of 35 dualtechnology licences given in 2007 (at 2001 prices) and underpriced spectrum over the stipulated 6.2 MHz, the loss on account of the 122 licences the Supreme Court cancelled is Rs 40,000 crore (based on Unitech's 67.25 per cent stake sale to Telenor) and Rs 33,000 crore (based on Swan's 50 per cent stake sale to Etisalat). Both numbers are close to CBI's estimate of Rs 31,000-crore loss (see box: What the Government Said). The zero-loss theory is as disingenuous as it was two years ago. 

66

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

