SURVEY 2012

TEN YEARS OF SEX SURVEY VIEW FROM VENUS
PLEASURE POINT

SHATTERING
THE SILENCE
By Sharla Bazliel

What is your favourite position while having sex? 2003
WOMEN (19-50 years)

10

53

Women have learnt to speak up for their desires, but they need to crank up the volume

2007
WOMEN (21-50 years)

12

60

2012
WOMEN (15-50 years)

12
MAN ON TOP WOMAN ON TOP

59

he INDIA TODAY annual sex surveys have for years charted the astonishing trajectory of India's sexual life. Each year's findings throw up an array of interesting facts and figures. None of these, however, is as startling as the number of women who are now comfortable with the idea of speaking up when asked about their most intimate wants and desires. For far too long this wasn't the case. Way back in 2003, when INDIA TODAY conducted the country's first comprehensive survey on sex, the aim was to understand the average Indian female's sexual preferences. While the survey showed the first stirrings of independence, there were revealing inconsistencies which only indicated the conflict within the modern Indian woman. Thankfully, the 2004 survey, which focused on the sexual desires of Indian men, showed that they were equally conservative and confused, with all claiming to want shy, beautiful virgins. The big change in attitude came during the 2005 survey. One in every four unmarried urban Indian women seemed to have had sex. More than that, there was less hypocrisy about sex as several women admitted they were now making significant demands in their relationships. The years 2006, 2007, 2008 rolled on with countless eyebrows (and tempers) raised with each new revelation.

T

WOMEN ACROSS SMALL TOWNS AND METROS FANTASISE ABOUT HAVING SEXWITH TWO PARTNERS SIMULTANEOUSLY.
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

14%

Women emerged as big viewers of virtual porn in 2006. By 2010 it seemed that the Indian woman had turned a corner. Talking about sex was no longer considered pornographic but was instead, as the survey revealed, an act of female affirmation. The 2011 survey, which focused on sex in the family, showed that all was not well on either side of the bed in middle class homes. Boredom reigned supreme with 49 per cent of wives saying no to sex by faking a headache and 33 per cent admitting that sex became a snorefest after a few years of marriage. And yet, reading between the lines of data collected over the last decade, it is clear a lacuna remains. When asked for their opinion, a significant number of female respondents chose not to answer or sought refuge in the ambivalence of the `don't-know/ won't say' column (in 2005 over 18 per cent of women said they had no view on extramarital sex at all). This silence tells a larger story about the countless women who remain out of touch with themselves and their desires or are more concerned with propriety than honesty. The fact that credible depictions and descriptions of desire in Indian films and literature, those trusty cultural mirrors, are few and far between speaks volumes as well. Besides a one-off The Dirty Picture, most female actors in Bollywood still remain ciphers reduced to choosing

between playing the de-sexualised wife/girlfriend or cunning vixen on-themake. Over in IWE (Indian's Writing in English) territory, the situation is pretty much the same. An avalanche of selfconscious schoolgirl writing hits bookstores in the form of chick-lit every month but it would be interesting for publishers (and readers) to ask why no female Indian writer has produced anything on a par with The Second Sex, The Golden Notebook or The Beauty Myth, or even The Vagina Monologues as yet. Don't know? Won't say? Perhaps some intrepid sociologist will one day find a link between this baffling silence and the slow death of feminism on the subcontinent. What was once a vibrant community of activists has today been reduced to an eccentric side-show, dismissed by most as little more than an amusing sorority populated mainly by women who wear way too much kajal and look like they cut their own hair. But what has gone ignored is that for decades, feminist activism provided countless women with a sense of community, inspiration and a booster shot of self-esteem. In short, they were told their views mattered and were encouraged to speak up and be heard, consequences be damned, no matter what the situation--making a public speech, standing up to an aggressor or simply filling out a sex survey. In The Fountainhead, author Ayn Rand, herself no slouch in the department of desire or activism, writes: To say I love you, one must first know how to say the I. As more and more women join the workforce and gain economic independence or choose to stay at home and raise children, they are slowly realising the necessity of creating their own identities. The importance of a healthy ego isn't liberal claptrap but fundamental in allowing women to choose candour over coy hypocrisy, in all aspects of their lives from the profound to the mundane. This will ensure that in the future, instead of confused ambivalence or uncomfortable silences, they will be able to answer with a clear yes or a no and say once-difficult words like I want, I know, I think, I feel. I hope. 

Your Sexual Quotient
Are you the next sexual goddess or do you shy away from the bedroom? One's sexual quotient indicates how willing one is to embrace sexuality.Take this fun quiz to find out how sexually-oriented your actions and decisions really are, at www.indiatoday.in/sq

For previous
INDIA TODAY

Sex Survey covers, go to www.indiatoday.in/ss-covers Trace the Sex Survey findings from 2003 to 2011. Read selected extracts of the survey at www.indiatoday.in/ss-extracts

Take a sneek peek of the best INDIA TODAY Sex Survey pictures at www.indiatoday.in/ss-pics

For more on the 2012 Sex Survey and the earlier ones, go to www.indiatoday.in/sexsurvey

56

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 10, 2012

DECEMBER 10, 2012  INDIA TODAY

57

