MAIL

Warrior Prince
DECEMBER 3, 2012

Can Rahul Gandhi save the Congress as allies and Opposition take poll position?

Rahul Gandhi is a good team leader and if he plans and strategises properly, he would be able to guide Congress to victory in the coming polls.
B E E N A M AT H U R , Pune

Tough Task
Ensuring victory for the Congress in the next General Elections seems a tall order for Rahul Gandhi ("Can Rahul Save Congress?", December 3). UPA's dismal performance in governance in its second term will prove to be a major hurdle and stall its prospects in the coming polls. Corruption and price rise are the other deterrents in its way. If Rahul could strategise the success of the Congress-led Government in the next elections, it would be nothing short of a miracle.
VIRENDRA T., via email

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Real-life Drama
The `peace meeting' between liquor baron Ponty Chadha and his estranged brother Hardeep ended into a filmy gangster-style shootout, resulting in the death of both the brothers ("Blood & Billions", December 3). The tragedy brought down the curtains on the astonishing career of Ponty, whose talent for befriending bigwigs across the political spectrum had led to his meteoric rise from a snacks vendor in Moradabad to a billionaire businessman.
J. AKSHAY, Bangalore

Rahul Gandhi playing a more proactive role in the party and the Government is encouraging. With the Opposition parties in doldrums and Rahul showing promise, Congress has every reason to be upbeat. Rahul is the only ray of

Your article on Ponty Chadha was a fascinating read and it brought to the forefront many facts about the liquor baron which were little known previously. Despite many shady dealings, one must admire Ponty for his sharp business acumen that saw him control a major share of the liquor business in Uttar Pradesh.
ZOYA KHAN, Delhi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

``

``

hope for the Congress in future. He has a pleasing and affable nature, abhors extravagance and is keen on cleaning the Congress's Augean stables. Given a serious chance, he will surely demonstrate his political and administrative acumen. Moreover, the nation needs youngsters like Rahul at the helm of affairs.
CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore

Rahul Gandhi is not interested in leading his party, forget leading the nation. There were a number of opportunities for Rahul to acquire experience and show his leadership qualities--like during the Commonwealth Games, or by becoming a Cabinet minister or at least the leader of the House after Pranab Mukherjee took up presidentship. But he was simply not bothered and

MAIL
refused to take up responsibilities. It is unlikely that he will be able to save the Congress.
A.Y. ALURKAR, via email

35
Death of a Crusader
As pointed out by INDIA TODAY, the big question now facing the Marathi manoos is who will inherit the legacy left behind by Bal Thackeray ("Life After Death", December 3). The Senapati may have crowned his son, Uddhav, to take over from where he left but Uddhav lacks his charisma and is continuously ill. His lack of aggression and refusal to associate himself with any cause, like Rahul Gandhi, make him a failure from the outset. The only alternative is Raj Thackeray. His aggressive stand on issues close to the heart of Shiv Sainiks makes him the natural choice to fill the void left by his uncle. His inheritance of the political space can be the only saviour for Shiv Sena if it wants to retain some relevance in the future. Uddhav should be magnanimous and give up the throne for Raj. A symbiotic relationship between the two and their parties can also act as a saviour for BJP in Maharashtra, which is facing huge internal squabbles.
RAJIV BOOLCHAND JAIN, Delhi

Rahul Gandhi is an energetic, naturally authoritative, not-so-young politician with a comparatively clean image. At a time when there are hardly any other credible faces left in a party going through the worst of times, Rahul can prove to be its saviour. Rahul's elevation can bring a cultural shift in the Congress, inject adrenaline in the ailing party which will ultimately help in regaining people's confidence. However, Rahul should learn to be cordial with the Opposition and forge better chemistry with the old guard within his own party.
MANOJ GHOSH, Kolkata

Marathi manoos. Though the nation has lost a strict disciplinarian who never hesitated to call a spade a spade even in compelling circumstances, the method adopted by him to achieve his objectives were communal and harsh in most cases and only led to violence. But despite controversies, the Shiv Sena supremo will go down in the annals of Indian history as the messiah of Maharashtrians who lived for their cause.
K.R. SRINIVASAN, Secunderabad

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
DECEMBER 16-31, 197 7

The Last Case
Six-year-old Rahima Banu of Kuralia village in Bangladesh has found a place in the world's medical history books. Hers was the last recorded case of variola major, the most severe form of smallpox in Bangladesh, in Asia and the world on October 16, 1975. On December 14, 1977, the President of Bangladesh, Ziaur-Rahman, received a report from an international commission of experts under the auspices of the World Health Organisation (WHO), certifying the eradication of smallpox in Bangladesh. While WHO Director-General Dr H. Mahler called it the death certificate

Justice at Last
In a bold step, the Manmohan Singh Government took the bold step of hanging Kasab, the lone 26/11 terrorist who was captured alive ("Cashing in on Kasab", December 3). Since his family refused to take his body, he was buried in the jail premises itself. India needs to be on guard as the Taliban and other militant organisations might now attempt to play havoc with the lives of common people.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

It is too early to predict how Rahul will fare in future but one thing is certain--there's nobody in the Congress party currently who can match his star power. Making him the head of the election coordination team may not help the party largely but will definitely streamline the chaos within the Congress. Rahul has a daunting task ahead but the solution largely lies largely in his own hands. He needs to perform and must also learn to cash in on his brand image.
SUDHIR MISHRA, Bhubaneswar

The death of Bal Thackeray has undoubtedly created a vacuum in Sena politics, prompting calls from loyalists to Uddhav and Raj to bury the hatchet and fight unitedly. They feel that this alone can realise Bal Thackeray's dream for the

The law has taken its course and justice has been done with Kasab being hanged. His death sentence was rightly upheld by the Supreme Court and the mercy petition was rejected by the President. Similar action should be taken against Afzal Guru. By attacking Parliament, he committed no less a crime.
M. KUMAR, Delhi

RAHIMA BANU WITH HER MOTHER-- LAST CASE OF SMALLPOX IN ASIA

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

of the most severe form of smallpox in the world, the WHO regional director of Southeast Asia, Dr VTH Gunaratne, said that young Rahima was the living symbol of the greatest single event in international public health. The certification of eradication came after two years of intensive and extensive surveillance during which time 12,000 health workers assisted by about 100 WHO international staffers toured the country to keep track of any new cases. None were recorded after October 16, 1975.

10

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

