COVER STORY

INTERNETCENSORSHIP
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora and Rahul Jayaram

S
THE
Crackdown on Internet puts India in the league of autocratic nations and alienates a generation

uddenly people know my name, suddenly everything has changed." A fortnight after Rinu Shrinivasan hit the headlines as the latest victim of a paranoid republic, she is singing the eerily appropriate lines of an Ashley Tisdale song. Everything changed for the 20-year-old girl from Palghar the day she `liked' and `shared' her friend Shaheen Dhada's Facebook post, questioning the shutdown of Mumbai following Bal Thackeray's death on November 17. Suddenly everyone knows her name and she is now flooded with hundreds of messages on her Facebook page, some congratulatory, but most of them abusive. She also gets at least a dozen friend requests. When Rinu went to the doctor last week,

PARANOID STATE
18
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

two constables accompanied her. "All of a sudden, there's too much attention on me," says the botany graduate from Dandekar College and a budding singer. There is, however, a word of caution from her father P.A. Shrinivasan, a former Navy officer now working with Shipping Corporation of India: "Don't comment on controversial issues you don't understand." That is not advice she or most of her generation would like to hear in twentyfirst century India. But she lives in a country that is showing the worst instincts of a totalitarian dictatorship. Armed with the loosely worded and ambiguous Section 66(A) of the Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000, the Government is increasingly cracking down on dissent on Internet. The Draconian section was introduced as an amendment in 2008 to the IT Act. It prescribes a threeyear jail term and fine for anyone who uses a computer or a communication device to send messages that are known to be false, but could among other things cause "annoyance" or "inconvenience", or messages that are "menacing in character" or "grossly offensive" and electronic messages that mislead the recipients on the origin of the message. It is so elastic and general that it can be politically misused by the Government to intimidate and punish people like Rinu. If an innocuous Facebook user is the enemy of the state, there is something terribly wrong with the state. It is not a surprise that the authorities have chosen to invoke the section only in cases with political connotations, where comments posted on the Internet were construed as offensive by easily offended powers that be. The police have rarely used the section in aid of ordinary citizens, who face real harassment on social media, and for women who are stalked on Facebook. There was not even a single case registered anywhere in the country in 2011 where Section 66(A) was invoked, according to data from the National Crime Records Bureau. That was the time when Minister for Communications and IT Kapil Sibal was busy trying to rein in social networking sites and service providers including Facebook, Google, Orkut, Twitter, Yahoo

DECEMBER 17, 2012  INDIA TODAY

19

NEW

COVER STORY

INTERNETCENSORSHIP

SCISSORHANDS STATE
INTERNET
April 2012 Professor Ambikesh Mahapatra of Jadavpur University is arrested for a cartoon that showed Mamata Banerjee and Railway Minister Mukul Roy plotting how to get rid of MP Dinesh Trivedi.

The touchy Establishment is quick to censure, block or ban outright any thing that questions institutions or faith

Aseem Trivedi is held in Mumbai for his cartoons. He depicted Parliament as a commode and showed the national emblem with wolves instead of lions.

A small-scale industrialist in Puducherry, Ravi Srinivasan, is arrested under Section 66(A) of the IT Act for posting on Twitter that Union minister P. Chidambaram's son Karti had amassed more wealth than Robert Vadra.

Shaheen Dhada and Rinu Shrinivasan are arrested in Palghar for questioning on Facebook the Mumbai bandh that followed Bal Thackeray's death.

Threats of violence prevent Salman Rushdie from coming to the Jaipur Literature Festival. In another incident, the Uttar Pradesh government bans a play, My Sandal, which allegedly satirises Mayawati's expensive tastes and corruption.

Delhi University's Academic Council drops A.K. Ramanujan's essay, 300 Ramayanas. from the Delhi University BA syllabus, largely due to pressure from right-wing organisations.

The Narendra Modi government in Gujarat bans Jaswant Singh's Jinnah-- India, Partition, Independence on the grounds that it tarnishes the image of Sardar Patel. The ban is later overturned by the Gujarat High Court.

Uttar Pradesh bans Jaishree Misra's historical work, Rani, saying that it contained "highly objectionable"matter about Rani Lakshmibai's personal life--a reference to a romance between her and a British officer.

The Maharashtra government bans James Laine's The Epic of Shivaji for "derogatory" observations on the Maratha ruler.The book is a translation of a 300-year-old Sanskrit epic, Shivbharat, commissioned by Shivaji himself.

FILMS & PLAYS

September 2012 October 2012

November 2012

January 2012

October 2011

August 2009

February 2008

January 2006

November 2003 The West Bengal government bans Taslima Nasreen's Dwaikhandito on the grounds that its contents could inflame religious passions. In 2009, the Calcutta High Court overturns the ban.

July 2009 The Chhattisgarh government bans the late Habib Tanvir's play, Charandas Chor, written in the Chhattisgarhi language, on the grounds that it shows the followers of the Satnami Panth community in bad light.

April 2004 Kerala High Court upholds a 1991 ban on the staging of Andrew Lloyd Webber's Jesus Christ Superstar.The order states that it is "sacrilegious and blasphemous and would outrage the religious feeling of Christians".

BOOKS

and Microsoft and forcing them to find a way of weeding out posts that were critical of the Government. The clampdown forced a Google India representative to emphasise to INDIA TODAY the dilemma of doing business in India, which the company found more complicated than China: "It is the largest democracy but socially conservative and politically servile." Freedom House, an American organisation that tracks political and civil liberties worldwide, also observed that while India is third in terms of Internet penetration after the US and China, its freedom leaves a lot to be desired. India did not prove the critics wrong. In October, Ravi Srinivasan, a Puducherry-based industrialist, was arrested and then let off on bail for tweeting about the assets of Finance Minister P. Chidambaram's son Karti. In September, cartoonist and India Against Corruption activist Aseem Trivedi was put in jail for exhibiting cartoons lampooning some political personalities. It started with the banning of his website by Mumbai Crime Branch on a complaint by a Mumbaibased advocate and Congress leader R.P. Pandey. In April, Ambikesh Mahapatra of Jadavpur University in Kolkata was arrested for a cartoon poking fun at West Bengal Chief

Minister and Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee and former railway minister Mukul Roy. Members of the ruling Trinamool Congress ensured his arrest. The list gets longer. As Internet penetration grows in the country, an increasing number of youngsters are taking to social networking in a big way. India has one of the youngest Net-connected populations, according to comScore, a company that measures Internet trends. As of July 2012, there were 125 million Internet users in the country, with 75 per cent of them being below the age of 35. The number of users has seen a 41 per cent jump from July 2011; the highest growth is seen in the age group of 15 to 24. This group is active on social networking sites, sharing views on various issues that are not always complimentary to the authorities, using sarcasm and irony to discuss politicians and politics.

s the reach becomes greater, so does the Government's paranoia. And the intolerant politicians are cracking the whip. They have used Section 66(A) to turn online communication into a virtual minefield. Instead of weighing in heavily on the rampant misuse of the section, the

A

Government has chosen to stand by as a mute spectator. In fact, it even encouraged the invocation of the section. In Ravi Srinivasan's case, sources in the IT ministry reveal that the message to arrest him was conveyed from Delhi to Chennai Police within hours of the October 30 tweet. The users of social media have become more cautious. Blogger Krish Ashok is disappointed with the Government's lack of engagement with India's surging online community. In a blog post in August 2010, he made fun of the Ramayana and the fact that women couldn't enter the Sabarimala temple in Kerala. A group called Hindu Janajagruti Samiti threatened to take him to court. Ashok spoke to his lawyer. "I was amazed. She said no individual could take action against me. But a group or organisation could," he says. Gursimran Khamba, who has over 30,000 followers on Twitter, retweeted reports and accounts after Bal Thackeray's death of the Shiv Sena's role during the 1992-93 Bombay riots. "I am not courageous to say anything about it myself," he says. He'd rather help his followers get a more nuanced picture of a venerated leader. Palghar and after, has made Ashok think. "I would reduce the number of provocative

posts I might make," he says. Khamba says he will stick to comedy. Author Amit Varma, who runs the blog `India Uncut', and gets hate mail from across the political spectrum, is guarded, but not scared. "Long before the IT Act, various sections of the IPC, such as 295(a) and 152 (a), laid down similar restrictions on free speech. That didn't stop bloggers from expressing themselves, and this shouldn't either. But such Draconian laws may have a chilling effect on the free speech of some," he says. The Internet users may have become cautious but they also are beginning to fight back. Young Delhi girl Shreya Singhal, 21, approached the Supreme Court on November 29, challenging the constitutional validity of Section 66(A). She claimed that

coercive steps taken under this provision had a chilling effect on millions of users of social networking sites, thus violating their fundamental right to free speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19 of the Constitution. Coming from a heavyweight legal family, Shreya was perhaps not intimidated at the prospect of approaching the court. Her mother Manali Singhal is a lawyer and grandmother Justice Sunanda Bhandare was a judge in the Delhi High Court. "I think what outraged everyone was the fact that the Facebook comments were so innocuous," Shreya told INDIA TODAY. The outrage reflected the rising awareness among the youth, connecting with the world through social media. Facebook users in India

IN A MATTER OF WEEKS, THE number of arrests just escalated. I think what outraged everyone was that the Facebook comments were so innocuous and they really didn't outrage anyone." SHREYA SINGHAL
PETITIONER AGAINST IT ACT

SECTION 66(A) IS A VANILLA provision that can be used for anything online. The words `grossly offensive' and `menacing character' mentioned in it have no definition given." PAVAN DUGGAL
CYBER LAW EXPERT

20

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

NEW

COVER STORY
GUEST COLUMN NITIN PAI

INTERNETCENSORSHIP
IT IS NOT CLEAR WHAT THE purpose of Section 66(A) is. It's like having the same penalty for murder, assault, intimidation and nuisance." PRANESH PRAKASH
POLICY DIRECTOR WITH THE CENTER FOR INTERNET AND SOCIETY, BANGALORE

NO RATIONING ALLOWED IN THE AGE OF INFORMATION
et us not underestimate the importance and the challenge of maintaining public safety and national security in a diverse, heterogeneous society undergoing rapid change. Over the last three decades, riding furiously on the politics of identity and the economics of entitlement, an arms race of competitive intolerance has rent Indian society. It is frequently accompanied by coercion, intimidation or violence. Unfortunately, where one citizen's intolerance collides with another's right to free speech, the agents of the Indian republic cravenly side with the former. This is the context in which our police, intelligence agencies and security forces are tasked with the job of maintaining domestic peace. As important as their job is, they are understaffed, under-equipped, under-trained and inappropriately organised for the task. To an extent, therefore, it is understandable that the security establishment seeks as much statutory leeway as possible in laws concerning free speech and civil liberties. It is understandable, yes, but no longer acceptable. Our unreformed, colonial approach to policing had created a yawning gap of disaffection between police and citizen, establishment and society, the state and the individual. The information age has exacerbated this gap, creating extreme pressures on both sides. Left unchecked, such pressures could explode in many ways, most of which spell trouble for our democratic republic. The traditional method of maintaining what is popularly known as "law and order" involves rationing information. It presumes that information is a scarce commodity like it used to be half-a-century ago. Censorship could prevent the masses from obtaining information that the authorities didn't want them to. Books could be banned and their import restricted. Sensitive installations could be protected by preventing accurate maps from being published. This is no longer tenable because information is no longer scarce. Traditional methods might still fetch tactical, short-term successes, but at the cost of creating strategic, long-term damage. Cutting off SMS services in Srinagar might put the brakes on the spread of a riot but adds another layer of grievance to an already disaffected population. In most cases it simply doesn't work. Censorship can be circumvented inexpensively, banned books downloaded easily and

Government should intervene in real time to counter misinformation with actual facts

L

many official documents accessed through RTI. That's not all. By keeping blunt laws that were designed for ease of use by unreformed police forces, we do not create any incentives for smarter policing. Draconian laws are bad for the police. They are obviously bad for society. The disconnect they create between the two is bad for the Indian republic. The recent arrest of the two young women in Palghar, Maharashtra, under draconian provisions of the IT Act and the Indian Penal Code, and the subsequent government action against the policemen involved, demonstrates this. The only winners in that episode were the intolerant. Instead of persisting with the increasingly counterproductive approach of rationing information, a better way would be for the Government to manage its abundance. There is nothing stopping the Government from putting timely, accurate information online. From traffic updates to weather, from law and order situations to details of the operations of our security forces. Law enforcement authorities can keep their fingers on the zeitgeist and intervene with factual information in real time. Some are already doing this. The police in Jammu & Kashmir have made good use of Facebook. Last month, the Ministry of Defence and the Army put out their version even as Arvind Kejriwal was making allegations concerning non-payment of emoluments to an NSG comDRACONIAN LAWS mando. This method can be ARE BAD FOR THE used to good effect when there are malefactors spreading ru- POLICE. THEY ARE OBVIOUSLY BAD mours online. Good informaFOR SOCIETY. THE tion obviates the need to block DISCONNECT THEY social media, ban websites and CREATE BETWEEN suspend telecom services. THE TWO IS BAD Law enforcement authoriFOR THE INDIAN ties must have the powers to REPUBLIC. ensure public safety and order. But the Policeman cannot be the arbiter of free speech. It is a mistake to ask police officers to develop the sense to appreciate the finer nuances of what is acceptable speech. What we must do as part of a larger project of police reform is equip our law enforcement authorities with information management skills necessary to do their basic job--protecting our liberty--better.
Nitin Pai is founder and fellow for geopolitics at the Takshashila Institution, an independent public policy think tank

had a phenomenal 47 per cent jump in just one year, rising from 35.3 million in July 2011 to 52.1 million in July 2012. Over four million are active on Twitter. The Government just didn't realise what it was up against. When the case was mentioned before the bench comprising Chief Justice Altamas Kabir and Justice J. Chelameswar, they asked why nobody had challenged this provision of the IT Act before. "When the case came up in the morning, the judge said the court was actually going to consider taking suo motu action," says Shreya. She was actually not the first to seek legal recourse. A PIL seeking the repeal of Section 66(A) was also filed in the Madras High Court by a retired physics professor Marx Anthonisamy, triggered by the Srinivasan-Karti case.

he Supreme Court, while admitting Shreya's plea, sought explanation from the Congress-NCP government in Maharashtra for the Palghar arrest and also took note of the other incidents of harassment by issuing notices to the Centre and governments of West Bengal, Puducherry and Delhi, giving them six weeks to file their reply. The bench noted that the "wording of Section 66(A) is not satisfactory. It is made very wide and can apply to all kinds of comments". Attorney General (AG) G.E. Vahanvati told the court that the section applied only to "gross offences" but admitted that it had been misused in Palghar case. "The offence

T

under Section 66(A) of IT Act is bailable. But in the Palghar incident, authorities deliberately invoked Indian Penal Code Sections 295A (deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage religious feelings or any class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs) and 505 (statements conducive to public mischief) to make the offence non-bailable though these sections had no application to the case," he said. The bench said that "there appears to be some kind of obvious motive behind it. Somebody has blundered." The AG argued that 66(A) was constitutional and it should not be struck down just because it was invoked improperly. The case will come up in mid-January 2013 now. Though the AG is likely to go on defending the section, Law Minister Ashwani Kumar, gauging the public mood, has asked him not to adopt a very aggressive stance in court. Unlike Sibal, the law minister is not averse to changing the wording of the section to make it less ambiguous to prevent its misuse. However, with the issue sub judice now, the Government has decided that it is best to leave it to the Supreme Court. The court has the power to strike down the law but not amend it. "The court can suggest changes but it is not binding on the lawmakers. It is up to Parliament to incorporate the suggested change," says senior lawyer KTS Tulsi. India's clampdown on Internet freedom has become an issue at an international level too. Freedom House observes that before November 2008, government control over the Internet was limited. However, it changed after the November 2008 Mumbai terror attacks. Explaining the context of bringing in the amendments, it said that censorship and monitoring capabilities were enhanced by the Indian Government given the range of security threats the country faced. This probably explained the hurry in passing of the legislation--Lok Sabha passed it in seven minutes. India did not stop there. Freedom House states that this trend contin-

22

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

NEW

COVER STORY

INTERNETCENSORSHIP
PTI

SHAHEEN DHADA (RIGHT) AND RINU SHRINIVASAN

LESSONS FOR INDIA
Laws elsewhere are much more attuned to real cyber crimes

`I WILL BE BACK ON FB'
Palghar's two harassed girls lie low for now but promise to fight another day. For the town, it's business as usual.
alghar's now-famous duo of Shaheen Dhada and Rinu Shrinivasan are riding out the storm of their November 19 arrest for a Facebook post in the best way they could: Lying low.The Dhada family has disappeared from Facebook even though their accounts still exist."I used it to send messages to my friends but I have stopped commenting on any issue," says Shaheen's uncle Abdul Dhada, whose hospital was vandalised after Shaheen posted `Mumbai shuts down due to fear, not due to respect' a day after Shiv Sena leader Bal Thackeray died.The police van outside Abdul's eight-bed hospital, he claims, deters patients from walking in.The girls were granted bail on the same day, but life has been different for them and their families ever since. Shaheen, 21, deactivated her Facebook account on November 20, the family chanced upon a fake account in her name, prompting them to approach the police. In the close-knit neighbourhood, there's talk that the family is scouting for suitors for Shaheen

P

outside Palghar. Her uncle dismisses suggestions that she is being married out of fear. "The wedding plans have nothing to do with the controversy," he says. A defiant Shaheen, who is set to return home from her grandmother's house at Rajkot, Gujarat, in a few days, says she'll be "back . on FB soon" Rinu, 20, who `liked' her friend Shaheen's post with dire consequences, has stayed put on the social networking site--although family elders have cautioned her to go easy. She is packing her bags to go to Chennai to record a song for a composer duo before she joins the Muzic Lounge School of Audio Technology in Chennai to study sound recording. For Palghar locals, life goes on as usual. The town's Internet service provider says that his 100 customers continue to use the Net."Our business hasn't been affected. We haven't got any requests for discontinuation after the incident," he says.
by Kiran Tare and Aditi Pai

ued in 2011 with the adoption of regulations increasing surveillance in cyber cafes. The Government and non-state actors intensified pressure on intermediaries, including social media, to remove upon request a wide range of content vaguely defined as "offensive" and potentially pre-screen user-generated content. "Despite new comprehensive data protection regulations adopted in 2011, the legal framework and oversight surrounding surveillance and interception remains weak, and several instances of abuse have emerged in recent years," it adds. The Government believes there is no problem with the section. It is the execution that needs to be improved. In the wake of the Palghar arrests and the PIL in Supreme Court, Kapil Sibal issued guidelines about registration of the case under the section. Only senior officers--DCP level in rural areas and IG level in urban--can allow registration of case using Section 66(A). Legal experts think this is not enough, and the Section 66(A) and the whole of the IT Act of 2000 needs revisiting. According to cyber law expert Pavan Duggal, Section 66(A) "is a vanilla provision that can be used for anything online". Section 66(A) seeks to empower the police and the complainant. "The words `grossly offensive' and `menacing character' of Section 66(A) have no definition given. Normal, legitimate bona fide conversation between boyfriend and girlfriend at noble times online is fine. Once the relationship sours, and they are gone," Duggal adds. "It's not clear what the purpose of Section 66(A) is. It's like having a single provision covering murder, assault, intimidation and nuisance, and prescribing the same penalty for all of them," says Pranesh Prakash of the Center for Internet and Society, Bangalore. Terminology and the law's purpose are massive concerns. "The extent of the ambiguity of Section 66(A) is worrying. Laws need to be very clear about what they want

US
The Fourth Amendment of the US Constitution guards against unreasonable searches and seizures. But it has a US Federal Cyber Anti-Stalking Law which aims to check instances of online stalking. PENALTY Punishment varies from state to state. In New York state, one can be fined or imprisoned for not more than two years, or both.

UK
Section 127(1) of the Communication Act, 2003, makes it an offence to send any message by telephone which is grossly offensive or of an indecent or menacing character."Improper use of public electronic communications network" is its operative language. PENALTY The usual punishment for an online crime is six months in prison.

AUSTRALIA
Australia has strong cyber laws. In October 2008, the governing Australian Labor Party proposed extending Internet censorship to a system of mandatory filtering of overseas websites. Legislation for the proposed policy has not been drafted. PENALTY Up to 11,000 Australian dollars a day for prohibited content not being taken down after orders.

CHINA
China practises Internet censorship by mandating that Internet service providers be licensed and Internet traffic goes through state-owned telecom companies. The Ministry of Public Security is tasked with Internet security. PENALTY Attempts to defame government agencies or leaking state secrets can mean fines up to $1,800.

to achieve. Section 66(A) is trying to do too many things at the same time. Its canvas is too vast," says Rajya Sabha MP Rajeev Chandrasekhar. As a country, we look to imitate the West, and often copy it badly. Some wonder if we need to ape the West. Prakash thinks the Indian Constitution is stronger on free speech grounds than the (unwritten) UK constitution, and the judiciary has wide powers to strike down a law passed by Parliament as "unconstitutional". Chandrasekhar thinks the British got it right. During the London riots of June 2011, the UK government kept a tab on social media networking sites so as to check incitement, he says. "It was a good example of clear legislation and effective execution, in an extreme scenario." To defuse online paranoia, he wants the Government to have a multistakeholder arrangement in fixing IT

laws. "This must involve users, IT companies, cyber cafe owners and the Government. The state must mend fences with the Web." There is certainly a case for cyber regulation when the threat is on national security. But when the fear is political, it is a losing battle. Look at the way the Great Fire Wall of China is being breached by ingenious dissidents. From Tehran to Tahrir Square, a generation has shown how Internet can be turned into a weapon of mass mobilisation. If someone out there lurking in the corridors of South Block thinks that India is so fragile that it can collapse under the weight of 140 characters of a tweet, then this country is living in a makebelieve of Soviet vintage. The India of Rinu Shrinivasan is a different place--and here to stay and win.
with Jayant Sriram

24

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 17, 2012

NEW

