YEARS

CONVERSATIONS
SHARAD PAWAR AND SUPRIYA SULE AT HIS 6, JANPATH HOME IN DELHI

"I can't impose my career and my aspirations on him and frankly, he won't do the same to me" Supriya Sule

This is Maharashtra's formidable Pawar Block: The 72-year-old threetime former chief minister Sharad Pawar and Union Cabinet minister for agriculture, and his daughter, secondterm MP Supriya Sule, 43. If there is one person who can get the taciturn Pawar to smile, it's his daughter. Asked to pose for a shoot, Supriya laughs and says "all those who know us will be surprised. We don't do public displays of emotion". His black sweater is just the right backdrop for her elegant red silk sari--the same contrasting sync is there in their conversation. The two met SENIOR EDITOR PRIYA SAHGAL at Pawar's Lutyens' bungalow in Delhi. India Today (IT) How do you handle the grammar of new generation politics--Twitter, Facebook and an active civil society? Sharad Pawar (SP) I have been keeping away from all this new technology. After the General Elections I don't expect this type of movement (aam aadmi agitation) to succeed. All they are doing is making wild allegations everyday on television. And the media gives publicity. But if you just subtract the publicity of the media, what is left? If some constructive work is done by any section, we respect that. But this abuse of one leader one day, another the next (shrugs)... what is that? IT How do you react to negative coverage of your father? Supriya Sule (SS) This is all part and package of public life, it's okay because I know the truth. Most allegations are false, as there is no proof or backing up. And I am not only talking about my father. Given the situation now, I would like to defend my entire fraternity. Every day there is a press conference at 5 o' clock and it is shown on every channel. Frankly, it's boring. Nobody can just get up and target all of us, who have sacrificed our family life and who try to do our best. IT Has civility among politicians dipped alarmingly? SP I think the new generation has a lot more rapport with their age group,

SHARAD PAWAR AND SUPRIYA SULE

"I understand strength. I respect strength. But it should not lead to arro gance of power"
Sharad Pawar

VIVAN MEHRA / www.indiatodayimages.com

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

87

CONVERSATIONS SHARAD PAWAR AND SUPRIYA SULE
YEARS
PAWAR IN 1981

SUCH A LONG JOURNEY

"I had a close equation with most political leaders but it was a personal equation.One to one.We criticised each other's policies.But if a friend visited my constituency, he would campaign against me,then come straight to my house and have dinner.There was no bitterness."
Sharad Pawar

In the 1960s and 1970s we never thought about the concept of coalitions. But now the people of India have rejected the idea of a single party. They want us to work collectively. If that is the situation, then let us work with likeminded people. There may be problems between us, but we know where to stop and how far we should go. IT Is Supriya your political heir? SP I don't think so. We don't believe in political heirs. Everyone will have to make his or her own career. SS Politics is about public life. And legacies are not about one person, legacies can be carried on by hundreds of people. He has his own dreams and ambitions and I have mine. I am answerable to my 1.6 million voters. Not because I am Sharad Pawar's daughter but because I am their MP. It's not a family fief. Political heirs are not decided by birth but by whoever is capable and can take the vision forward. IT What is Sharad Pawar's legacy? SS Whatever he leaves, he will leave for the party and not for me. But why are we talking about his legacy? First of all, he's not going anywhere. He is here to stay. We're in no rush to think up legacies. SP She has to figure out her own vision. I don't expect anything and I will not thrust anything on her. And I don't think she is expecting anything from me except my land and my house after me--which she will never allow anybody else to enter. SS (Laughs ) I don't have to share. SP But I tell her what I tell all my party colleagues. To keep an excellent rapport with the masses, be administra-

"I am now planning to leave parliamentary politics, if my party will let me." Sharad Pawar
PRAMOD PUSHKARNA / www.indiatodayimages.com

irrespective of party lines. I see a lot of MPs from different parties here at my house. They discuss national issues. I don't know what is the outcome because I don't participate in these discussions--and to be frank they don't invite me either. But it's a good sign. The same group goes to Odisha. When I ask my daughter what is the mission, I am told the mission is to assess the situation on malnutrition. So I am quite happy that younger members of Parliament are working together. They assess the ground level situation of important issues and after that, go meet the Prime Minister or the minister concerned. I don't know what they convey (in the meetings) but they go

collectively, and must be conveying something (smiles at Supriya). It was different in our time. I had a close equation with most political leaders but it was a personal equation. One to one. We criticised each other's policies. But if a friend visited my constituency, he would campaign against me, then come straight to my house and have dinner. There was no bitterness. This generation has something different--they have collective unity, which is much better. IT Is your equation with the Congress one-sided? SP We had our differences on certain issues but we are still working together.

PASSING THE MANTLE

"Politics is about public life.And legacies are not about one person. Political heirs are not decided by birth but by whoever is capable and can take the vision forward." Supriya Sule
"I don't think she is expecting anything from me except my land and my house after me--which she will never allow anybody else to enter." Sharad Pawar
88
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

CONVERSATIONS SHARAD PAWAR AND SUPRIYA SULE
YEARS

GENERATIONAL DIVIDE

"This generation of politicians has something different from ours. They have collective unity, which is much better." Sharad Pawar

"I think on national issues, there cannot be disagreement.We all want quality education and we all think alike on health.A lot of issues are common between us, cutting across party lines." Supriya Sule
tively strong and while I understand that they have to work for the party, simultaneously they should also cultivate other fields beyond party work. It might be sports, art, drama, music. But (turns to Supriya) you have to show that you are not just thinking politics, politics for twenty-four hours. IT What is the future of small parties? SP I don't see either of the major two parties getting a good response in the next elections. Regional forces will be an important factor. They will have to work together on some common programme. But the thinking of the regional forces is altogether so extreme and so different that it will be difficult to provide stability. Those who will be able to muster good numbers from the state, they will have the strength. I understand strength, I respect strength. But strength should not lead to arrogance of power. If the people who will ultimately decide the destiny of this country are filled with arrogance, then it will be difficult to bring stability. For the larger interest of the nation, a major party, either the Congress or BJP has to be part of any government, with good numbers. IT You have dealt with three generations of Gandhis. Any tips on how to deal with the fourth? SP To be frank, there are no personal dealings. We discuss issues with the Congress as we are dealing with the party. I recollect one meeting in Teen Murti Bhavan in the Capital which had both Indira Gandhi and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru in attendance. Only a few of my current colleagues from the Congress were there at the time, Vayalar Ravi and Narain Dutt Tiwari. Nehru was such a towering personality, there was no question of interaction. In Indiraji's time, I was a minister in the state. Whenever I visited Delhi-- we didn't visit Delhi so frequently in those days as we do now--if I asked for time, I was given time. IT What about Rahul? SP I hardly know him. IT Any regrets about your long political career? SP Not a regret exactly but what I had planned has been derailed. I had planned that at the age of 67, I would leave the parliamentary party. Earlier, there was a group of us young Congress workers, like Chandra Sekhar (former prime minister) at the national level and others at the state level--myself, Sushilkumar Shinde. In those days, we kept passing resolutions that those who had contested elections thrice should not be given tickets. We thought three elections were more than sufficient--but now this is my 14th election (at the state and Centre). So I have gone quite a long away from what I was saying in those days. I am now planning to leave parliamentary politics, if my party will let me. SS It's his career and his choice. I can't impose my career and aspirations on him and he won't do the same to me. IT When we say Pawar, what is the first thing that comes to your mind? SS He is always ahead of his time. IT Do you think you will be able to catch up with him? SS (Laughs) We can try!
Video available on iPad

"I am answerable to my 1.6 million voters.Not because I am Sharad Pawar's daughter but because I am their MP. It's not a family fief."
POWER POINT
Supriya Sule

"Why are we talking about his legacy? He's not going anywhere. He is here to stay. We're in no rush." Supriya Sule

SUPRIYA FILES HER PAPERS FOR THE RAJYA SABHA BY-ELECTION IN 1996
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

90

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

