OBI TUARY
PANDIT RAVI SHANKAR 1920-2012
andit Ravi Shankar, easily the greatest Indian musician of our times, is no more. While his death marks the transience of time, it also reminds us of the glory that was his life and the immortality of his legacy. In the passing of Robindro Shankar Chowdhury on December 11 in San Diego, California, we cherish the indelible memory of an extraordinary genius whose life and talent spanned nine decades, crossed all continents, connected several genres of human endeavour and uplifted countless hearts, minds and souls. Very few Indians have epitomised Indian culture in the global mind as this charismatic Bengali Brahmin. He not only straddled two centuries but also impacted many worlds: East-West, North-South, old-new, traditional-modern. Nimble and agile till almost the very end, he had played at a concert in Bangalore in February this year. Last year on June 21, he had given a full solo to a sold-out Barbican Centre in London where he ended with a Tagore song to mark the sesquicentennial of the poet. The video of that concert on YouTube is a mesmerising treat that shows the then 91-year-old master deeply moving his audience with music that he had so perfectly tailored to suit his diminished physical capacities. Raviji, as he was called here, had lived his life on the rollercoaster of history. He was barely ten when he joined his elder brother Uday Shankar's Indian dance troupe in Paris. In 1930s he attended a French school, danced small parts in brother Uday's ballets, and met the rich and the famous of pre-World War II Europe and America. He recalled being in the thick of glamour and high life of Paris, New York and Hollywood and meeting greats like guitarist Andre Segovia, cellist Pablo Casals, author and art collector Gertrude Stein, composer Cole Porter, actors Clark Gable and Joan Crawford. He had seen Stravinsky, Toscanini, Chaliapin at the Paris Opera, and as a twelve-year-old dancer, he even won the praise of The New York Times reviewer. The fact that Ravi Shankar decided to forsake the fickle comfort of Uday Shankar's West-inspired `creative' dance form to risk a comparatively late beginning in classical Indian music at the feet of a temperamental smalltown master like Ustad Allauddin Khan is a pointer to his vision. Ravi Shankar knew, perhaps instinctively, that he had a greater tryst in life than amuse the well-meaning orientalists of the second world. That to get anywhere, he would have to delve the depths of his own tradition and lift it to greater heights, instead of merely repackaging its more superficial attractions. And that is what he did. He did raise Hindustani instrumental music to its present level of structural

Ravi Shankar's life and talent spanned nine decades, crossed all continents and uplifted

Maestro of the U niverse P
countless minds and souls, says S. KALIDAS

RAGHU RAI/www.indiatodayimages.com

234

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

235

OBI TUARY
INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIVE

A LIFE IN MUSIC
The iconic journey of the sitar maestro who has epitomised Indian culture in the global mind

1966-1969

1986-1999

2012

Meets George
1930-1937

Is nominated
INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIVE

Performs his last
concert in San Diego with Anoushka at the age of 92 on November 4. On December 11, the maestro passes away.

Launches his
career with brother Uday Shankar's dance troupe, Compagnie de Danse et Musique Hindou.

Harrison in London who later comes to India to take sitar lessons from him. In 1969, performs at Woodstock and is aghast to meet a stoned audience.

to Rajya Sabha for a six-year term. Marries Sukanya Rajan in 1989. Is conferred the Bharat Ratna in 1999.

1920

1939-1945

1955-1959

1971 Performs with tabla
virtuoso Alla Rakha and Ali Akbar Khan at an all-star concert in Madison Square Garden in New York that George Harrison organised to help Shankar raise money for Bangladeshi refugees.

Born on April 7 in
Varanasi. Ravi Shankar was the youngest of five sons of a Bengali Brahmin family based out of Jessore, now in Bangladesh.
INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIVE

Gives his first concert and
begins playing with sarod player Ali Akbar Khan, son of his guru, Allaudin Khan. Marries Allaudin's daughter, Annapurna Devi, in 1941. Starts composing for Mumbai films such as Dharti Ke Lal.

Composes music
for Satyajit Ray's Apu Trilogy. The first of these films, Pather Panchali, wins the Grand Prix at Cannes Film Festival in 1955.

sophistication, musical expression and public appeal. No master of the previous generation had ever played a raga as we are used to hearing it from their successors. The structural format for any instrumental concert--the alap, jor, jhala sequence, the various stages of the vilambit gat (slow composition), and the sawal-jawab with the percussionist--was put together and refined by Ravi Shankar. Add to this the large body of new ragas that he has composed, many of which have become popular with musicians all over the country. In the post World War II era, with the rapid growth of technology, industry, air travel and media, Ravi Shankar went back to the West to expand not only the market for Indian classical music but also its application. In this he has been truly ingenious and had it not been for him, large chunks of popular western music might not have happened. Ravi Shankar began touring the West again from the mid-1950s, this time as a solo sitar player. It took a decade of steady rise in the international music scene and the coming of the Beatles to India in 1966 for Ravi Shankar to become the global superstar of sitar. George Harrison, in particular, became a devoted pupil and the rest, as they say, is history. Ravi Shankar played at the Monterey

RAVI SHANKAR raised Hindustani instrumental music to its present level of structural sophistication, musical expression and public appeal.

Pop festival in 1967 and the Woodstock in 1969. Two years later he and Harrison organised the Concert for Bangladesh at the Madison Square Garden in New York, drawing the attention of the world to the plight of a nationin-becoming. By then, he had already split from his first wife Annapurna Devi, started living openly with his love Kamala Shastri. He had also penned his first autobiography, My Music My Life, which was an instant bestseller. Although his first film score was for Satyajit Ray's 1955 classic Pather Panchali, Shankar was by the late 1960s composing music furiously--for films, orchestras, ballet and songs. Few remember but the popular tune for Iqbal's Saare Jahan Se Achchha was also made by him. Ravi Shankar's compositional opus is huge and diverse; beginning with his work with Yehudi Menuhin on West Meets East that earned them a Grammy, the Concerto for Sitar and Orchestra commissioned by the London Symphony Orchestra, a second sitar concerto for the New York Philharmonic performed under the baton of Zubin Mehta, his works for flautist Jean-Pierre Rampal, cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, shakuhachi master Hosan Yamamoto and koto virtuoso Musumi Miyashita are all well known. But even more lasting will be the influence he wielded on the west-

ern music scene through his partnership with minimalist composer Philip Glass and the jazz saxophonist John Coltrane whom he had met in the mid-60s. Ravi Shankar's mark on the western music scene is now so well acknowledged that tomes have been written on the subject, Peter Lavezolli's Bhairavi: The Global Impact of Indian Music (Harper Collins 2009) being the latest. Western musical genres from jazz to fusion and from the experimental to the minimal, would definitely have been the poorer had they not benefited from Ravi Shankar's mentoring and his music. In the midst of this creative maelstrom, his personal life, too, kept the same pace. In his two later autobiographies, the excellent Raag-Anuraag in Bengali and Raga Mala in English, he was disarmingly frank about his deep need for the love of women and his "unfaithfulness" to the ones that loved him. While he continued to tour with his partner Kamala in India and she ran his establishment in Benaras for him through the mid and late 1970s, when in America he loved and lived with Sue Jones, a dancerturned-music producer in New York. When the news of the birth of a daughter, Norah Jones, in 1979 reached Kamala, she finally stepped out of his life and retired to Chennai. Simultaneously, he was having an affair with Sukanya Rajan in London who gave birth to another daughter, Anoushka, in 1981. By his first wife Annapurna he had a son, Shubho, who died in 1992 in America.

Between 1986 and 1992, Ravi Shankar was nominated to the Rajya Sabha and was based in a colonial bungalow in New Delhi. He was in his 70s now, his home was run by a third generation of pupils and health was increasingly becoming an issue. As was guilt, he would readily admit. He married Sukanya, the mother of his child Anoushka, in a simple private ceremony in Hyderabad in 1989. Of course, it made world news instantly. Sue Jones, who had borne the situation silently till then, cut him off from her life taking Norah with her. It was only when Norah turned 18 that she took the initiative to re-establish contact with her father. It is to his wife Sukanya's credit that she navigated the whole complex and messy situation so well that Norah and Anoushka are now good friends. In his last years Ravi Shankar was immensely proud of Norah and Anoushka who have both blossomed in their individual ways. Even if all of us who knew him will miss him as a person, Ravi Shankar's huge recorded opus will continue to bring joy and pleasure to listeners of music for all time to come. Undoubtedly, like Tansen and Beethoven, Ravi Shankar's will be a legendary legacy. And, perhaps, given his internationalism and our globalised times, it could prove to be more universal and enduring. 

236

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

237

