NA TION

JASCINTHASALDANHA
JASCINTHA SALDANHA, THE BRITISH NURSE OF INDIAN ORIGIN WHO DIED MYSTERIOUSLY

the death was reported. They said they had not pressured the King Edward VII hospital, where a pregnant Katherine was admitted, to act against the nurses who attended a call on December 4 from Australian radio jockeys Mel Greig and Michael Christian pretending to be Queen Elizabeth and Prince Charles. Greig and Christian got an update from the nurses and replayed the entire call on MY WIFE their radio station, STUDIED AT THE 2Day FM, making the SAME COLLEGE hospital and its staff IN MANGALORE the butt of their WHERE JASCINTHA jokes. Three days DID HER NURSING. later, Jascintha, the JASCINTHA USED TO nurse who manned VISIT US OFTEN. the reception and SHE WAS A GENTLE, transferred the call KIND PERSON. to the nurse looking after Katherine, was Ivan D'Souza, Congress leader found dead in her in Shirva village staff lodgings near the hospital in Marylebone, central London. Jascintha's family in London, her husband Benedict and children Junal, 16, and Lisha, 14, have not commented on the cause of death but are said to be angry and traumatised. Her shocked family in India is clueless about the situation. All doors are closed in houses along the gravelly hill road leading from Shirva village, 20 km from the temple town of Udupi in Karnataka. The coconut, banana and arecanut plantations on either side are silent, as people stand behind windows, peering at strangers with suspicion and The mysterious death of an Indian-origin nurse in resentment. Any new vehicle leads to London prompts her native village in Karnataka instant phone calls from one neighbour to the other and everyone disapto seek the same answers as the rest of the world pears, leaving their tasks undone. The old tile-roofed house of on how she died. British newspapers By Sowmya Aji The Daily Mirror and The Guardian Jascintha's in-laws, the Barbozas, t began as a joke and ended in reported she was "found hanged" on lies abandoned on December 10, death. Curiosity over the next heir December 7. The Daily Mail and The three days after the death. A lone dog, to the British throne and an Telegraph reported Jascintha had tied to a pole, barks angrily at visitors, Australian attempt to poke fun at left behind a note for her family, but but otherwise, there is silence and a royalty took a gut-wrenching turn there were still "unexplained circum- sense of disbelief. The neighbours' faces are sullen as Indian-origin nurse Jascintha stances" and her husband Benedict and surly, particularly when they Saldanha, 46, became an unwitting Barboza, 49, wanted answers. Prince William and his wife, Kat- catch a glimpse of media microtool and died mysteriously. There is international speculation herine, issued a statement as soon as phones. "You have killed Jascintha,''

PRANK THAT COSTALIFE

I
32

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

NA TION
AP

JASCINTHASALDANHA
London, they have been besieged by the media. Indian, Australian, British and even Japanese media have made a beeline to this otherwise quiet village, populated mostly by Konkanispeaking Christians. Rev Father Stanly of Shirva's Our Lady of Health Church, where Jascintha married Benedict Bardoza 20 years ago, seethes at the sight of the media. "That family is crying in trauma. You people have harassed them. Even if I know the answers to your questions, I will not tell you. You are here to fill your pages, not to help them,'' he says. Jascintha's eldest sister-in-law Irene D'Souza, sounding exhausted, tells INDIA TODAY over the phone: "We don't know anything about her death or why it happened. We are devastated by what has WE DON'T happened and have KNOW ANYTHING nothing left to say.'' Scotland Yard, ABOUT HER investigating the DEATH OR WHY IT death, has said it is HAPPENED. WE mysterious and imARE DEVASTATED plied it could have BY WHAT HAS been suicide. There HAPPENED has been no official AND HAVE NOTHING confirmation on the LEFT TO SAY. cause of death but Jascintha's relaIrene D'Souza,Jascintha's tives, friends and eldest sister-in-law members of the ward to Jascintha and Benedict's Catholic community in Mangalore next visit for Christmas. But that is suspect it could even be murder, as not to be. As she and her four daugh- the British can be extremely protecters struggled to deal with that, more tive of the royal family. Mangalore and more microphones were thrust diocese representative Monsignor at her and questions asked, including Denis Moraes Prabhu, speaking on by some policemen claiming to be behalf of Bishop Aloysius Paul from the UK. Carmine collapsed D'Souza, says, "Did Jascintha comwith high blood pressure on Decem- mit suicide or was it murder? What ber 9 and has gone into hiding, as were the circumstances and who put have her daughters. such pressure on her that it led to her A Shirva local and a friend of death? We want a detailed inquiry.'' the family, Leena Mathais, says, Jascintha's brother Naveen Sal"Carmine has been told it is the me- danha and mother, also named Cardia which killed Jascintha through a mine, 72, who live in Valencia in prank. She hates the sight of the me- Mangalore, have declined to share dia now and so does everyone else their grief with the media. The news here.'' From the time the family got of her daughter's death has been kept the news at 8 p.m. on December 7 from the ailing Carmine, who was that Jascintha had been found dead told on December 10 that Jascintha under mysterious circumstances in was critically ill. 
(LEFT) AUSTRALIAN RJs MICHAEL CHRISTIAN AND MEL GREIG; JASCINTHA'S HUSBAND BENEDICT AND CHILDREN JUNAL AND LISHA

GETTY IMAGES

murmurs one, angry that the gentle daughter-in-law of their village was the victim of a media hoax. Nobody is interested in the radio jockeys' subsequent admission of grief and abject apology or the 500,000 Australian dollars that the radio station has announced for the family. Jascintha's physically challenged mother-in-law Carmine, 82, who lived with a helper at the now-abandoned house, whispered to all who could hear her on December 7 and 8, "I want to see her face again.'' Her daughter-in-law and son Benedict have lived abroad, first in Muscat and later in Britain, for 20 years. They, along with her grandchildren, visited Carmine every Christmas, called her up every week and supported all her expenses. Carmine was looking for-

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

