37
YEARS

ZAFAR IQBAL AND SANDEEP SINGH

CONVERSATIONS

"We'd hide our faces if we didn't win the gold medal"
Zafar Iqbal
ZAFAR IQBAL (LEFT) AND SANDEEP SINGH AT MAJOR DHYAN CHAND NATIONAL STADIUM, DELHI

We miss the presence of a psychologist. What we really need now is to become tougher mentally
Sandeep Singh

VIVAN MEHRA /www.indiatodayimages.com

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS ZAFAR IQBAL AND SANDEEP SINGH

in the run-up to the Zafar Iqbal, 56, and Sandeep Singh, LAST PLACE IN LONDON London Games, people 26, belong to two different eras in a expected a medal. But sport that has seen a vast improve"We worked harder than normal.In the run-up the team finishing last ment in infrastructure and facilities to the Olympics,we trained hard and played a lot dealt a severe blow to its but a dramatic decline in results. Iqbal of matches.We realise we'd miscalculated our popularity. was part of India's last Olympic preparations and were tired." Sandeep Singh SS Players worked harder gold medal-winning hockey team than normal to do well. at Moscow 1980 while Singh Even during the run-up to had to endure the igthe Olympics, our training nominy of finishing at was going very well and we the bottom at London By the time we played a lot of matches. Unfor2012. In conversagroom a potential tunately, we peaked before the tion with ASSOCIATE Games and that went against EDITOR G.S. VIVEK, back-up player, us. As players, we were trying the hockey stars he's out of the our best but we realise we had dwell on the state team. That's miscalculated our preparations of the game, past and were tired. and present. a problem. ZI I remember India won a bronze medal at the 1968 Olympics. Those India Today (IT) Indian Sandeep Singh days a bronze medal was very diffihockey has been a story cult to digest. Now, any medal is of gradual decline. Why? considered a bonus. Those days we Zafar Iqbal (ZI) We were superused to hide our faces after we had powers long back. We are trying hard won bronze. We never used to carry to improve but other countries are imour sticks in hand because somebody proving very fast. They now have would know we were hockey players plenty of quality players as we did in and abuse us. People did not value any those days. We had a number of qualmedal in hockey other than gold. ity players fighting for one place. Take the case of Sandeep himself. He's a IT In the past, prime ministers would world-class drag-flicker but unfortugo to watch club matches. There are nately you won't find a second person hardly any spectators nowadays at in our country to fill his place. We have hockey venues. Youngsters too are not just 4-5 world-class players; the rest taking up hockey. Why? are just average. If you have to win at ZI The game is losing popularity as the Olympics, you need 11-12 worldyoungsters prefer sports that offer class players, who possess sharp more money. Hockey India is introminds, great stamina and speed. ducing a league (HIL) so that players Sandeep Singh (SS) We have good players coming up but we need a can get some money. Such things back-up system. By the time we groom are very important. Cricketers playing a potential back-up player, he's out of the Ranji Trophy earn more than SANDEEP the team. That's a big problem with players who represent the country SINGH IN our team. The training and workload in hockey. ACTION IN have to be monitored properly. IT Sandeep, HIL is seen as a game2005 IT After a string of good performances changer. How much do you think this
ARIJIT SEN /www.indiatodayimages.com

FANATIC FANS

"Hockey has been lucky to have had a big section of people who have backed us right through. I hope we get more results and give diehard supporters something to cheer about." Sandeep Singh
"I'm surprised to see so many spectators still coming to support the team. That's a huge change. People used to get very angry in our time." Zafar Iqbal
128
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS ZAFAR IQBAL AND SANDEEP SINGH FIELDS OF PLAY

"Playing on AstroTurf takes a lot of effort physically." Sandeep Singh

"Ours was the only generation that played on both surfaces. Grass is normally soft. Playing on AstroTurf requires 2-3 times more stamina. You have to do all sorts of weight training or you knees will go. If you don't stretch your body properly, you can't walk the next day." Zafar Iqbal
"We used to sleep on the floor.Even during the World Cup,we used to stay in a stadium dormitory and,frankly, were not bothered.It was the people who used to get angry." Zafar Iqbal
ZAFAR IQBAL

Zafar Iqbal professional league can help generate revenue and spectator interest? SS People mostly get to watch country matches. It will be different for them to watch good players from all over the world coming together to play. Our players will learn a lot from international stars and get to display their own talent. IT Fan reactions in India generally border on the extreme. SS When you lose, they come up to you and expect you to spell out the reasons why you lost. They get angry sometimes but mostly, it's their attitude and the way they look at you that changes. After the Olympics, they said they had the team that lost all its matches. But if you win, as we did at the Commonwealth Games, people go crazy. Hockey has been lucky to have had

a big section of people who have backed us right through. In fact, we were so surprised to see packed houses during our matches at the 2010 Commonwealth Games and even in London in 2012. I hope we get more results and give diehard supporters something to cheer about. ZI I think there's a big change in spectator mindset since those days. I was surprised too, to see so many spectators coming to support the team. That's a huge change from our time. People used to get very angry then. When we lost, we had to deal with a lot of abuse from the public. IT Sportspersons often complain of a lack of facilities. It must have been very basic during the 1970s. ZI During the 1982 Asian Games, we used to stay at the National Stadium

INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIEVE

Our training regimen used to be crushing at times. We were made to run 40 rounds of a football field. We ran on sand.

where we played and used to sleep on the floor. There were no cots or coolers and air-conditioners were unheard of. Even during the World Cup, we used to stay in a stadium dormitory and, frankly, were not bothered. It was the people around us who used to get angry and point out we didn't have the facilities we deserved. We never had any videos. We used to go to the stadium to watch rival teams play and study their game. Our training regimen used to be crushing at times. We were made to run 40 rounds of a football field. We were made to run on sand. We didn't have psychologists or physiotherapists. Our coach Balkishan was everything rolled into one. SS Thankfully, a lot of things have changed for the better (smiles). We get good accommodation. We have a specialist trainer, a specialist dietician and a video analyst. Yes, we do miss a psychologist. What we really need now is to become tougher mentally. IT Zafar, as one of the best forwards the country has produced, you would fit into a team from any generation but would Sandeep have made it to an alltime team as well? ZI When we used to play those European teams, we used to get 7-8 penalty corners but there was hardly anybody to convert those. Of the 70 minutes, almost 50 were played in their half but we couldn't convert the short corners. On the contrary, they used to come once in a while and converted their short-corner chances. So yes, Sandeep would have helped us become much better. SS Thank you, Zafar bhai.
Video available on iPad

GAME AND THE GRIND

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

129

