PRO FILE

KAMALNATH
KAMAL NATH AT HIS OFFICE IN NIRMAN BHAWAN, DELHI

THE NEGOTIATOR
The parliamentary affairs minister with his unmatched cross-party connections and smooth backroom skills has become the Government's indispensable crisis manager
By Priya Sahgal

O
26

n the afternoon of December 6, when Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) President Mayawati stood up in the Rajya Sabha to speak during the debate on FDI retail, Kamal Nath already knew what she was going to say. The Union parliamentary affairs minister

had met the BSP chief the previous night. She was planning to abstain from the vote in the Rajya Sabha. The meeting between Mayawati, BSP leader Satish Mishra and Nath carried on well past midnight. The next morning, dressed in a dark blue safari suit, Nath strode into Parliament, the BSP vote safely in his pocket, and broke the good news to the Prime Minister. The only other per-

son who knew he had turned the vote was Congress President Sonia Gandhi. "I don't think anybody else could have done what Kamal Nath did. He burnt the midnight oil and no one knew what he was doing. Mrs Gandhi knew, but he told the Prime Minister in the House," National Conference leader Farooq Abdullah told INDIA TODAY. The Opposition which had been briefing

journalists a few minutes earlier that the UPA was going to lose the FDI vote was caught off-guard. This was a classic Kamal Nath moment. It had shock and awe wrapped in political finesse. Although UPA had won the December 5 vote in the Lok Sabha, Nath knew that the numbers were much more precarious in the Rajya Sabha. UPA needed either BSP or Samajwadi Party (SP) to vote along with the Government instead of walking out as they had done in the Lower House. Interestingly, most of Nath's colleagues were not as worried. Since UPA had already won the FDI vote in the House of the People, some argued that a defeat in the Rajya Sabha would matter little. But Nath had caught on to what they had overlooked: The Prime Minister was the leader of the Rajya

Sabha. A UPA defeat in the House could dent Manmohan Singh's credibility. This is why he rushed to Mayawati's home. The BSP leader told the House, "If the Opposition's motion (against FDI) is carried, then it will get another political issue to disrupt the House and many important bills such as reservation for SC/STS in private sector jobs will not be passed." Nath couldn't have presented the case better. A disappointed AIADMK leader V. Maitreyan, who spoke after Mayawati, said, "If the Government wins, it's going to be the victory of manoueuvrability." The weekend after the Rajya Sabha win, Nath moved the SC/ST Bill in Parliament. The Prime Minister has finally found a troubleshooter to replace Pranab Mukherjee. The then parliamentary affairs minister, Pawan Kumar Bansal, was a lightweight. The new leader of the House, Sushilkumar Shinde, who replaced Mukherjee last August, was ineffective. The monsoon session was a washout due to Coalgate. Manmohan needed someone with Mukherjee's cross-party political heft and a strong grasp of economics. The larder was bare. No one from the `Cabinet A-list' fit the bill. Finance Minister P. Chidambaram has the gravitas but lacks a rapport with allies. Loyalty to 10 Janpath may have taken A.K. Antony to defence ministry and Shinde to home, but it doesn't take them very far while negotiating with cantankerous regional players. The Prime Minister knew he had to look beyond the charmed circle. The spotlight fell on Nath who had been on the sidelines for most of UPA 2. In terms of Lok Sabha wins, the 66year-old Nath is one of the most senior MPs in the Lok Sabha. The only one who beats his record is the CPI(M)'s Basudeb Acharia. Nath is also an oldschool Congress leader who has risen from the ranks of Sanjay Gandhi's Youth Congress. He knows Mayawati from Kanshi Ram's days; had negotiated an alliance with DMK in 1980 during Indira Gandhi's time and later was instrumental in bringing DMK to the UPA in 2004. He has seen Mamata Banerjee grow from being a feisty streetfighter to chief minister, and went to school with

Past Fires
The UPA Government has finally found a troubleshooter to replace Pranab Mukherjee. Nath's track record as a firefighter is impeccable.  In 2001 as general secretary in charge of West Bengal, he negotiated an alliance with the Trinamool Congress for the Assembly polls while Mamata Banerjee was with NDA. Soon after, she withdrew support from the NDA government.  As general secretary handling Tamil Nadu, he brought DMK to UPA in 2004. His rapport with M. Karunanidhi dates back to the 1980 alliance between the two parties.  As commerce minister, he got the Left to support the controversial Patents Amendments Bill and the Special Economic Zones Bill in 2005.  His coalition-building skills worked in the international arena. In 2007, he was one of the prime movers at the G-33, a coalition to protect the rights of developing countries at the WTO. Nath said then that he represented "emerging economies against the submerging ones" . Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik. So when Nath dials an ally, he knows what tone will work. He has certainly passed his first floor test. The FDI win has lifted not just Nath's profile but also the Government's morale. It has given UPA momentum to implement its reforms agenda. Apart from the Bill to increase FDI in insurance, where BJP and Congress are yet to iron out differences, the Government is confident of pushing through banking and pension reforms as well as the money laundering Bill this session. There is a feel-good buzz within the Congress which was missing on the eve of Parliament session. Even the Opposition's latest attack, raking up allegations of bribery by Walmart, have not dampened its enthusiasm. Nath immediately took the

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

DECEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

27

PRO FILE

KAMALNATH
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

have been proved in the last few days." The no-holds-barred style of attack is something Nath has finessed from his Youth Congress days, when he was one of Sanjay Gandhi's star stormtroopers. "Congress has finally found its Machiavelli and the Opposition needs to get its act together to fix him, otherwise he will play havoc with us," says Janata Party leader Subramanian Swamy, adding, "without him Indira Gandhi and Sanjay (Gandhi) could not have engineered the split in the Janata Party (in 1979)." This eventually led to the fall of the Morarji Desai government. Nath and Sanjay Gandhi had lured Charan Singh to break up with Desai with the promise of prime ministership. Once they installed Charan Singh, the Congress withdrew support in 1980. The election that followed saw Nath's Lok Sabha debut from Chhindwara in Madhya Pradesh.

sting out of their attack by announcing an inquiry, although some of his own party leaders such as Chidambaram and Union Telecom Minister Kapil Sibal advised caution saying that this may send the wrong message to global investors. On an adrenaline high, Nath is in no mood to shirk from a fight. He hit the ground running and did his homework before the winter session began, getting the Prime Minister to host oneon-one dinners and lunches with the SP chief Mulayam Singh Yadav and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav; Mayawati and the BJP leadership. This was the first time that the allies and the main Opposition party had been wooed separately and not at an all-party or UPA forum. For the SP dinner on November 9, Nath invited another ally and an old friend Farooq Abdullah. The idea was to get a Muslim face to explain the benefits of FDI to the Yadavs. Nath also pointed out to both SP and BSP that the shopkeepers' lobby was committed to BJP and therefore supporting FDI would in no way dent their vote bank. It was Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha Sushma Swaraj who unintentionally gave Nath his most fitting tribute when she

(FROM LEFT) KAMAL NATH, MANMOHAN SINGH AND RAJEEV SHUKLA

pointed out in the House "that only four of the 18 parties that spoke supported FDI in retail". And yet UPA won the vote. It's not Nath's arithmetics but his algebra that BJP should be worried about. The Kamal Nath floor show in Parliament had a Cabinet minister saying with a laugh, "Why didn't we think of him as parliamentary affairs minister before?" Adds Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh, "Nath is someone you cannot ignore. If he is given a task, he delivers. Both his persuasive powers and networking skills

THE FDI WIN HAS LIFTED NOT JUST NATH'S PROFILE BUT ALSO THE GOVERNMENT'S MORALE. IT HAS GIVEN UPA MOMENTUM TO IMPLEMENT ITS REFORMS AGENDA.

ntil now, Nath was given crucial but not key portfolios. During UPA 1, Nath was given charge of the commerce ministry, while in UPA 2, he first got roads and transport and later on urban development. Interestingly, during the recent reshuffle, the Prime Minister had divested all other Cabinet ministers of their additional portfolios--Anand Sharma lost textiles, Kapil Sibal human resource development and Jairam Ramesh sanitation. The only one who got to keep a dual charge was Nath. "He doesn't delay in taking a decision. If any minister knows how to get the work done, it's him," says Ajay Maken, Cabinet minister for urban poverty alleviation. Urban development ministry bureaucrats who have seen files pile up on the previous minister S. Jaipal Reddy's desk would agree. It must have hurt Nath that a newcomer like Sibal made it to the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs before he did. But slowly, Manmohan Singh has realised that it's not the debating prowess of a Sibal or a Salman Khurshid that will steer his Government out of the current crisis, but the straight talk of a Kamal Nath. 

U

28

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

