YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

SHIVKUMAR SHARMA AND RAHUL SHARMA

"I couldn't have imagined santoor music would be used as caller tunes"
RAHUL (LEFT) WITH SHIVKUMAR SHARMA IN MUMBAI

Shivkumar Sharma

He put an unheralded folk instrument from Kashmir on the world map. At 74, Pandit Shivkumar Sharma and the santoor are still inseparable. His son Rahul Sharma, 40, has not only inherited his music but also his glorious locks. The father-son duo tells SENIOR EDITOR S. SAHAYA RANJIT that musicians must be in tune with the times. India Today (IT) Your musical journeys have been so different. How is it then and now? Pandit Shivkumar Sharma (SS) I have struggled all my life to give santoor the status of a classical instrument. It was a Kashmiri folk instrument, I developed it by making innovations and fine-tuning the instrument. Sixty years ago, no one had heard of the santoor. Now it is an integral part of classical music all over the world. Rahul is taking it to a different level by adding his own repertoire and style. Rahul Sharma (RS) I don't know if I am creating my own genre. (To his father) But it was you who initially introduced it in film music and worked with great music directors in Mumbai. The credit goes to you for elevating it to a solo classical instrument. It is now a part of world music. You have taken the santoor to a different audience and I am taking it forward by presenting it in varied mediums--classical, fusion and world music. Continuity and change are very important in classical music.

"Today fans are buying a few tracks of an album and it is encouraging. The market rules"
Rahul Sharma
Photo by SHIVANGI KULKARNI, Designer outfits by BARKHA 'N' SONZAL and Location Courtesy SUN-N-SAND MUMBAI

IT Is fusion music a dilution of classical music? Do you think there is too much fusion music these days? SS I don't compartmentalise music as classical, fusion or film music. Music is music. It has emotion and balance of rhythm and melody. (To his son) You have been able to attempt fusion or world music because of your ground-

136

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

CONVERSATIONS SHIVKUMAR SHARMA AND RAHUL SHARMA
YEARS

PURIST'S PREDICAMENT

"I recorded 45 ragas of 12 minutes each for iTunes. But in terms of presentation, I have never changed my music to suit the audience's taste." Shivkumar Sharma
WORLD'S A STAGE

"Today musicians can collaborate without meeting each other,something unheard of in your time. We have Web concerts where you can sit in your drawing room and listen to a concert being played in the US.You take classes for your students in the US, Japan,UK via Skype."
Rahul Sharma

ground score. The use of classical music in films is varied and experimental. IT Technology has changed the way we listen to music nowadays. But is music getting better? SS I think with time, music will change. But I don't understand how one can do collaborations over email! RS Today musicians can collaborate without meeting each other, something unheard of in your (Shivkumar's) time. We have Web concerts where you can sit in your drawing room and listen to a concert being played in the US. You take classes for your students in the US, Japan, UK via Skype. Times are changing and you have to be versatile to know what technology can offer and be smart to cash in on it. I agree sales of CDs have gone down but the silver lining is that the digital world has opened a new platform. Today fans are buying a few tracks of an album and it is encouraging. The market rules. SS You will be surprised to know that I recorded 45 ragas of 12 minutes each for iTunes. I couldn't have imagined santoor music would be used as caller tunes. We need to adapt to the changes and keep pace. But in terms of presentation, I have never changed my music to suit the audience's taste. RS Everything is being packaged and repackaged. Test matches were once the true test of a cricketer, then came ODIs and now T20s. Similarly, everyone wants music according to his or her convenience. IT Who is a good student in music? SS Musical ability is God-given. But a good guru and total commitment to one's art can take you far. RS Apart from what you (Shivkumar) have said, it is practising for hours and perfecting one's art.
Video available on iPad

"Music will change. But I don't understand how one can do collaborations over email!"
Shivkumar Sharma ing in classical training. The compositional aspect is important. Composers are not man-made but God-gifted and I am blessed that you are God-gifted. A saxophone player wanted to do a collaborative music project with me. But I refused. When Kenny G did a project with you, it was wonderful because you studied his style and music even before attempting to work with him. You can teach language to a student but not poetry. You dared to experiment but I was cautious and restricted myself to classical music. RS We are creating new audiences. The core is classical, on which we build the fusion compositions. When the young see drums, bass guitar and the santoor on stage, there are great expectations. The process of creation goes on but one has to create something that is lasting. IT Earlier, classical musicians have composed for films. How is film music
SHIVKUMAR SHARMA

viewed today? SS I got my foothold in film music by playing the santoor as background score and interludes in songs. It is difficult to play for films, because it needs discipline and a different ability. The roots are in classical music but it has to have popular appeal. I have composed for Silsila, Faasle and other films. The style of filmmaking has changed. Songs are high-pitched now. Earlier, the voice of the hero and heroine had to match that of the playback singer. Raj Kapoor's voice was in perfect sync with Mukesh's. Now it is no longer relevant. The classical raga-based songs of yesteryear had longer shelf lives. Today's songs are heard for a few weeks and then forgotten. RS There was more melody and a touch of classical music in the film songs of the 1970s and 1980s. Today the music directors use a classical bandish with electronic accompaniments as back-

138

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

