37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS

RISHI KAPOOR AND RANBIR KAPOOR

"We don't have friendship between us, probably because my father didn't do that with me"
Rishi Kapoor was 16 and still in school when he was cast in Mera Naam Joker. Ranbir Raj Kapoor was 15 when his father enrolled him in the family business, making him an assistant director on his directorial debut Aa Ab Laut Chalen. Both films bombed, but the star of both was on the ascendant. Rishi Kapoor, 60, probably had the longest career as a romantic hero in Bollywood, from Bobby in 1973 to Karobaar in 1998. Ranbir Kapoor, fourth generation of a venerable acting dynasty, who made his debut in Saawariya, has become an actor who takes surprising risks, not all of which his straight-shooting father understands. The father and son are famously different--Ranbir doesn't have an angry bone in his body, while Rishi has spent his off-screen life fighting demons of alcoholism and insecurity. Yet both live under one roof in a well appointed cottage in Pali Hill named after Rishi's mother Krishna Raj. Wife Neetu plays the middlewoman. Rishi, whose acting career has seen a resurgence of late, playing villain in Agneepath and gay teacher in Student of the Year, is proud of his son's rising star. When Rishi and Ranbir speak for an hour in a hotel room a little distance away from their home, taking time off from their shooting schedules for Aurangzeb and Yeh Jawaani
MANDAR DEODHAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

Rishi Kapoor

"As an actor, you can't really gauge your films. So I wait till dad sees it" Ranbir Kapoor
Hai Diwani repectively, it's like watching a gripping tennis match: Rishi the aggressive serve and volleyer, grunting and whooping in equal measure; Ranbir the phlegmatic clay court artist scoring points quietly. INDIA TODAY EDITOR KAVEREE BAMZAI watches, fascinated. India Today (IT) What was the reaction to Student of the Year? Rishi Kapoor I don't know, you tell me. Ranbir Kapoor I liked it. Rishi He has to say this because he is sitting next to his father. Ranbir I had no expectations. But it was decent and pleasant. IT That's because you are friends with the director, Karan Johar. Ranbir But I'm honest with their films. IT What about Barfi? Rishi I have no judgement of my own as far as my films or his are concerned. I have decided to see our movies with the audience and make up my mind. I saw Barfi in Delhi. The whole audience was so involved. IT What did you think of Agneepath? You must be uncomfortable watching your father in the scene where he is so aggressive with that little girl? Ranbir No, no. I am an actor myself. Rishi We know it's all make-believe.

RANBIR AND RISHI KAPOOR ARE READY FOR THEIR CLOSE-UP AT TAJ LANDS END, MUMBAI

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS RISHI KAPOOR AND RANBIR KAPOOR

IT What makes you angry? Rishi Everything. I am basically an angry man. IT Then you should have been the angry man of the 1970s. And what were you doing? Dancing, singing and romancing Ranbir's mother. Rishi That's what an actor is all about. IT But those were fun times, especially the clothes. Glitter jackets. You still have those in some museum somewhere... the Karz jackets? Rishi We made identical Karz jackets for the International Indian Film Academy (IIFA) awards, where both of us danced. And they got exchanged. I was wearing the tight one and he the loose one. IT That's good. He is not given to excess weight. Are you happy about that?

Rishi He has taken after his mother. His metabolism is pretty good. Ranbir Also, this is the time when people are more aware. Rishi Those were times when we were not really thin but were healthy. IT This is a new phase for you: Being the bad man. But did he (to Ranbir) ever shout at you? Ranbir No, he has never raised his voice at me. IT Are you sure? Because he always shouts at everyone. Rishi No, he is being diplomatic. I have been slapped once by my father, because at a very young age I smoked a cigarette borrowed from his make-up man. He (Ranbir) also got it once when he wore his shoes to the prayer room. IT How old were you?

Ranbir Must be around 12. IT Before you broke your cheek on the pot in the bathroom? Rishi He was two-three years of age when he did that. He literally wrecked this house we rented in London. He broke the fridge door. He was five then. We went to a restaurant and he wanted a guitar. He won't eat and was crying all the while. It was raining and I had to go looking all over London to find him one. IT What convinced you (Ranbir) that acting was the thing to do? Ranbir I think it started when I could not do well at school. I was interested in studies but school was boring. By the time I went to New York, I had become more responsible for myself. I think it's when you come out of the family's shadow, and organically in

IT Do you know when a film you're in is going to bomb?

"We are in a creative world and there are so many creative minds involved in a motion picture. So things can go wrong. Picture ki bhi kundli hoti hai." Rishi Kapoor
Rishi Bachna Ae Haseeno was about going from one girl to another. IT That's like him in real life. Rishi Is he? IT I don't know.I only read the same papers as you. Rishi You can't really rely on them. IT What do you think when you see Ranbir with X,Y,Z? Rishi I feel very good. If he doesn't do it now, when will he? At my age? He is very organic and very correct.
112
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

RISHI KAPOOR IN A STILL FROM HUM KISISE KUM NAHIN, 1977

INDIAN EXPRESS ARCHIEVE

37
YEARS

CONVERSATIONS RISHI KAPOOR AND RANBIR KAPOOR

IT Do you still watch your parents' films?

"Absolutely.While growing up,my sister and I would have dinner watching their films.When I see them on screen,it feels lovely they are my parents.I also feel weird because she is my mother and I don't like to see her romancing other heroes.I stay away from her films." Ranbir Kapoor
IT Did you ever think of launching Ranbir? Rishi No, never occurred to me, because I don't think of myself as a filmmaker. I'm more passionate about acting than making films. IT You did make Aa Ab Laut Chalen and Ranbir was working with you. How old was he then? Rishi He was 15. IT So young! Child labour! Rishi What child labour? Uske baap-dada ka dhanda hai. He should know what it is all about.
story line is more or less redundant. I really liked his film Ajab Prem Ki Ghazab Kahani, it's my kind of film. I always wanted him to do a Rishi Kapoor-style romantic film. IT Do you meet his girlfriends? Rishi I do not know which of them are his girlfriends. He has never told me this is my girlfriend. But I assume at his age he will not have a girlfriend but girlfriends. IT Why? Rishi When he is serious enough to make his girlfriend his wife, then it will be a different story. IT You have an opinion on everything he does. You share it with him? Rishi I don't know. There is something I am really sorry about. We don't have friendship between us, probably because my father didn't do that. I love him and he is my only son but he is closer to his mother. IT If you were working now and had the opportunities your son is getting, with the kind of directors he is working with and the terrific scripts, which of his roles would you like to do? Rishi I loved him in Raajneeti, Barfi, Rockstar. I don't care much for Anjaana Anjaani. I haven't seen it yet. IT Did you enjoy doing Anjaana Anjaani? That film lost its way. Ranbir At the time of doing a film you surrender completely. You do what the director wants you to. As an actor, you can't really gauge your own films. So, I wait till he (Rishi) sees it. Rishi My wife is the best judge.
Video available on iPad

A PUBLICITY STILL FROM BOBBY, 1973

A PUBLICITY STILL FROM SAAWARIYA, 2007

life--as each year goes by you become more responsible. IT How were the four years he spent in New York? Rishi My daughter went abroad before Ranbir. So we were mentally prepared. He went to the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute, which was against my grain of acting. It is a method school. But I let him do what he wanted. After he came back, he assisted Sanjay Leela Bhansali on Black. Bhansali then cast him in Saawariya. IT The reception was mixed for Saawariya. Rishi The reaction was not mixed. It was bad all the way.

IT Were you disappointed? Rishi When we saw the movie, we knew he was from the family and he knew his job. I was sure he'd pick up. IT The next film he chose was romantic, Bachna Ae Haseeno. A film that got him a lot of credit was Wake up Sid. Rishi I don't interfere with his creative side or otherwise. My choices may not be true for this generation. I would never want him to do a film like Wake up Sid. IT But when you saw Wake up Sid, the scene where he confronts his father... Rishi Yeah, that moment. Actually, it is moments that make a movie. The

114

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 24, 2012

