TRIPURA - Racing ahead, quietly
the tiny hill state in the North East corner of India is A land that was ravaged by of , has from the and is able to a in diverse fields. is and is a
GOVERNANCE & ADMINISTRATION: The Government has re-organized the administrative units in 2012 with the focus on delivery and improving infrastructure. The State now has 8 Districts, 23 Sub-divisions, 45 blocks and one Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC). The thrust is now to take development to the grass roots level with total participation of all stakeholders. DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE CONNECTIVITY: Provision of all-weather road connectivity in the State is the prime objective of the State Government. Beginning with only about 50 km. road length at the time of merger of the State with the Union of India in the year 1949, total road length in the State has increased to about 18,362 km at present. Agartala Airport is equipped with Instrument Landing System (IIS) and the aircrafts can land in low visibility of up to 800 meters. The Airport has also got facility of night landing of aircrafts. POWER: The power sector in Tripura underwent a fundamental institutional change with the establishment of Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited (TSECL) on 1* January, 2005. The task of generation, transmission and distribution is now vested in the Corporation. TSECL operates generation unit in Rokhia, Baramura and Gumti. The former two are gas-based power plants with installed capacities of 74 MW and 42 MW, respectively. Gumti is a hydel power Project which has installed capacity of 15 MW and generates about 8 MW. A 21 MW gas-based generation unit was inaugurated at Baramura in September, 2010. At Rokhia, a 21 MW unit would be installed by 2013, replacing two 8 MW units that are due for de-commissioning In addition to the above, two large gas thermal power projects are presently under construction in Tripura. The first project is at Palatana in Gumti District which, when complete, will generate 726.6 MW. The share of Tripura has been fixed at 196 MW. The second project is Monarchak in Sipahijala District. It will generate 105 MW and the entire energy will be Tripura's share. Monarchak is being constructed by NEEPCO, which currently runs an 84 MW gas-based power plant at Ramchandra Nagar, West Tripura District. With all these power projects coming up, the State will be well-equipped to meet all its power requirements. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: Several initiatives have been taken to create the IT infrastructure necessary for effective delivery of e- services to the citizens. These include: и State Data Centre (SDC): SDC is one of the key elements of the IT Infrastructure. SDC is the Central Repository for Data for all e-Governance applications deployed/to be deployed by the Government. и Tripura State Wide Area Network (SWAN): SWAN is a wide area network for

for all the right , insecyrity and stuttering of all growth and to all round prosperity.

the

carrying data, voice and video, which provides OFC connectivity upto Block level. Tripura has a fully functional SWAN since January 2009. и Agartala City Area Network (ACAN): ACAN has been setup to connect different offices at Agartala on OFC network. The ACAN is envisaged as the network backbone for delivering various e-Governance applications to citizens. ACAN is fully integrated with SWAN. и Common Service Centres (CSCs): Common Service Centers (CSCs) are the outlets at the village level through which all e-Governance services shall be delivered to the citizens EDUCATION: The State has witnessed a phenomenal expansion in the field of school education in terms of access to school facilities, enrolment of students, deployment of teachers, development of infrastructure, etc. The State Government has initiated necessary steps for effective implementation of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, which provides for free and compulsory education for all children in the age group of 6-14 years. The Government has been implementing Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RSMA), Mid-Day Meal and other Programmes for universalisation of School Education, in the right earnest. Tripura was awarded at National Level for highest reduction in the gender gap between male literacy and female literacy during the period 2001-2011, based on the results of the 2011 Census. The period from 1999 to 2012 is a period of significant development of higher education in the history of Tripura. The Gross Enrollment Ratio (GER) in higher education has increased from 7.24 to 11.4. Some important developments и. и Upgradation of Tripura Engineering College (TEC) into a full-fledged National
PROUD RECIPIENT OF A HOST OF NATIONAL AWARDS

Decadal Literacy Award for 2001-2011 President's Colours to Tripura Police in 2012 Prime Minster's Award for excellence in Public Administration in Rural Health & Sanitation in 2012-11 Excellence Award for implementation of MGNREGA in 2008-09 Krishi Karman Award for outstanding performance in Food Production among Category 111 States in 2010-11 Nagar Ratna Award for Agartala Municipal Council in 2011 Best Fisheries Award in 2009 e Governance Award in 2008-09 e North East Award in 2011 Award for Excellence in Sports in 2010 Award for Financial Discipline in 2005 Award for successful implementation of NLCPR projects e Panchayat Awards in 2010-11 & 2011-12

'

* и*ииии

Institute of Technology (NIT) in 2006 and upgradation of Polytechnic Institute, Narsingarh into Tripura Institute of Technology (TIT) in 2007 with provision for both Engineering Diploma and Degree Programmes.. и Two Medical Colleges, one Agriculture College and one Veterinary College have come up. One College of Fisheries already exists in Tripura. и One Polytechnic Institute exclusively for women has been set up at Hapania. Four new Polytechnics are being set up across the state. и Seven new Degree Colleges have started functioning from 2011. и Bachelor of Computer Application (BCA) and Diploma in Computer Application (DCA) courses have been introduced in nine General Degree Colleges of Tripura. и Infrastructure development of Govt. Music College and Govt. College of Art and Craft in its new venue with newly constructed buildings have opened facilities for the students in these new areas of education and learning. HEALTH : 'Healthcare Facilities for AH1 is the goal of the Government of Tripura. Special efforts are being made to expand the healthcare infrastructure at all levels. One Health Sub Centre is being set up in every Gram Panchayat. The healthcare infrastructure at Sub-Divisional, District and State level is also being strengthened. As a part of the Master Plan, 15 very difficult locations [Dhalai-9, North-4 & West2] in tribal areas, which are not yet possible to be covered through conventional means, are being covered through deployment of Medical Teams by Helicopter. Sub-divisional Hospital In order to reduce infant mortality, new-born care corners, ante-natal intensive care units and special new-born care units have been established at PHCs, Subdivisional Hospitals, District Hospitals and State Hospitals.. Proactive efforts are being made for prevention of various diseases through creation of awareness at community level. As a result of persistent efforts made by the State Government, the various Health Indicators for Tripura have been improving over the years and the same are better than the National Average. AGRICULTURE : Agriculture is the State's dominant sector providing employment to about 50% of State's population and contributing about 22% to the Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) of the State. The State Government had launched a 10-year "Perspective Plan for Achieving Self- Sufficiency in Food Grains" in the year 2000-01, which was further extended by two years upto 2011-12. As a result, the total food grain production in Tripura significantly increased from 5.13 lakh MT in 1999-2000 to an all-time high level of 7.30 lakh MTin 2011-12. It is due to such impressive performance of the State in the field of agriculture that the Government of India honoured the State with "Krishi Karman Award" for the year 2010-11 for best performance in the field of Agriculture among Category-Ill States. In Tripura, total about 1,17,000 hectares of land (out of cultivable land of about 2,55,485 hectares) was assessed as irrigable. Out of this, about 1,10,524 hectaure has already been brought under irrigation through concerted efforts of various Departments. INDUSTRIES & COMMERCE : Industrialisation is gradually picking up in Tripura. As of now, there are two large-scale units (excluding power sector) in Tripura, namely, a Steel Cold Rolling Mill (producing GCI sheets) and a Rubber Thread unit. There are some medium-scale units like a Cold Storage (25,000 MT capacity), a TMT Bars/Rods/Flats unit, a Cement Plant, some Tea Processing Factories, etc.

There are a number of small and micro enterprises. As per the Census-2007 conducted by the Ministry of MSME (Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises), there were total 1,253 registered MSME units in Tripura. Since then, 1,035 new units have been registered, increasing the total number of registered units to 2,288 units (as on 31.03.2012). Total Investment in Industrial Sector is about Rs. 700 crores. Total value of Gross Output of Industrial Sector is about Rs.700 crores. Secondary Sector contributes about 27.5% of State GSDP (2010-11). All necessary steps are being taken for promotion of industries and commerce in the State with a view to generate economic growth and employment. The necessary industrial infrastructure has been developed at Bodhjungnagar in the form of an Industrial Growth Centre, a Food Park, a Rubber Park and an Export Promotion Industrial Park (EPIP). A Bamboo Park is also being developed. In addition, there are 6 other industrial estates/ area in various parts of the State. The performance of the Department during 2012 vis-a-vis 1972 on some important parameters has been as follows.Self-employment: No. of Cases Disbursed Industrial Infrastructure: Total Area developed (Acres) Foreign Trade (Rs. Crores) Number of ITIs Important Sectors: и Food Processing (Turnover in Rs. Cr.) и Handloom (No. of weavers in clusters) и Handicrafts (Turnover in Rs. crores) и Silk Yarn Production (kg.) и Rubber Utilisation within State (MT) и Bamboo Sector (Turnover in Rs. Cr.) NIL 76.35 NIL 2 NIL NIL

695

3,226

76.35 140.23 728.33 NIL 2 NIL

15.46 4 1.00

330.60 8 68.34

3,200
0.05

5,300 8,645 19,264
0.50 NIL NIL

6.00 800 100 NA

24.02 1,970 3,000 107.22

NIL NA

TOURISM: The Government of Tripura has taken up a comprehensive plan for promotion of Tourism in the State which includes augmenting accommodation facilities, improving the existing infrastructure and attraction at major tourist destinations, developing the communication network and strengthening the skill of the manpower engaged in this sector. Tripura Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. is playing a vital role in building basic infrastructure like Tourist Lodges, Cafeterias etc. Presently, the Corporation is running 33 Tourist Lodges, 10 Cafeterias and 15 Sulabh Toilets. Tourist Information Centre at Akhaura Check post and International Bus Terminus have also been set up. TRIBAL WELFARE : The State Government attaches highest priority to the educational, economic and cultural development of the tribal communities in the State. Some important initiatives include 31% reservation of STs in Government jobs in promotions as well as in admission to Educational Institutions, minimum 31% of its Budgetfor development in Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP) areas, setting up of Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) for accelerating the development of tribal areas, setting up of the Tripura State Academy of Tribal Culture (TSATC) for promotion and development of tribal culture and heritage. THE ROAD AHEAD : Tripura is quietly marching ahead with significant developments in key areas. But the Govt. realizes that there are miles to go... The good work needs to be sustained with a better industrial environment, a more robust infrastructure, improved connectivity, enhanced job opportunities, and availability of all basic amenities - housing & education, potable drinking water, total electrification and advanced health care for all. Tbe objective is to develop Tripura as a model state in India where different sections of the society cohabit in peace and harmony.

