tit I

EDUCATION

SelaQui

GORU NANAK FIFTN CENTENARY SCHOOL, MVSSOOR1E

Academic Excellence 1 Holistic Development ? or Both !
S
elaQui International School at Dehradun is the first to respond to the challenges of new test pattern of IIT JEE effective 2013. As a leading Boarding, Co-educational &. International school in India, SelaQui offers best-in-class test preparation for IIT-JEE. Supported by high quality pastoral life, where students groom and develop; spiritually, intellectually, academically and physically. Integrating the merits of conventional boarding school with academic excellence and test preparation.

IIT-ians PACE Together with IIT-ians

-* HT-ian's

PACE', amongst the leading test prep institutions, SelaQui has top rated teachers of Physics, Chemistry & Mathematics and English to transact the school integrated ISC board examinations & IIT-JEE preparatory program.

PACE
Blending academic rigor with the comforts and warmth of a boarding school.

Location
In the foothills of Himalayas, nestled along a mountain river, SelaQui International School at Dehradun, boasts of a 52 acres rich and green campus. Safe and Secure.

GURUKUL' - IIT-ians PACE
Gurukul, IIT-ians PACE, a program for two final years at school, Class XI &XII, enables students to prepare for competitive entrance exams together with the board examinations. Only the top 20 percentile in the board examinations can participate in the Mains of JEE.

Targeting a success rate of 40% of enrolled students as against the current best of 7%

First and the Only of its Kind 'GURUKUL'-CCU

Affiliations
Affiliated to For ICSE (class X) and ISC (class XII) examinations. Council for Indian School Certificate Examinations was established in 1958 as a successor board of University of Cambridge Local Examinations syndicate. The International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (IBDP), a global leader in international school education is equivalent to class XII, is a two-year program equivalent to classes XI & XII for students aged 16-19. Supported by United Nations and Ford Foundation, IB has now authorised 3,480 prestigious school across 144 countries. SelaQui is llth amongst India's 98 IB schools.

Competition stiffens for students of humanities & commerce too. For entry in prestigious courses in Law, Accountancy and Finance & Management. Entry is only Integration of IIT JEE and ISC curriculum through CPT, CLAT & UGM AT. enhances Learning & Performance. Reduces Learning Fatigue. Coupled with Commerce & Humanities students prepare linguistic competencies, Life skills and high for CPT, CLAT & UGMAT entrance emotional intelligence quotient, students exams together with ISC board prepare not just of IIT JEE, but prepare for examination. CPT, [Common Proficiency Test] an success in life. entrance test to enrol for Chartered Seamless Transition to IITs & Accountants program

Centres of Excellence in Higher CLAT, [Common Law Aptitute Test] for Education. BA, LLB in India's leading law institutions In collaboration with India's UGMAT, [Undergraduate Management Aptitude Test], an entrance test for leading test-prep institutions
250 days of effective teaching as against global standard of 210 or less. admission to premium BBA programs

Success of Every Learner

SelaQui International -School with a Purpose.
m

S

ports is catching up as a career, as good as any other, or perhaps better.

ADMISSIONS
GURUKUL IIT-ians PACE Class XI only - through an entrance test. GURUKUL CCU Class XI only through an on-line entrance test. ARJUNA - Classes VI & VII only. Healthy children between the age group of 11 to 13 years can apply. The admission would be granted on the basis of national trials in the sports for which the child wishes to enrol.

The real formative years are between the age 10 to 15 years. Players must shape up by then and play some serious competive sports or else they have little chance of making it to the national or international levels. Students and their parents in the metro cities often struggle to balance between schooling and opportunities in competitive sports. Smaller cities simply do not have sports infrastructure. Hence some of the best sporting talent never comes to the fore. No wonder India, a country of 120 crore people, is not able to make its mark in the sports.

The'ARJUNA'Program
SelaQui has taken on this challenge for &on behalf of students & parents. It blends best of academics with the best of coaching and infrastructure for Cricket & Tennis. SelaQui is in the final stages of tying up with the national level sporting associations to access the best coaching talent and support systems for students in the ARJUNA programs; Cricket or Tennis. ARJUNA1 Tennis ARJUNA Cricket For students wishing to explore a career in sports and enrolled in the ARJUNA' program, SelaQui provides regular classes, tailored to suit their needs. They do not have to sacrifice either and pursue their aspiration in Tennis or Cricket or both or blend the two with academic excellence too.

International Higher Education
SelaQui also offers students choice between ISC Class XII of CISCE and the globally p r e f e r r e d two years I n t e r n a t i o n a l Baccalaureate Diploma, IBD.

SelaQui
EDUCATION

Special Supports

Students aspiring to study overseas after school for undergraduate programs must have test scores of TOEFL [Test of English as Foreign Language] and SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Students pursuing this program are Test], SelaQui is already an authorised supported by a whole clutch of support TOEFL test centre. While it systems, physiotherapists, gymnasiums, provides preparation for c o n d i t i o n i n g w o r k o u t s , d o c t o r s , TOEFL, it also prepares appropriate diets and of course the best of students for SAT. the coaches.

SelaQui International School
DEHRADUN

School with A Purpose
For admissions to any of the programs

SAT

www.selaqui.org Delhi Office: 011 47342000 Dehradun Office: 0135 305 1000 Cell: 09873743433/09927000585

1. SelaQui is an authorized TOEFL [Test Of English as a Foreign Language] test center 2. SAT Scholastic Aptitude Test

FOCUS EDUCAfioH

Providing Education the New way!! Is your child getting it?
Are you ensuring a great future for your child? Have you made sure that the school he/she is going to has all the modern facilities and methods of teaching and preaching and your child gets that 'extra1 factor in himself that is required?

About Multiplexes and Boarding Schools
Like the multiplexes, the boarding schools can bounce back as Centers of Excellence and 'Schools with a Purpose. - By Om Pathak

16

Changing Expectations, Changing Schools An evolving concept of the good school
Education is the constructive, consistent and compelling system of values around which personal as well as social life should be built. An important part of the mission of new age education is developing learners' competence. - By NidhiSirohi
:

Good Schools.
By Om Pathak The definition of education in 21st century encompasses the whole learner as knowledgeable, understanding, co-operating & collaborating while maintaining a healthy balance between the material and spiritual.

14

Training teachers for the future shift
On-going professional development is the key ingredient in the overall success of technology-driven education in classrooms. - ByShantanu Prates/)

26 29
<r$&Ф

Expatriates Experience in International Schools
Confronted with academic change, culture shock, and homesickness, expatriates students can struggle to adjust to their new surroundings, aiding strain to an otherwise difficult life transition. - By ShaliniNambiar

An Effective Learning
The goal of any school cannot be anything other than good and everlasting learning for every child. The question of how to ensure that we are successful in this goal, is in itself a big challenge. - By Dhriti Malhotra

32

Are you game for learning?
What exactly is fun and games applied to studying? It is a straightforward system of teaching lessons through puzzles, mazes, tricky observation games and drawing and colouring or even reconstructing the lesson through a pictorial blueprint. - By Nita Mehta

PLUS PROFILE | READY RECKONER

02

CTniiiaiive THБ 6OOD SCHOOL 6UiD*sUa^f-file on Progressive Schools

^

FOCUS

Providing Education the ]S

Is your child getti
The race of running to various schools for admissions has started. In a capital city where you have more than 5000 schools, the amount of confusion naturally creeps into your mind which school to opt for.
04 | AnimPACTnitlative THC GOOD SCHOOL 6UiD iD A fact-file on Progressive Schools

utttttm^tt^ttUWMi

и*и

e help you find and figure out the regions and areas that you as a parent should look for your child. The things that a school should have in store for your child, the importance of the upgraded methods of teaching, the necessity to adopt them and lots more... CURRICULUM Programme & Methods It is not a denied fact that the course study should be the first priority of the school as well as the student. But there are numerous factors that derive the studying environment of a child. It is necessary to see that the school follows the course syllabus and guidelines of the Board to which it is affiliated. The Central Board (CBSE) for instance follows an entirely different course form as compared to the ICSE. The prescribed books henceforth should be the ones dictated by the concerned Board. Some schools for the stance of making profit over accommodate students in one class. The teacher - student ratio ideally should not be more than 1:30. Not only that, it should be seen that you don't fall prey to schools which have untrained teachers as their employees. According to the latest survey of the District Information System for Education (DISE), it was found that over 54.91% private schools had untrained teachers as compared to 44.88% in government schools. So it is crucial that your child is not quarry to such incidents. The teachers to tackle the problems and needs of the students should adopt new and innovative ideas that would make the class more interesting and fun filled for your child. Adapting to student friendly techniques like showing live presentations, taking other technical aids and not sticking to the four walled rooms by taking them

out for educational excursions, trips, etc can build and create a different mind set and a level of understanding in the students mind. Not only this, the school should make their students participate in various competitive exams, Olympiads and competitions giving them the feel of the competitive world around and accordingly prepare for them. THE Co - Curricular Dynamics Falling outside the realm of the daily curriculum and getting oneself out of the bookish world, it is necessary that your child involves himself in the cocurricular activities. The school for different classes organizes different types and levels of activities. Your child's school should be the one that would organize various competitions like say Fancy Dress, Story Telling, Poetry Recitation, etc for him. It should conduct weekly classes of various sports like taekwondo or karate, swimming, horse riding, yoga, etc ensuring that your child is involved in both mental and physical activities. It should help bring out your child's sports talents and groom the skills by properly training and coaching him/her. The school should timely ^organize various tournaments like cricket, basketball, football, tennis, etc. Whereas on the cultural front the school should engage your child in music, dance, various musical instruments, arts, drama, etc leaving no stones unturned in ensuring that no talent or skill of your child is left out undiscovered. This kind of exposure at a very young age makes your child strong both mentally and physically and prepares them well to tackle the problems on their own. It helps in building up the morale of the child psychologically and gives a helping hand in the overall development and growth of the child. Services & Facilities A child spends around six to eight

SelaQui International School - School with a Purpose
ADMISSIONS: Admission available only in classes VI & VII under the 'ARJUNA1 program. Healthy children between the age group of 11 to 13 years can apply for admission.

SelaQui International School
DEHRADUN

School with A Purpose
For further Details / Admissions to any of the programs visit: www.setaqui.org or contact office: Delhi :011 47342000; Dehradun: 0135 305 1000, Cell: 09873743433/09927000585

ии.-, A::Jp :.и>.и:.ии и

hours in a school and it is essential that some facilities and services are provided to the students that can be availed by them. These are some of them that a school should look for and provide to its students.
1

The primary sections of the school should have one or two care takers who maintain and takes care the needs of the children. With increasing crimes in the capital and the NCR regions, it has become essential that even schools upgrade their security levels. Deploying security staffs and installing Closed Circuit Televisions (CCTV) is necessary to ensure the safety of the school staff and students.

1

A cafeteria that provides hygienic food and avoiding the junk ones. A clean lavatory, change rooms or wash rooms with locker facilities if needed. Basic Infirmary services with a doctor or nurse appointed so that quick medical aid can be provided in case of injuries, etc. Well routed bus facilities providing to and fro service for students. Library is the treasure land of the school. So, ensuring well stocked books for the children.

technology can be the preparation of Power Point Lesson Plans by the teacher. The teacher by connecting the PC or laptop to a projector can use both audio and visual aids while teaching topics that need such assistance. Your child in this prospect can be given online assignments involving htm more in what we call as 'e-learning'. The basic computer lessons are already included in the courses but the authorities must ensure that the software or the other computer languages your child is taught are timely updated and the new versions are obtained as soon as they are launched in the market. This gives your child an edge over others who don't comply with it.

1

1

1

1

и Playing arena is important for the kids. Hence, a big playground is a must and also a smaller playing area for small kids having swings for the children and place for having various fun filled activities for them.

With the technology taking an upper hand over everything, it is important that even schools adopt and integrate these technologies in their classrooms. Though accommodating and setting up these latest technologies may involve high budget, there are small IT companies who find a solution to this problem. They help in setting up the smart class rooms and e-learning programmes relatively at a low cost. It should be understood that using these technological aids will help in increasing the efficiency and level of understanding of your child as these appear to be more appealing and interesting to them at this age. The basic level implementation of

The technology that your child uses, is surrounded with, the state-of-the-art facilities he gets that not only helps him in being smart but also helps him grow as a global citizen over coming barriers and boundaries of the states and countries.

06 AnllTlPACT initiative TH 6ooD SCHOOL 6UtOE A fact-file on Progressive Schools

;

Ф-

-

KOTHARI INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL

TRANSFORMING EDUCATION
и и '^ ; : I $$ "иии :$v ииииии'и ?cs!i :yi ; и
;

и/

^iel

и 'и m
/ I El ^ Б

. -Д to -mgn " -' rl mmfMlm $ <
;:Ф:: fVy?-d?^^y?^?.|

and

he school aspires to make its students productive members of the society enabling them to help transform the lives of the people around them. It wishes to equip them with sufficient tools so that they go on to become effective leaders who will be the torch-bearers and pioneers in a world that can rest comfortably on universal values of tolerance, nonviolence, peace, team-spirit and sportsmanship. The vision, thereby, envisaged a rich curriculum; effective teaching and learning driven by specially trained team of teachers; technology integration; structured sports, visual and performing art programmes; a designer school building that includes learning spaces, activity centers,

T

labs and resource rooms and all sports facilities. Most importantly the school built a culture where diversity is celebrated. We believe that diversity is strength. It is a value that is evidenced in the school providing equal opportunities to learn and excel. Every child is recognized in the community for the difference he or she brings and is respected and valued. The school's admission policy reflects this belief. At KIS every child is a star! Every educator is inspired to innovate, communicate, collaborate and create dynamic experiential classrooms and celebrate joyful learning of every child. The school's efforts, in pursuit of excellence, find their expression in the performance and achievement of its students. The trail blazers have held

NURTURING SPECIAL STUDENTS IN A SPECIAL WAY

The School offers an all-inclusive set up catering to the policy of 'caring and sharing'. The dedicated Counsellors and Special Educators ensure that the children with special needs become completely self-reliant in the pressing times to come. Led by Mrs Nidhi Sirohi, Principal, the school and the team of KIS teachers promises a new hope in the quest for quality education. Kothari International School offers:
и Curriculum of Cambridge International Examinations and the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) и A day-boarding facility и Bag less and burden less learning и A safe and secure environment

aloft the School Torch at many national and international competitions. Special mention must be made of its many gems-Shitiz Gargfor standing first at the Google Code-in competition and Ritwik Bhattacharya who reached the top 40 at the Times Scholar, an initiative to find the best and the brightest minds in the country. Ritwik Bhattacharya and Vijeet Malik, our ace quizzers possess an unquenchable thirst for knowledge. They have a cent percent track record, winning every quiz they participated in. The very great Thomas Carlyle has said 'Nothing builds self confidence and self esteem like accomplishments'. Saloni Ratra realized her ambition when she stood second in North Zone at the 'Young Chef culinary test organized by IIHM. In order to gain meaningful insight into the workings of United Nations and the dynamics of diplomacy, our MUN delegations are regular participants at the Harvard Model United Nations and the conferences organized in Delhi and NCR. A playground is said to be the cradle of democracy. Aishwarya

и Air-conditioned classrooms and a variety of premium amenities и Premium Sports facilities и Structured KOOH Sports programme и Platform for every interest, talent and capability и Air conditioned Transport и Hygienkally made Special dietician's meals

Gupta,Nancy Jain, Samriddh Sood, Yatharth Bajaj are just a few of School shuttlers who bagged medal at State and NCR Badminton Championships. The School skating team reaped a rich haul at the State Championships by winning more than 5 golds. Chinmaya and Chaitanya Chauhan have put KIS on the Lawn Tennis circuit and bring laurels every year. Every sport is an opportunity to measure yourself against your own potential. Our swimmers pursue their passion for swimming with great determination. Our star performers Vasantika and Mallika Handa set new records at all State and National swimming meets. The other members of the elite team are Ansh Arora.Arpit Chaddha.Shlok Agarwal.Katyayani Pande.Anupam Gope and Navya Gupta. Painting is like poetry that can be seen. Dipping their brush into their soul and creating wonders are our budding artists. Dhriti Singh was awarded the First Prize at 'Doodle with Rob', an Inter School Art Competition. No legacy is so rich as drama. The School street plays have won accolades and prizes wherever they performed. The icing on the cake was winning the Second Prize at the International Theatre Fest organized by Ryan International School.

Words and photographs can only give an impression of the spirit of KiS -we welcome all to share and experience this warmth!!

While the classical view restricts education to just academics, as most of us believe too, but the scope and definition of education in 21st century encompasses the whole learner as knowledgeable, understanding, co-operating & collaborating while maintaining a healthy balance between the material and spiritual. Education would therefore, seek to transcend literacy, knowledge and skills, as it goes well beyond equipping a learner to handle the challenges of living together and sharing natural and material resources and developing an innate ability to address and resolve conflicts.
or the learner in 21st century, the agility of a committed learner, the adroitness of a skilled athlete, the eloquence of a capable speaker, the valour of an adventurer and the inquisitiveness of a free-spirited entrepreneur as they boldly step out of the classroom to experiment with technology, dabble with science and nature while at the same time get a good grasp of their course knowledge and structure through research, observation and data collection. As always, we look back to the future. Probably, answers for the future trends in education also point to our own history of Gurukuls that produced fairly well rounded humans. Those attending Gurukuls not only learnt vedas - providing insight into science, mathematics, astronomy, environment, they also trained in martial arts like fencing, horse riding, tent pegging, etc and above all imbibed 'dharma1 -values and ethics. And centuries later, as a carry over, Benjamin Bloom, an American educational psychologist, teacher, thinker and reformer spoke of three 10 | AnlfTlPAC limitative TH GOOD SCHOOL 6UiDБ
A fact-file on Progressive Schools

F

domains of human learning; cognitive (Learning), psychomotor (physical development) and affective (values, attitudes and ethics). Bloom's Taxonomy, today forms the basis of any discussion or discourse on the future of education. The International Baccalaureate Organization based in Geneva further defines the profile of the learner thus; Inquirers; lifelong learners in a spirit of inquiry and research. Knowledgeable; Explore concepts, ideas and issues acquiring in-depth knowledge & understanding across a range of disciplines. Thinkers; Critical, creative and Ethical. Effective Communicators, Principled; They act with integrity and honesty, fairness, justice and respect. Openminded; Sensitive to cultures, history and perspectives, values and traditions of others. Caring; They show empathy, compassion and respect towards others. Risk-takers; Driven by courage and forethought and self belief. Balanced; Intellectually, physically and emotionally. Reflective; Of own learning and experience. If this be the profile of our learner today, then what

By Om Pathak

FOCUS EDUCATION
does it take to provide opportunities of learning, imbibing, fostering and shaping. What and who influences - Formally or informally; the growth of learner, across continents, cultures, languages and regions. There is sufficient data and evidence now available by way of school test surveys that not only assess the student learning but also is able to take stock of the variations in social, cultural and educational environments. Comparisons very strongly suggest the role of factors that define quality schooling. One such test survey is PISA, Program for International Student Assessment, an organ of OECD that conducts tests, once every four years, in around 60 countries where 15 year olds participate in language, mathematics and science tests. The other being TIMSS, Trends in Mathematics & Science Studies, conducted by IEA at grade IV [around 10 year olds] and VIII [around 14 year olds] levels. These test results are compiled and compared against various indicators so to understand how and why some school systems perform better than others. The analysis provides countries with enough data and evidence to attempt reforms in their respective countries. Based on the quantitate test data of PISA survey 2007, McKinsey & Co, a leading consultancy reported that Finland, Korea, Singapore were amongst the top performing countries in schools education. As for the factors; amongst several ranging from policy, communities, practice, infrastructure to rewards & compensations responsible for good showing, the report concluded thus: The experience of these top school systems suggests that three things matter most: 1. Getting the right people to become teachers 2. Developing them into effective instructors and 3. Ensuring that the system is able to deliver the possible instruction for every child. This almost tasks us with redefining and reinventing the teacher, who at the very least must be committed, competent and compassionate. Most teachers view teaching as a subsidiary part-time vocation, working half days and remaining confined to the text book. Poor compensation, bleak career progression, lack of challenge and recognition are amongst several reasons why teaching does not attract the best of the university graduates. Confounded further by the grossly underperforming B.Ed, a teacher preparation professional program, India continues to struggle with pre-service and inservice professional development with pathetic results. The last two CTET [Central Teacher Eligbility Tests] and state level TET showed that a mere 7% of the B.Ed qualified teachers were able to clear the test. Undoubtedly, we face formidable challenges in the area of policy and practice. The need for systemic reforms is urgent. McKinsey report concludes: on capacity building and empowerment such that teacher could devise strategies, build plans and use tools for effective transactions in their classrooms. TeacherSITY noticed a marked preference for 'notes' and readymade templates that could be used in their classrooms without having to create their own. Despite exhortations that there could be several ways of doing the right things, teachers wanted trainers to tell them just one right way to teach, thus avoiding the necessary rigor! Teachers cannot foster creativity & innovation unless they have it all themselves? - TeacherSITY finally concluded that it was a challenge of a culture shift more than any training, capacity building or empowerment. Preservice or In service training must necessarily comprise of not just skills and competencies, but more importantly of the right attitudes and perceptions of teaching as a profession. It must aim at building compassionate teachers deeply interested in their pupils, competent and innovative enough to recreate content beyond the text books, relevant to the learner and in sync with the environment, use multiple and appropriate strategies to engage the learner, develop a corrective, instead of punitive approach in dealing with disruptive behavior, know what and how of assessment & evaluation, instead of being judgmental use every assessment opportunity to benchmark learning and charter learning course thereon. Teachers must understand and appreciate that they are undisputed leaders in their classrooms. As Haim Ginott, a celebrated Jew teacher notes in his famous book, 'Between Teacher and Child'; "I've come to the frightening conclusion that I am the decisive element in the classroom. It's my daily mood that makes the weather. As a teacher, I possess tremendous power to make a child's life miserable or joyous. I can be a tool of torture or an instrument of inspiration. I can humiliate or humor, hurt or heal. In all situations, it is my response that decides whether a crisis will be escalated or de-escalated and a child humanized or de-humanized." The next time the parents go looking for a 'good1 school, they must look for teachers, knowledgeable, creative & innovative, compassionate & humane, understanding & appreciative, instead of palatial buildings or air-conditioned classrooms. It is these early years spent at school that makes children what they finally become in their lives - private and professional.
- The writer is a leading educationist, Founder, SelaQui International School and Delhi Public School, Gha^iabad

developing strong processes for selecting and training teachers, paying good starting compensation, and carefully managing the status of the teaching professions. Above all, the top performing systems demonstrate that the quality of an education system depends ultimately on the quality of its teachers.1
Like any other professional, teachers need to look at their vocation as a demanding engagement on a full time basis and that requires them not only to continuously update themselves on content and pedagogy of not just the subject they teach, but all other subjects, that integrated learning may demand. Teachers are no longer looked upon as mere pedagogues; they are friends, guides, mentor and above all, role models and leaders. The new National Curriculum Framework expects teachers to switch to activity based teaching, project based & integrated learning, fostering attitudes and imbibing values. But is it happening yet? Does our crowded syllabus provide for enough time and space for even the willing teachers to do that? Is'nt there information overload already? Isn't all our assessment and evaluation oriented towards information recall? Does our pre-service teacher preparation and in-service professional development geared towards creating empowered teachers? And above all, are we getting the right kind of people to become teachers? In a pioneering effort, TeacherSITY, a Delhi based organization conducted empowerment training for more than 3,500 teachers across the country. The training design based on teacher diversity, focused

1--

Academic Excellence ? 1 Holistic Development?..,or Both!
ADMISSIONS: For Gurukul IIT-ians PACE Program admissions are accepted in Class XI only through an Admission Test. For Gurukul CCU Program admissions are accepted in class XI through an Admission Test. f%Aftl

*JjyuS

SelaQui ^Ss International School
DEHRADUN

School with A Purpose

'*$}

For further Details/Admissions to any of the programs visit: www.selaqui.org or contact office: Delhi: 011 4734 2000; Dehradun: 0135 305 1000, Cell: 09873743433 / 09927000585

FOCOS

rtOH

By Shantanu Prakash

On-going professional development is the key ingredient in the overall success of technology-driven education in classrooms. Training the teachers in technology and retraining them in delivering effective content with the help of that technology is a prerequisite for effective teachinglearning in schools today

T

he effects of the digital revolution will be felt nowhere more than in education, as we prepare the first wired generation in the history of mankind. If it has taken time for the impact of this paradigm shift to register, it is only for the years it takes to fully educate a child and the lacuna in rolling out the technology apparatus to the entire population of children, and therefore schools, at one go. However, the critical link in the entire process is the Teacher, who must first be made proficient in its use and practice before it can be made useful for students. This is where a significant challenge faces us for it requires a serious modification in established systems of While the concept of technology in education is not so new anymore, its adoption in India by schools of all types still is. Interestingly, even in developed

141

initiative TH 6OOD SCHOOL 6UiDБ A fact-file on Progressive Schools

FOCUS
digital style requires a huge mindset change for teachers. Getting teachers' buy-in to use technology for imparting learning is important and not so easy at the same time. While younger teachers might find it easier to transition to technology-based teaching and using digital tools, it may not be so for the more mature teachers who have been using the conventional teaching methods for years. A lot of them in India may have never even used a computer so expecting them to adopt digital tools overnight will not happen. This doesn't mean the teachers lack the will or skill to take up technologybased teaching. It simply means that as it happens with any new product or service, there will be innovators, early adopters as well as laggards. At the same time, preparing six million teachers across the country for technology-based teaching is no mean task. It also means the solution can't be one-size-fits-all. It has to be a gradual, step-bystep approach of: и Building awareness about technology and how it can benefit teachers as well as students, и Generating an interest about the various types of digital tools so that teachers seek more information about them, making them more familiar and comfortable with technology, и Evaluating digital tools, their features, pedagogy, and associated content to understand how it can benefit the teaching and learning processes. This will require a trial-run on using the digital products in a real-life school setting by involving teachers, students and parents, и And finally, training the teachers professionally to get them hands-on with digital tools so that one, they become comfortable with technology, and two, they can use it most effectively to impart learning. A number of educational companies, NGOs and government organizations have launched teachertraining programs for technology adoption. These countries like the United States, technology trainings go far beyond telling teachers how to adoption by schools is not so ubiquitous. While they switch a tablet on/off or what its features and have progressed beyond the question of how, India applications are. These trainings cover more is still grappling with it. On one hand is the complicated things like behavioural changes and apparent huge cost of installing technology in the challenges that teachers face in adapting to classrooms, on the other is training the most digitized methods of teaching. important element in this whole chain - the The Golden Triangle approach - Involving Teachers, teachers - on integrating technology in their Technology and Students Equally teaching process and imparting it successfully to A thorough and consistent exposure of teachers to students. The former is being covered to a large technological devices and how they can be used in extent by education companies as most of them delivering instruction is essential in building work on the build-own-operate-transfer model. The effective pedagogical practices. Educomp's Golden latter requires a lot more than just addressing the Triangle approach is where the technology, teacher financials. and student, all three are equally involved in the Training the trainer... process of imparting and receiving education. It is a Transitioning from a conventional chalkboardsetup where the teacher learns to exhaust teaching style of teaching to the technology-oriented technology efficiently in designing lessons that embrace all kinds of learners. As an outcome to such a training teachers become proficient not only with technology but also with tools on how to deliver technology centric lessons and make full use of the technology tools in the school. Such training is not long-drawn process and can be done in about a month . It is effective only if followed by continuous technical support to teachers to help them with their daily classroom requirements and challenges. Virtual support in the form of networking sites, discussion groups, online training modules, media broadcasts, email communities, etc, is equally important for 24x7 learning and training. Regular access to the equipment that they will utilize in classrooms is also a must. On their part, teachers have to make efforts to stay connected and interact more with their students to be able to gauge their needs better and hence design more effective technology-based teaching sessions. Educomp has partnered with numerous corporates and NGOs to implement top-class teacher-training projects to prepare educators and make them proficient in integrating technology in classrooms. Our teacher-training workshops empower teachers by imparting them skills in areas like enquiry-based learning, building problem solving skills among students, creative thinking, and effective communication and assessment strategies. It trains them in things like lesson planning, managing environment and time and motivating students. We have exclusive teacher training centers that are located in over 20 locations in India. These centers provide technology training to over 140,000 teachers in India and are working extensively with the Ministry of Human Resource Development for initiating teacher training projects in urban and rural schools across the country. We have also worked with the Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti and Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan. The mission is to equip teachers with latest technology and help them effectively implement instructional strategies that can cater to different needs of diverse set of learners so that they can learn better. On an average, a school can factor in for about 20% of its hardware and software cost for teacher training over the life of the usage of the equipment and software . It may appear to be quite a bit initially, but most educational companies build in this cost as part of the overall project. It is important to understand that all initiatives and expenditure by a school or educational institution can go waste if there are no trained teachers. Without training the trainer, imparting technologybased learning in classrooms can be nothing more than a mere fantasy, something like purchasing a car without knowing how to drive.
The writer is the CMD, Educomp Solutions Ltd.

TH GOOD SCHOOL 6UiDБ A fact-file on Progressive Schools

AnimPACTnitlatlve|15

Changin Chansin Scno
AN EVOLVING CONCEPT OF THE GOOD SCHO
Education is the constructive, consistent and compelling values around which personal as well as social lit important part of the mission learners' competence. Educatio

" I
^WHl^^dtt: -.*Ф?

I By I

иj^im^wjir

he fundamental principle is to inculcate values of honesty, compassion and respect along with academic success. As education policies move from an emphasis on process to a stronger emphasis on the results of the education processes, learning outcomes have come to be seen as an essential feature of a good school. Responsibility is a notion which has become a moral cornerstone of our times and a central concern in every society. Citizenship and human rights education are among society's strongest defences against the rise of violence, discrimination and intolerance. Hence introducing teaching methods that stimulate the development of critical thinking and problem solving skills in students, renovating schools to provide better learning environments, and expanding access to computer and internet technologies is of paramount importance. Enrichment programmes for the teaching faculty would keep them abreast of the latest pedagogic practices that underpin holistic education. The good school provides the most amicable

ambience for all its students so that they effortlessly blend into the intricacies and complexities of an adult life, graduating from the innocent and unquestioning portals of childhood to become 'the doubters'and therefore the discovery and invention agents of their times. Developing the capacity and courage to face realities and challenges is yet another mission on which modern schools have embarked. Leadership and learning are indispensible to each other. Character training is fostered by the environment we create and opportunities we offer. Discipline, I believe, must be based on example and self control. Students should be given the opportunity to handle responsibilities and make decisions. In order to accomplish this, conduct standards must be clearly laid down and students be helped to set goals for improvement. In an age when leisure is recognized as essential for development, its good use is an indication of good education. Thus it is a compelling reason for each school to offer structured sports programme and spirit building co curricular activities to encourage pursuit of excellence. Knowledge by itself has no value; it is like a dictionary filled with words. It is fortunate that a modern day parent seeks a 'school' that imparts 'real education'- an institution that guarantees a safe and secure environment to its upcoming pioneers so as to facilitate and guide their growth and progress in life as they march confidently and gallantly towards achieving their lofty goals and accomplishing their preferred future aspirations. The good school fosters and refines the innate qualities of each child so as to fashion out an ideal human being, capable and willing to play his part for betterment of human race-a global citizen.
- The writer is the Principal of Kotbfin ]nk'rnatio}uil School, l\oid{i

16 | AnimPACTnitiaiive THБ 6OOD SCHOOL 6t>iDБ A fact-file on Progressive Schools

GURU NANAK FIFTH CENTENARY SCHOOL

COME IN TO LEARN GO OUT TO SERVE
ay fou will find !FCS fun, Hear i|r to be, to you and for life.

Located in the beautiful hills of and and to you

the

of E in a

Its

As

the
rs ago S. Mehtab Singh felt that an essential growth to the community could come only through quality education and also realizing, that it had to be at an affordable cost and thus be available to all sections of society. He felt that every man and woman should accept individual responsibility for the survival of all. He set about bringing up Schools, where curriculums were designed, to develop abilities and skills, (rather than memories) in children. S. Mehtab Singh and Sardarni Jasbir Kaur laid emphasis on self-less service, rendered in a spirit of total devotion to the Guru (in whose sacred name the School is) and the True Lord. They enrolled the whole family and who all adorn the annals of the 'Intellectual Heritage', with their dedicated and pro-active beings. S. Mehtab Singh

Chairman

was an M.A. Economics from the Forman Christian College of Lahore and was selected for a fellowship at the London School of Economics. He conceptualized and actualized the mission of setting up quality meccas of education, and was the vision behind the setting up of Public Schools in the Sikh community besides Public Schools in Delhi, Hansi, Kota, Dehradun, etc. He shaped his vision with the spiritual leaders of his time and the outcome of which is the School at Bathinda, the Engineering College at Malout, the College of Nursing at Ludhiana and the Home for the Aged at Delhi. Sardarni Jasbir Kaur was a Graduate and Gyani from Rawalpindi and was a woman with a focused purpose and a doer and much attached to the traditions and richness of Sikh culture and the Guru's thoughts. She inculcated a rich heritage of the Guru's thoughts in her family and which has helped in continuing their vision. The nucleus of all other schools of Mussoorie with its palatial buildings, extensive grounds, highly qualified staff & brilliant achievements, in the field of education & sports, houses the girls school and junior section (boys upto classs III) in Shangri-La estate & boys in the Vincent Hill campus. The school provides state of'd' art facilities. Be it the infrastructures modern amenities, e-class rooms, resource centers, catering or entertainment. Today, the Schools are chaired by S. Jaspal Singh, Chairman, who is ably assisted by Members of the Governing body. The academic direction is well supported by Sardarni Amrit Kaur Sabhharwal, a qualified and highly experienced academician, Sardarni Jasleen Kaur, Sardarni Jaswinder Kaur, Sardarni Gurvinder Kaur, Mr. M.PSingh, Mr. Amarpal Singh Sabharwal, Mr. IP Singh Merita and a Honorary Advisory Body - all leading scholars, who are leaders in their field, including Mr. Tarlochan Singh, Ex-Member of Parliament. GNFCS today devises new curriculums to teach concepts and not only subjects and builds the curriculum around three core concepts of: Awareness, Honesty Responsibility. It is endeavoured to learn how to get along, become tolerant, not to hurt others and to see others as equal. GNFCS also endeavours to bring around the quality of believing in yourself and walking in dignity. We endeavour to teach what it means to be honest; we teach what it is to be responsible; we teach what it means to be aware of other people's feelings and respectful of other people's path. The Faculty is motivated to prepare a value-based curriculum and the wealth is in the question and not in the answer. Counseling effort is provided along with the parents. As a primary rule - in creating the child's system of values and to encourage students from the earliest age, until the end of formal education, to aspire such values and to learn how to use them, apply them, function like them and yes, even to question them. One of the most difficult decisions that all parents have to take is to select the right School for their Child.

The parents envisage a future and send their child to the School of their choice. No other social institution, perhaps, is bound by, or burdened with such responsibility as a School is. We of the Guru Nanak Fifth Centenary School, are conscious of and alive to our responsibility, towards the children, whose education has been entrusted to us. We are thankful to God, for having allowed us to dwell here in an environment that is most salubrious. We are fortunate to have spacious dormitories with modern facilities, bright big dining halls, well-lit and airy classrooms, well equipped laboratories and libraries, spacious playing fields and big covered gymnasiums. We are grateful to Him for having given us, all that we need to keep the children healthy and happy. Imparting education to every child under our charge, is the duty, that we owe to our God and Guru. We train him for a future, that yields no scope for uncertainties. Inculcating an aesthetic sense, a sharp common sense, an enlightened outlook in life and a desire to attain near perfection in everything that a CENTONIAN has to take up, is our constant endeavor. We train him to be a successful man of the world, without forgetting His mercies. We teach him never to be oblivious to his duties, as a human being. We remind him never to lose grace in defeat and always to be magnanimous in victory. It might sound idealistic. Yet, education devoid of idealism, is sure to lose something, which this world and mankind need. We dedicate ourselves to all this and remind ourselves of Rudyard Kipling's words, that shall always remain refreshingly relevant "Of all things in the world, there is nothing, always, excepting a good mother, so worthy of honor as a good school". We work in partnership with the staff & make it our responsibility to ensure that our school is a happy environment, in which children can work and play. We aim for highest achievement in establishing a solid base for the preparation of a useful adult life. We perform a vital function in developing expectations and capabilities, from the earliest age.

-m-

*\ft*KV;

CURRICULUM

The GNFCS prepares boys and girls, in accordance with the 10+2 formula, for School education; for the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (10year course) examination and the Indian School Certificate (12-year course) examination, conducted by the Council, for the Indian School Certificate Examination, New Delhi. These certificates are recognized by the central and state governments in India, and by almost all the universities, and for the purpose of Public Service Commission, examinations and entrance to the universities. The school is also a Cambridge International Centre and conducts the international General Certificate of Secondary Education [IGCSE] administrated by the University of Cambridge, Local Examinations Syndicate- a two year course taken by students in over one hundred and sixty countries. English is the medium of instruction and every student is expected to acquire accuracy and fluency in the language. Other subjects taught are: English Literature, Punjabi, Hindi, History, Geography, Economics, Commerce, Structure of Modern Governments, Art, Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Mathematics, Computer Science, Music etc. For girls, special classes in Home Science, Interior Decoration, Home Economics, Needle Work and Dress Making are arranged, Music (vocal and instrumental) is taught, both as a subject and as a hobby. While the play-way method of teaching is adopted in the Elementary School, stress is laid on written work, in higher classes, by paying individual attention to each child. Computer education is compulsory for the Primary to the Senior School and both theory and practical exposure is provided in the well-equipped Multi Media Labs, by a specialized faculty.

GNFCS AIMS
To impart a broad-based education to boys and girls, so as to enable them, to become worthf and dynamic lenders; able to make a ysefyl contribution, to the changing conditions, of this technologically advancing world. To dewelop the physical, intellectual, cultural ond spiritual aspects of child's personality, so as to inculcate, sobering, practical and aesthetic sense, in order that he/she may the life of a successful and worthy citiien. Particular ottention is paid to the ethical and moral training of the students, in an endeavour, to develop in them a sense of initiative ond responsibility; to tench them the value of social service, self-discipline, self-reliance; punctuality, deonliness, loyalty, politeness, respect to seniors, courtesy to servants, and the importance of games, physical and sportsmanship, while at work and play. The School aims at producing disciplined students, educated in mind, body and spirit and hence, best suited to serve their motherland ond best fitted, to lead others by their example. To encourage learning by providing a supportive environment for all religions, with Sikh values as central to the ethos of the school & its teachings, in profiding an awareness to develop "Faith" & to cultivate the foundation of mutual respect & responsibility.

DEBATE DANCE DRAMA The School nurtures the hidden talents individually and collectively and our forte is Debates in both Hindi and English and GNFCS has brought laurels in both local and State levels. All students are encouraged to participate in hikes and excursions, debates, dramas, declamations and recitations. Arrangements are made for pursuit of hobbies and crafts such as Painting, Carpentry, Electronics, Paper Cutting, Gardening, Photography, Book binding, Clay modeling and the Study of trees, plants, birds, and insects. Instruction in needlework and knitting is also provided for girls. COMMUNITY SERVICE BAL VIDYA MANDIR - A Noble Beginning Located at Wimbeldon Estate between Vincent Hill and Shangri-la. The Guru Nanak Bal Vidya Mandir was founded in 1992 by the GNFC School Society. It is an English medium primary school, for the less privileged children. LIVING IN THE BOARDING Living in the Boarding House is under the strict and close supervision of the Housemaster/Housemistress, assisted by matrons and supervisors. HEALING HOUSE Well-equipped infirmaries are provided in both the campuses with 15 to 25 beds. Resident and experienced Nurses are available with visiting Doctors and Dental surgeons FOOD The Schools run independent messes and where, high quality, tasty and nutritious vegetarian food is cooked and served. RELIGIOUSNESS The GNFCS is a Sikh School. One of our chief aims is the development of character, as taught by the Ten Masters. Sikh history, traditions, culture, the Sikh way of life and Gurbani are taught to the students. In the morning, the Sikh students recite JAPUJI and pay homage to Guru Granth Sahib. At the morning Assembly, led by the School choir, sacred hymns are sung daily. In the evening, SODAR REHRAS is recited followed by ARADAS and HUKAM. On Sundays, special congregations are arranged. All historical days, Gurupurbs, Hindu, Muslim and Christian festivals, are celebrated and their significance and relevance in life explained. GURU NANAK FIFTH CENTENARY SCHOOL, MUSSOORIE
Vincent Hill / Shangri - La S. Mehtab Singh Road, Mussoorie 248179 (Uttarakhand), India Phone: 0135-2631621, 011-23277725/35,23288884/6. Website: www.gnfcschool.com Email: gnfcs_sh@gnfcssociety.com

RADIO KHUSHI 90.4 FM
"Radio Khushi" 90.4 F.JVL, GNFCS's own Community Radio Station is the first in the region of Uttarakhand. ft has given wings to the dreams of many students to reach out to the masses. Radio khushi provides the young, energetic enthusiasts of GNFCS a platform to not only explore their talent but, also to prove their skills firstly themselves & then to the masses around.. Through this Unique medium they get a chance to meet the leading Professionals, entrepreneurs, responsible citizens of the Community around, not to forget getting a chance to connect with the world, the society they live in.... Young enthusiasts... get a chance to connect with the community around.., & today not just voice their opinion on the matters of the community they live in but, have become the voice of the masses....

FOCUS EDUCAfioH

About Multiplexes and Boarding- Schools
Late 80's and through the closing of 20* century, the conventional cinema hall was replaced by the televison and with the dawn of the 21st century the cinema hall has reincarnated in new shape & substance - the multiplex. Like the television in drawing rooms, good and viable private schools have mushroomed ail across the country. They may not quite match the holistic development model of Boarding Schools, but provide enough of an academic rigour for students to connect with life beyond school.

T

he conventional boarding schools are in the midst of a cinematic metamorphosis. They are no longer the preferred options, unless of course the parents and children have some compelling reasons and there could be several. But, they surely are not the preferred scholastic destinations. And as the race hots up and competition stiffens, the performance and success at the board examinations or NT JEE has become more important than the pursuit of knowledge. The schooling has become more focused; its purpose shifting from

preparation for life to success at the school end entrance examinations - connecting with higher education. It is move away from Learning to 'Be1 to Learning to 'Become1. Education has thus come to mean, academic performance to the exclusion of its other essential constituents; skills, attitudes and values, it runs contrary to the very macro design of education wherein education and success, in life & profession, are co-extensive and without these three, schooling could well be half-baked. At another level, the new phenomenon; the withering of joint family and emergence of nuclear

family, gender issues, fragile marriages, broken homes or with both parents working, especially in the metros, the children are not able to get enough attention during their most formative and adolescent years. The high levels of pollution and near absence of any physical and sporting infrastructure in the new age day schools, the city children miss out enormously on the healthy mind in a healthy body opportunity. Obesity amongst children would soon be a common infliction. Distractions of living in a city draws most children astray from their fundamental goal of preparing for life through school years.

L GUifrE A fact-file on Progressive S

FOCUS Just as the multiplexes, this then, is a huge opportunity of boarding schools to reinvent themselves and re-position themselves. Given their quality infrastructure and support systems they could offer high quality academics in addition to the conventional 'holistic development' model.
Chairman emeritus Infosys, NR Narayana Murthy's, address at the 'Pan III' summit in New York in October 2011, clearly underlined the deterioration of quality of students entering Indian Institutes of Technology [Ills]. He said the majority of the students fare poorly at jobs and global institutions of higher education. He also lamented the poor English speaking and social skills of a majority of I IT students, "An IITian has to be a global citizen and must understand where the globe is going," he added. These remarks in the midst of the current debate sparked a nationwide response around improving student quality in terms of knowledge & understanding, life skills, attitudes and ethical values. It finally culminated in the T Ramasami committee report, recommending to the government of India, a clutch of changes in the design and conduct of the JEE. The report was examined at several levels and prompted changes in IIT entrance examinations effective 2013. The focus is back on the school, away from the standalone coaching & test-prep shops. And the boarding schools are best positioned to prepare high quality students for IITs and like institutions. As a top-line boarding school; Coeducational and International, in Dehradun has seized the initiative of the being first boarding school to offer test preparation for IIT-JEE. "It has combined the best of academic rigour, leveraging the best coaching institutes with the best of pastoral and personal care environments of the boarding schools and hopes to prepare the best of citizens and professionals for tomorrow's world", says Major General Basant Singh, the vice chairman of the SelaQui International School at Dehradun. It also offers high quality pastoral life, where students groom and develop; spiritually, intellectually, academically and physically, in addition to test preparation for admissions to eminent institutes offering undergraduate programs in engineering, law, accountancy and management. Adds the Headmaster, Mr. Rakesh Tomar. The competition extends beyond the sciences to Law, Liberal Arts, Commerce & Accountancy too. The National Law Universities, set up by almost every state demand a minimum qualifying level. Colleges like Shri Ram College of Commerce [SRCC] or the new program for preparation of chartered accounts under the The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. Even in the field of competition sports, boarding schools have an edge over the day schools. I have come across students wanting to play tennis, cricket or any other game, traveling several hours a day to get some coaching and practice. Just consider the time loss in long commutes! What if the boarding schools can provide all of the sporting facilities under one roof? It might help create champions that India has yearned for. The sports associations, governments could come together, pool resources and convert some of the best boarding schools with rich sports infrastructure to become nurseries for future champions. While it may be re-invention opportunity for boarding schools, the days schools could well integrate the pastoral practices building life skills and extending school hours beyond the academic program to develop all of what the boarding schools can deliver. The issue is not one of comparative merit or who would survive. The opportunity is to learn for a variety of experience and pool them all together to build a generation of competent and committed learners. And finally, like the multiplexes, the boarding schools can bounce back as Centers of Excellence and 'Schools with a Purpose'.

- By Om Pathak

flnljTlP

CTiniUaihe THE GfW> SCHOOL 6WOБ A fact-fill on Progressive Schools

\a

By Shalini Nambiar

Ф

Schools
India has a large range of Internationa! schools and some schools have been specifically designed to cater to the Expatriate students or the Indian students who return being born and experienced some years of education abroad. These students face a lot of challenges. The academic challenge faced by international students can be much greater than that of their peers. Confronted with academic change, culture shock, and homesickness, these students
can struggle to adjust to their new

surroundings, aiding strain to an otherwise difficult life transition.
26 I

tudents can also face problems when adjusting to new expectations in their academic settles. Schools overseas may have different expectations for homework, deadlines, paper format, citations, average workload, or communication with the instructor. International students may find it difficult to take on more work or shorter deadlines than they experienced in their home countries. Though the move to a new country might seem a great experience at first, many expatriates have a hard time getting things done in the beginning adapting to their new life abroad. Among children who repatriate, whether or not they return to their previous town or city, curriculum rarely matches, courses may be taught in a different sequence, and students may find that they lack prerequisites for classes they are about to take. Other children find that they have already read the books on their reading list, or may be ahead in foreign language. Teachers at home may be threatened by their advanced levels of

S

knowledge or simply may not know how to teach a child who is out of step with his or her classmates. For high school students, meeting exit requirements for graduation may not be possible, or may require significant negotiation or manipulation. Most of the Expatriates feel that the so called word International is a misnomer and the focus is more on International Infrastructure rather than the quality of education. After the initial hiccups they all settle down and once the honeymoon period is over they have to face the real classroom challenges Jolene Walvis, whose kids study in a top International School in Gurgaon, The first challenges were mainly the foreign language that was spoken at school, but (strangely enough) also dealing with the heat and air conditioning (never experienced that before), teachers wearing saris, having guards, having breakfast, lunch, and an Indian snack. Bringing your own (heavy) schoolbag was a new experience for our children as well as wearing a school uniform.1

TH &OOD SCHOOL 6UiD A fact-file on Progressive Schools

FOCUS
I think the British and American schools are not very different here from what they are in the UK and America. The difference between Indian international schools and foreign international schools is (I think) that former place more emphasis on academic achievement and less on individual development.1 .India is on the brink of several changes and many private schools are moving towards what they call progressive education which entails more freedom to the child, independence and creativity is encouraged rather than rote learning but the challenge faced is the proper implementation of the same for which an intense training of the faculty is required. The challenges faced are many as shared by Uyen Waldon who relocated to Gurgaon from Sweden. The school uniform is a blessing! Not more fuss and fights in the morning regarding what to wear! The school here has so much better facilities and resources. The teachers are enthusiastic and engaging. The use of written school report even on as young children as in the pre-primary gives us parents a great insight in how the child is doing, not only academically but also socially, which is more important1. But theses expatriates say in one voice that in India children are often not allowed to do things because it makes their clothes dirty, they can break things, hurt themselves etc. When putting up a show or performance, the children are put aside in the name of perfection and the adults do all the planning and carrying out instead of involving the children, let them decide how the show should be etc. The focus here is more on the results rather than the efforts leading up to the results. A lot of these problems come from parents who seem to judge the school from how well and perfect the school shows and performances are rather than what part the kids have actually been taking'. They miss out the involvement of parents which is on a large scale abroad as In India we still believing closed door policy. This shift has to be there as we forget that parents are the partners in their child's education. Though they feel the faculty is warm and nice but- 'I think one of the differences in the Indian faculty and the ones in the US, is the 'I teach- you learn1 approach in India versus the let's learn together' approach in the US. This goes back to the way the way the teachers themselves have experienced education' says. Renu Ramakrishnan, who returned to India after living in the US for 21 years. Eric Jones is specially troubled by the lack of communication and transparency in schools. Vanita Konzelmann a working Expat mother wonders why in India we have holidays for each and every occasion, 'Frankly, it's very difficult to be a working Mom, with the number of holidays the school gives and many seemed unannounced' On a positive note, Gangsen Lee feels,' I feel that Curriculum and school education culture are different. However, since so many Indian students and teacher are in international schools, feeling of difference is not much.1 With the mushrooming of International schools we need to focus on not just the IB curriculum but paying attention to those small things which really matter and can make adjustment easier for an expatriate student.. .more parental involvement, focus on reaching out to that one child, bridging the language barrier, more transparency and more communication. Adjustment also becomes enjoyable and easier when schools provide facilities that these children were accustomed with .Sports like horse riding, swimming, gymnastics, track and field events, and golf that these schools offer engross students, enabling them to adjust quickly.

The writer is the Director of Excelsior American School, Gurgaon

TH GOO& SCHOOL 6UlO A fact-fite on Progress!

An Effective Learnin
By Dhriti Malhotra
sty-educational organisation. An. makes the cttW adept to'face f h e ~ ╗ , , s{i)Ф into, is what is required to make lea. concept basal 'skill developing currwiitg r .content based one, doubted up with'tBGteiegicat aishlano is the need of ite hour, i | Now ag& curriculum ncecii to go hand in hand with prt feodb^k to parents ^ncwvoivinf; them m the iearniog procf.sj. it fo-itw-; notiuФ a cios<; bond betoeor. narents, teachers and students but ai:>n ftnah'cs them tФ pragre-,:, a-. individuals andTOPS,vrth r;riai!?)iis;&i betier, -;:,:';:;

o c
m
CO H

O O

iSS
wdy^

,

,

:

Ф , - . - - > . , - H . H rni'iol!'-"1

warn inrougn lire as ir he has something new to learn."

are also key motive he students to be engrossed in the

CTnlliatluB ! 29 L

FOCUS EDUCAfioK

LU
O

DOOM PUBLIC SCHOOL

EDUCATION IS THE APPRENTICESHIP OF LIFE
Doon Public School - a hi-tech futuristic, numerouno school grooms each child academically, socially and spiritually, thus, turning out an ethical, confident, well-balanced citizen of the world. Being pioneers in digital learning, we provide a cuttingи.,;'.-?*, edge technology platform for our students and и believe that education can bring about a radical change in society.

a: a.

M.G.VASAN CHAIRMAN oon Public School is a co-educational; CBSE affiliated Senior Secondary School, celebrating its 35 years of service to the nation. . The school aims at imparting premium quality education through a holistic, scholastic and spiritual approach in its pursuit of excellence in all fields. The school provides a cutting edge technology platform to the students and enjoys a unique distinction of being the first school in India to have computer aided teaching and learning through Smart Assessment System, the digital Maths Lab, the first in India which facilitates students with new modern technologies in learning, verifying and visualizing mathematical concepts. The school also offers the latest educational technologies in the form of wi-fi enabled computer labs; a digital language lab which aims at enhancing the student's communication skills; a digital library with more than 18000 books online in addition to the existing library; a state-of-the art Biotechnology lab with the facility of tissue culture; a lecture theatre provided with interactive board and facility for video conferencing; the Digital Teaching System which

creates a culture of inquiry in the learners' minds and the Fashion Studies Workshop which trains the students in the theory and practice of garment manufacturing. The concept of Abacus and Vedic-Maths has made Maths easy and enables students to achieve a high standard of mental arithmetic. To broaden the outlook of the students, the reading habit and the book culture is also inculcated in them. The programme of social concern like the Mothers Empowerment for Educational Development (MEED), Rural Education Mission and Hope for Future have brought a change in the lives of many people. Global partnerships and exchange programmes have emphasised on building a world without boundaries, a world where people exist in symbiotic relation amidst amity, love and peace. The dedicated work of our competent teachers, innovative teaching methodologies and use of cutting edge technology platforms along with the support of the parents ensure that we are able to live upto our motto 'Excelsior'.
I am proud and privileged to lead and be a part of a spirited and dedicated team which has redefined school education. Our methodology and pedagogy of imparting holistic, high value education by combining judicious use of technology and moral values makes our students globally capable, competitive and efficient. We groom leaders, in every field to meet every challenge.

I N.V. SARAT CHANDRAN MANAGER

COMMITTED To EXCELLENCE
A ttitude is a little thing that makes big difference. The proficient L\m of individuals at Delhi Public School, Gautam Buddh Nagar JL Vlakes the process of teaching learning to the next level. It believes that the key to success lies in creating positive learning environments in which learners can actively learn through their strengths. The systems set in the school are par excellence and inspire inquisitiveness and spontaneity. School Principal Ms. Indira Kohli a seasoned professional wills to form a contemporary alliance between ethical values and the modern day education systems. She believes that education should be such that it inspires learning and not drill in the theoretical knowledge. The key to such success lies in creating positive learning environment in which learners can actively learn through their strengths and many kinds of intelligence. Set in the lush green, (10 acre) plot of land in a pollution-free environment. Delhi Public School, Gautam Buddh Nagar (Sector-132, Expressway) is a part of one of the largest chains of educational institutions in the world. The school building is fashioned keeping in mind the expediency of learners under our care. In the Pre-Primary section, all classrooms are air conditioned. Keeping in mind the personal hygiene of the young learners, classes Nursery to II have attached washrooms, supervised by a maid. Each class is a smart class fully equipped to keep the learners creatively engrossed in the lessons. To satiate the thirst for knowledge, the school has a well appointed library. To keep the learners active and fit sports facilities are provided. Medical checkups are a regular feature. The school has an ambulance too. In the coming times, the learners leaving the portals of this great institution would be revered as not only first class achievers but as spirited, self assured and evolved individuals.

DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOL, Gautam Buddh Nagar

At DPS emphasis is laid on each student to give individual opportunity to put forth their inherent talents. The aim is to provide a comprehensive system of education that will help develop learners to grow into well-groomed personalities.
30 I AnimPACTinlflaUve THБ 600D SCHOOL 6OiD A fact

FOCUS EDUCAfioK

ViDYA DEVI JINDAL SCHOOL, HISAR
The School is the brainchild of its founder father, Late Shri OP Jindal, the Steel King of India, a visionary and a philanthropist. In the shade of his benevolence, VDJS today has grown into a School with a global presence and is amongst the best known residential schools in the Country, A girl child at VDJS finds holistic education and grows into an balanced

V?

IHEAD OF SCHOOL

NANDITASAHU

idya Devi Jindal School, Hisar is a premier residential educational institution V for fo girls. The School was established in 1984 in sylvan surroundings, 150 Kms North West of New Delhi. The School is a member of many prestigious organizations such as the Round Square International Service, The Indian Public Schools Conference (IPSC), The National Progressive Schools Conference (NPSC), International Award for Young People and Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH). VDJS also participates in the activities of National Cadet Corps (NCC) and promotes the initiatives of the British Council. VDJS provides broad based and comprehensive education to girls from all across India and countries overseas. VDJS is an initiative of Corporate Social Responsibility of Jindal Group' one of the top Business Houses of India. VDJS was one amongst only; five Schools that were granted the International School Award by the British Council for the fitst time in 2004 and one in three Schools in the country which won the International School Award for the third time in 2012. The School, has had an on-going partnership with the Lancaster Girls Grammar School at Lancaster, UK which helps the students to participate in exciting

collaborative projects throughout the year. VDJS has also had academic/cultural exchange programmes with reputed schools in Germany, Canada, Australia, South Africa etc. VDJS has delivered excellent academic results. Board results this year for Class XII- 95.61% students secured distinction and 100% students passed with 1st Division. VDJS students have been Indian Public School Conference Hockey Champions for nine consecutive years. VDJS students also excel in Swimming, Skating and Taekwondo. The School is supported by an excellent trained faculty drawn from all corners of the country. Under the able guidance of its Chairperson, Mrs Deepikaa Jindal, the School has achieved a place on the international map. Her vision is to see each VDJS girl grow into a dignified lady who can face the world with grit and determination. The current Head of School, Nandita Sahu, an experienced educationist, took over this appointment in November 2011, and is wholly committed to carrying the vision of the founder with a progressive and modernistic approach. Her personal educational ethos endorses an evolving process of learning while imbibing changes which remain rooted in realties of culture and values. Established in 2005, Excelsior American School located in Gurgaon was envisaged as a different, distinct centre for learning. The school aims at giving education in its truest sense of word. Education that goes behind the confines of academics, moulding the child's personality, building up his moral character, instilling I a sense of responsibility, in .short helping children grow up into responsible citizens.

EXCELSIOR AMERICAN SCHOOL

SELF INSPIRED LEARNING
xcelsior American School, Gurgaon - a part of the chain of schools in Houston [Montessori School of Downtown] has initiated this process. Excelsior owes its genesis to the vision of its two main architects Ms. Rita- an eminent educationist and Mr. Hersh Kumar- a philanthropist and a passionate educator. The school strongly believes that curiosity, learning and developmental progression are inborn needs of children and early childhood education takes on new meaning when the child's natural curiosity is encouraged and rewarded. The school believes learning is a process in which each student discovers and constructs meaning from information and experience. The individual needs, background, and development level of each student serve as the starting point for all learning activities. The school follows the University of Cambridge IGCSE curriculum till Grade X and proposes to follow IB for class XI and XII in the coming year. "The IGCSE syllabus is broad-based and has a very strong stress on application-based learning. It lays emphasis on inculcating the spirit of enquiry. It teaches you to teach yourself as opposed to being taught. This approach is what makes it very special, not only for those planning to study abroad, but also for those who define education as the creation of an independent thinking mind", adds Mrs. Nambiar. In the Middle years the school offers CIPP [Cambridge International Primary

E

Program] thus enabling students to discover themselves. The school has been ranked amongst the top 30 International schools in India. The school also has a high academic standard. The faculty believes learning to be a process in which each student discovers and constructs meaning from information and experience. "Teachers at Excelsior teach more for understanding than just from the examination point of view. The classrooms are more experiential and collaborative so that every child learns deeply and meaningfully as we need to prepare children more for skills which they will use in their lives", says Mrs. Nambiar.

THБ 600D SCHOOL &UiDБ A fact-file on Progressive Schools AnlfTlPACTnitiame | 31

FOCUS

ame
t is evening time and eight years old Neha's mother Kirin tries to divert her wandering attention back to the books. "Read it carefully Neha. Put it down and then cram it!" Neha suddenly nods then in a sing -song manner mugs her lessons. This grim picture may be being played out in many households. Little Neha may just be one of the many students beginning to formulate an opinion that studies is the most boring activity! FUN AND GAMES? What exactly is fun and games applied to studying? It is a straightforward system of teaching lessons through puzzles, mazes, tricky observation games and drawing and colouring or even reconstructing the lesson through a pictorial blueprint. After reading a lesson the child looks forward to understanding the tutorial through this fashion. ByNitaMehta COME A LONG WAY... Change is always welcome! In the last decades education planners are sitting up and looking at the best ways to educate children. The pressures to do well in this

I

Initiative TH GOOD SCHOOL 6UiD A fact-file on P

for learning:
competitive environment are phenomenal. Children are dragged into the "do well or else..." syndrome by constant reminders from all quarters. There is no fun aspects left for any framework construing study time. Slowly this thought is changing. Suggestions are being made to base teaching through a fun and games methods RESEARCH SAYS.... In fact a 2007 study by Carnegie Mellon University's Psychology Department reported that math games played by young students increased their basic math abilities! Dr Sayyara Ansari leading child psychologist and counselor says, "activity" based studies give all an round development to a child. The reason being that, because of the use of full mental powers it gives a freshness to the child's outlook towards studies." DrVikas Taneja, senior pediatrician and child development expert says, "in the formative years of a child teaching should be done through fun and games. It is at this age children are using all five senses to absorb everything around them leading to better wisdom. If we allow the child to learn through a gaming activity supported lesson he develops reasoning, logic and the basis of his main intellect. Parents today must understand that stress through studies is the biggest damaging factor towards children's development. Let us face it parents want to control everything their child does! May it be their studies or even free time! Dance lessons, tennis etc all controlled! What they do not realize is that they are taking away free will from the child!" PRACTICAL SENSE... Practical knowledge goes a long way in assuring understanding. Experts view that if teaching a child about a tiger instead of teaching him verbally let him also plunge into the world of paints, crayons, and actually colour a tiger! Allow him to know more about the tiger through this fun and games route! THE OPINION.... We took this question to our readers and many animatedly agreed with this! Teachers in schools are now further depending on teaching children through fun methods. "It makes them sit jp and pay attention." Say most early education teachers. Geeta Chadha, school teacher, feels it is absolutely necessary to involve fun in teaching methods through structured activities. Although she adds this should be done for only specific age groups since as the classes get higher so does the syllabus-and this requires the more conventional approach whilst imparting knowledge. Karuna Shriram, a special educator feels, "Lessons should be taught through fun and games method whatever the class is! This is a brilliant way of registering lessons!" she says. "Sadly I believe most schools do not apply these methods and end up loading the method of mugging and cramming on to the poor children!" Puja Bakshi mother of two says "I used fun and games in studies when I introduced my children initially into the world of school and knowledge. My children thankfully began to believe school is fun and not the torture as some children unfortunately begin to imagine. As the children moved on to higher classes it was easier to reach out to them with more serious stuff!" Mini Chibber, a grandmother, now hunts only book shops to buy presents for her grand children. "They only want activity books. My daughter is happy since she feels that keeps them completely busy for some part of the day!" PREACH THE RIGHT WAY.... World over educators, government and even parents are debating on the best ways to Educate children, not only providing knowledge and information but also values and wisdom. HELP IS NEAR There are many publication houses who have committed themselves to publishing books that come with the motto 'books that enrich the mind". The array of titles range from non -fiction mythology stories, history stories and even fiction tales. Efforts are being made to introduce activity books that contain topical subjects included in school lessons. When my children were growing, I felt we needed books on tough topics made easy. Drawing from the well of our varied cultures the idea of making well researched, simple, colorful books on mythology came about. This is a win-win situation for both parents and children as the parents

THБ 600D SCHOOL &UiDБ A fact-file on Progressive Schools AnimPACTnitlatlve | 33

FOCUS EDUCATE

want children to gain this knowledge and because of the presentation, the children themselves pick up the books. Today I clearly see how important it is to make study time fun. Children have so many distractions. School, studying etc, falls on the wrong side of the line that demarcates interesting from boring! Take my grandson Aarav, I quite believe that teaching him his math lessons through a gaming process has actually helped him in doing mental math! Anurag Mehta, my son told me, "In my school years I learned through repeat and learn method! Also interesting books came with saintly messages or in your face moral tutoring! Even going to the book stores and picking up books meant thickly laced preachy books without any fun aspects! He feels "books should not only entertain children with their interesting narration and vivid illustrations but also inculcate practical wisdom and values in children to help them face day to day challenges of life! Even saying that sounds like we are presenting a lecturethe child today has awareness that is mind boggling!" On a more serious note, when listing themes for children's books, we always insist that make it brain involving interesting! We are now redoing our books into activity books. Our subjects are actually quite school book. The idea now is to

graduate to reading levels where the child has risen one rung higher from reading to understanding what he is reading! Activities like puzzles, games etc assure that!" Having said that, we have over these years realized that in India parents choose what their children should be reading. Especially the younger ones! Parents are conscious that idle reading is fine but some reading should educate the child along the way too. Our education systems demand academic brilliance and just by wishing it away it will not go away! Parents as I said with this in mind choose books that have some value with the children's ongoing school syllabus. Also most parents want to culturally enrich their off springs and look for such themes whilst book shopping. Nothing wrong with that! However as a publisher for children's books it is very important to present a child friendly book too! We at the publication after much market research touch on topics that parents will definitely pick-yet we also make sure it is extremely child friendly too! VISION TO TEXT Illustrations play a very major role in creating interest in children. Critics sometimes scoff at vivid illustrations calling them loud and garish. However

it is very important for children to connect visually to whatever they read. These should be applied to activity books as well. Story telling is an art that is changing its face with the times. Even read aloud stories have something unusual to offer, though the topics are common. The element of adding fun and grip into old plots make them interesting reads. More than anything, emerging interest in reading is known to come from a child reading a book with the help of an adult! So you see, bonding time as well as nurturing a reading habit develops by something as uncomplicated and as appealing as a read aloud story session! IN THE END.... The ditty 'rain, rain go away little Johnny wants to play1 can be altered to, 'study study go away little Johnny wants to play!1 In today's world, with all the stress and pressures heaped on our hapless growing youth, this just could be the new jingle. But all is not lost! The binding ropes of studies that anchor students to classrooms can change just by adding fun and games into the method of teaching lessons that are so important to learn and more than anything remember!
- The writer is renowned author of children book

34 I AnimPACTmmative THБ GOOD SCHOOL 6UiD A fact-file on Progressive Schools

FOCUS
01

z o o * 111

DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOL
Address Affiliated to Admissions Period B-l, Sector-132, Expressway, Gautam Buddh Nagar (Noida) To be affiliated with the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) September - March

-" MANAV RACHNA

MANAV RACHNA INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL
Address Affiliated to Admissions Period Phone No. Helpline No. Website Email 5E/1-A, B.R, Nil, Faridabad, Haryana Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) August - March +91 129 4198600 +91 129 4259000 www.mris.edu.in info@mris.edu. in

tt

Q < UJ QL

Phone No.
Website Email

+91 9654422222,9999999484
www.dps-gbn.org info@dps-gbn.org; admissions@dps-gbn.org

DOON PUBLIC SCHOOL
Address Affiliated to Admissions Period Phone No. Website Email B-2, Paschim Vihar, New Delhi -110063 Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) January-July Address

SelaQui

SELAQUI INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL
Chakrata Road, (near Pharma city), Selaqui, Dehradun, Uttarakhand +9199270 00585,0135 3051000 CISCE/IB(forXlandXII) Oct. - Mar. (for VI - X) & Oct. - Jun. (for XI, XII & IB) www.selaqui.org selaqui@selaqui.org

+919891999975, 25268686,42316890,
www.doonpublicschool.in doonpublic_school@yahoo.co.in, info@doonpublicschool.in

Phone No. Affiliated to Admissions Period Website Email

xcei-s
A P H t l l C H K ! (

░i EXCELSIOR AMERICAN SCHOOL
Sector 43, C-2 Block, Sushant Lok, Ph 1, Gurgaon, + 91124 4049342/4049343 International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE) January - July www.excelsioreducation.org info@excelsioreducation.org Address

V,Q7

^
Affiliated to Admissions Period Phone No. Website Email

LOTUS VALLEY INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL
Taj Expressway Road, Noida Sector 126, Noida-201301, Uttar Pradesh Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) Commences from the 1st week of September

Address Phone No. Affiliated to Admissions Period Website Email

+919910952225/9810891913
www.lotusvalley.com info@lotusvalley.com

GURU NANAK FIFTH CENTENARY SCHOOL, MUSSOORIE
Address Affiliated to Admissions Period Phone No Website Email Vincent Hill / Shangri - La S. Mehtab Singh Road, Mussoorie - 248179, Uttarakhand Indian Certificate of secondary education (ICSE) January - March Phone: +91-135-2631621,91-11-23277725 www.gnfcschool.com gnfcs_sh@gnfcssociety.com

^
Address Affiliated to Admissions Period Phone No. Website Email

VIDYAOEVIJINOAL SCHOOL
Delhi Road, Hisar-125005, Haryana, India Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) December - February

+911662281000,911662281001, 098964 19611
www.vdjs.edu.in admissions@vdjs.edu.in

KOTHARI INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL
Address Affiliated to Admissions Period Phone No. Website Email B-279, Sector 50, Noida 201301, Uttar Pradesh National Curriculum for England and the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) September - March Address Affiliated to Admissions Period Phone No. Website Email:

MAYOOR SCHOOL
Sector -126, Expressway, Noida Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) Commences from the first week of September

+ 91120 4618300,4618301
www.mayoornoida.net info@mayoornoida.net, mayoornoida@gmail.com

+91-120-4330844,4082430,4330877
www.kotharischool.edu.in info@kotharischool.edu.in

38 I AnimPACTnitiatlve TH-E GOOD SCHOOL 6UiD A fact-file on Progressive Schools _

as

m

Mizoram gearing up to excel in Sports

T

he Government of Mizoram announced Vision 2016: Rio to produce a maximum number of elite athletes to represent India in Rio 2016 Olympic Games. of Youth Affairs and Sports' PYKKA, rural up in a concerted environment. The rural talents in the muddy playfields with an aim of sports in Rio 2016.

From mud to world class playfields

Following the Ministry sports has been taken youths showcase their to reaching a pinnacle

To thoroughly tap the raw talents across the state, the Govt of Mizoram is taking steps to establish sports stadium in all the 8 districts. In fact, the Government has laid an artificial turf at Aizawl, the first of its kind in the North East. In addition to this, two other artificial turfs for football ground at Thuamluaia Mual, Lunglei and Rajiv Gandhi Stadium, Aizawl have already been laid. Artifial turfs for two hockey grounds at Thenzawl Women's Hockey Academy and Kawnpui Boys' Hockey Academy are underway. State of the Art Facility at Rajiv Gandhi Stadium Rajiv Gandhi Stadium equipped with an eight-lane athletic track being constructed at Mualpui, Aizawl will be quite conspicuous once the construction is finished. It has been designed to be the best in the whole of North East. Even before completion, the stadium hosted the 26th North East Games 2012. It is noteworthy to say that Mizoram was the over-all champion in this sporting event.

j

'.;.'.

SHRILALTHANHAWLA Hon'ble Chief Minister of Mizoram

imp enFeature

Sports Auditorium Construction of modern sports auditorium is underway in different districts of the state, wherein athletes can practice various sport disciplines like boxing, basketball, tennis, badminton etc. CATCH THEM YOUNG POLICY To excel in sports the Government of Mizoram is aware that talents must be tapped at a tender age. As a long term commitment, talent development programme has been initiated to harness accolades in sports by following a policy of 'Catch Them Young.1 Children aged between 6 to 12 years are given training in different sport disciplines not only by local and national coaches, but also by international coaches. Just within 3 years after the adoption of the policy, Mizoram is starting to reap its dividends for the investments made in sports. Achievement in Sports from 2008 to 2012 SI No LEVELS OF CHAMPIONSHIP 1. North East/ Regional Championship 2. 3. National Championship International Championship TOTAL GOLD SILVER BRONZE

ATTENTION FIFA!!! Young talents in Mizoram have caught FIFA's attention. Mizoram has been solely identified by FIFA to organise its Grassroot Football Programme. Young kids below the age of 12 years are given basic training by FIFA trainers. THE TORCH BEARERS With a population of just over 10 lakhs, Mizoram has produced outstanding young athletes in recent years who are recognised at the national level. Snookers: Lalrina Renthlei - National Junior Champion, who displayed a notable feat at his first world championship participation. Football: Lalrindika Ralte - East Bengal Midfielder who is known for his remarkable match winning performance and killer instincts on thefield. Tennis: Basil L. Khuma - Currently trained under a world renowned tennis coach Nick Bollettieri (IMG Academy, USA). A promising tennis player expected to take Indian tennis to new heights of excellence. Issued by Government of Mizoram.

219 303 14
536

195 263 15
473

182 335 30
547

atФte╗J ;

FOCUSBUSINESS

A
vjjjjj*^

,

INTALKWITH
DINESH PATIDAR CMD

I CREATE SOMETHING NEW
When the present CMD, Dinesh Patidar of Shakti Pumps (I) Ltd.joined the company in 1987, he had a dream of taking the company to the pinnacle of success. But he didn't know how to convert his dream into reality and how to go about to achieve this goal. He had even no idea that what were the challenges in the store waiting for him on his way. Despite ail he was determined and headstrong. Just one thing was very clear to his - "I will not stop, I will not go back and I will never lose/' He kept continuing his journey and finally after 25 years he proved himself as a successful self made businessmen and a visionary. Now, when he bob back, everything seems like a dream: "How it was difficult to fulfill his dream which was next to impossible". But, his hard work and dedication of rainbow and took him to newer of Excerpts from his astonishing journey:
Tell us something about your childhood. Where were you born and brought up? I was born in commercial capital of Madhya Pradesh. Since childhood I was more inclined towards business than studies. As my father was a businessman so I got an opportunity to understand the intricacies of business at an early age. Where did you get your education? I completed my schooling from Indore itself, and then moved to college for graduation but due to keen interest in business I decided to put extra hours to work which deprived me of enough time for study. In order to balance study and work I joined evening classes. I used to work for whole day in office extending full support to father in business. It was really tough time for me, but I accepted as a challenge and did my best. When and how your company Shakti Pumps started? My father, Shri. Manoharlal Ji Patidar started Shakti Pumps from a scratch way back in 1982 with a meager capital supported by bank finance. When did you join the company and how was your initial experience? I joined the company in 1987 with an intention to extend a helping hand to my father in the business. Like any other beginner, I also had to face a lot of problems and challenges. It was the time of license/quota raj where government controls were very strict. Doing business was not easy also due to inadequate capital support. But I didn't lose patience. More the troubles came on the way, more courage I gained and fought back. My will power and energy level was always higher than the difficulties I faced. My willpower and energy level came out always stronger than my prevailing difficulties. What was the biggest challenge in front of you when you joined the company? The biggest challenge was to create a talent pool with right people to leverage skills and talents to accomplish the tasks. I realized that forming a core team of professionals was not easy as you may think. I put all efforts to form a core team of reliable and hard working professionals and fostered an environment of team work. Now you have reached the height of success. How do you feel about your journey so far? In every business every day and every moment brings new challenges and opportunities. Unfortunately I had to face more challenges than opportunities. We did not have skilled workers and resources were limited too. Lack of technology support was another weakness. In those days, for even making a phone call AnimPZlCTn

from Pithampur to Indore, we had to book trunk calls. Farmers were not brand conscious and not aware of the quality and brand value and therefore selling a branded pump was tough especially at a time when the purchasing power of farmers was very poor. Now it gives us immense satisfaction that we have gone a long way dealing with all odds. Now we have 800+ employees with sprawling manufacturing facilities for various models of pumps and motors for diverse applications. Government rules and regulations were also a hurdle? In those days, the government permission was required to supply pumps for whatever sort of purposes and to get that permission was not very easy. It was not at all a practical idea and created lots of problems. The whole process was so slow that it took a long time to invent a new way and to do more innovative experiments with it. Any memorable experience which you would like to share with our readers? Yes, I do remember an incident. We were expanding our business and we had just started export of our products abroad. Exporting our products abroad was a matter of pride that time. One day a customer of Middle East landed at Indore Airport looking for our office. He reached the airport and asked for our address. A taxi driver from the airport called up and said there was a foreigner who was asking for our company's address. I am proud to state it was really a huge opportunity which has not only helped us to expand our export business, but also boosted our confidence level. After

that we achieved tremendous growth in export also. Who were your closest companions and dedicated workers in this journey of success? Only a good team of honest, hard working and dedicated workers can run a successful business enterprise. Whosoever was a part of this journey, directly or indirectly, has played a significant and admirable role in the success of our company. All of

them have been an important asset to the company. Among them, a couple of names deserved to be mentioned are Mr. B.R. Patidar and Mr. Ramesh Patidar. They remained so close to the company and are still part of the core management team. What is your policy for the employees and how do you make them work together as a team? I have built up relationship of trust with my

employees. I never behaves like a boss. Instead I am like a friend, a mentor and a colleague. I always appreciate them for their good work and never criticize on any of their mistakes. I urge them to learn from those mistakes. To make people work together and love their work place it's an essential thing to make the environment pleasant and happy. I do all possible efforts to assure this. I recognize every effort of my employees. I believe that every employee should get equal opportunity to participate in his/her respective area. I motivate them to maintain their physical, mental and intellectual health. I also try to do justice in terms their remuneration and rewards. Whom do you want to give the credit of your success? All the credit of my success goes to my employees. The company has reached to the height of success because of their dedication and hard work. They have only made it possible. What are fundamental elements to run a successful company? First of all, you should be a visionary. You should have a big dream in your heart. Then you should have a good team of honest, hard working and dedicated workers who can execute your decisions on the right time. Latest and modern technology is also an essential ingredient to develop a success and sustainable engineering product. Besides all these things, you should have enough courage and a positive approach that you will win.

W-

9.

AnimP CTn

QSOBHASARIA GROUP OF INSTITUTIONS

EMPIR
its no! an to start something from the scratch and take it to the top of success, Byt the of India's biggest hosiery companf Rupa & Co. has made it true. The tag line of is "Ye Aoram ks Msmla hsi". So with his constant dedication and work he has Rupa & Co, the biggest hosiery brand of indie. Today this company has 950 dealers and one lakh retailers across India, f he behind the success is full of adventures and struggles. Now Rupa & Co. is also giving its remarkable contribution in the field of education. is an interview of Mr. Prahtacf Agrawal, the chairman of the He is tailing the story of his success,
и At a very early age and with very limited resources you started this company. What was the inspiration behind? After completing my school education from Rajasta I did my graduation from City College, Kolkata. Then I took admission in Law simultaneously started helping my father in his business. My father has a small hosiery business. At that time hosiery industry was not very developed. Most of the brands were local and their quality was also not very good. I always wanted to do something new and different. So in 1957 with a business partner I started a manufacturing and trading company by the name of Binod Hosiery. It was my father's suggestion. Then while working, we realized that just manufacturing the good quality products was not enough. We need a brand name. Then we started this brand name - Rupa. After sometime as the business started growing, two of my brothers also joined the business. From that day we are working hard to build up this empire. All of have given our heart and soul to it. Precisely this journey must have not been easy. What were the challenges? What problems did you face in this process? The biggest challenge and problem on the way of any business, is to first of all prove your calibre. No one entertains and give chance to the newcomers easily. So the biggest challenge in front of us was to prove ourselves. Distributors were not ready to talk to us. Initial years were

ALKWI1M
RR.AGARWAL
Chairman

AnimP-CTn

i!

,

I FROM ZERO
full of difficulties. But we never gave up and eventually proved that our hard work and dedication were not a waste. After experiencing our work and product quality no one could say us- NO. After that journey towards success started and we never looked behind. At Initial stage we didn't have much money and resources. I myself used to travel to different cities to see and experience the market trends. I always used to travel in a general class. To stay in general ordinary hotels was the routine part of my life at that time. Many times I used to get fresh at the station only. That' was a challenging time. But for me my business was everything and for that I was ready to suffer up to any extend. Problems were negligible in front of my ambition. Was your business limited to Kolkata in early years? When did you started marketing all over the country? Yes, we had started from Kolkata. Kolkata's feedback was very good. Then we started expanding our business. First destinations were Bihar and UP Marketing and branding is the key of your company. How important do you think branding is for the success of any company? Branding is the key of a business. The good and reliable quality of the products is of course very important. But with the quality one should also focus on establishing the product as a big brand. Aishwarya Rai, Govinda, Saif All Khan, Sanjay Dutt and Hritik Roshan have been appeared in our advertisement. Rupa has many different products such as Frontline, Softline, Macroman series etc. All these are brands in itself. Big film stars have done your advertisement. Do you have any specific policy regarding advertisement? We do not have any policy as such. But advertisement and promotion are very important for any company. Advertisement and promotion played a very important and significant role in the success of our company. In 80s and 90s we were one of initial brands who took top models and film stars for promotion and advertisement. In 1990 Bollywood actress Aishwarya Rai did the advertisement of Rupa Softline and in the Year 1999 Govinda was the brand ambassador of Rupa company. Celina Jately and Koina Mitra had done our advertisement. We believe that the brand ambassador of a hosiery product should be a person who is very popular among masses who has reach to the large number of people. Now Rupa has become a public limited company. What are the changes that have taken place? Precisely many things have changed. Now whoever invested in our company becomes automatically a partner in the company and its our responsibly to take care of our investors and partners. We have decided to give 150 percent dividend return to our investors. Investors are the part of the company. We are with them in their good and bad times. But for our consumers nothing has changed. We are still a brand for them, making good quality products and taking care of their requirements. Consumers are very important for us. They trust on our quality products and in future we will try our best to enhance the quality. Globalization has opened a huge market. Not there are immense possibilities but at the same time the competition and challenges have

also become tough. What are your policies to fight in this hard competitive market? The growth of market and competition is same in the globalized world. But the door of opportunities is always open for them who work with honesty and dedication. We have established ourselves as a high quality product in the market. We have won the trust of our consumers. I believe that till the time we are working honestly, we will survive and grow, n Rupa Company not only did the business, earned profit but also returned it to the society. Tell us something about your corporate social responsibility? We take everything from the society. So it's our responsibility to return it to the society on a larger scale from where we have got it. As a corporate company and as a citizen of this country we have fundamental responsibilities. We have always fulfilled those responsibilities. In this process we have started a college in Rajasthan. The name of the college is Shobhasaria Engineering College. Apart from this college we are also attached to the Heritage Institute of Technology, the heritage school and Shri Shri Academy in Kolkata. We have always tried to do our best in social services. We are also working with Shankar Netralay and Eye Hospital in Kolkata. i What was the reason behind opening an engineering college? We opened an engineering college because only with education we can reach to the heights of success. Only then we can enter in new decade and only with the power of knowledge and education we can become the world power. There was a well thought idea behind starting an engineering college. The most we need today is education and especially the technical education. Technology plays a very important role in the success of any country. We want that large number of young population of our country can get access to the education. Good technical education should be available to everybody. We have the dream where every young person of this country would have access to good technical education. It's a small start. Now gradually the responsibilities of the company is shifting to the second generation. But now at this age also you seem to be so active, healthy and happy. You still travel a lot, roam around the world and take big responsibilities in the company. What's the secret of your success? I believe in myself. It was my belief only who took me from scratch to this height of success. I always had this trust that one day we will reach to this point. We will win the hearts of our consumers. One day we will be a big brand. We worked day and night. We saw good times and bad times. In bad times we never lost the hope. We continued our journey with this very belief inside that yes we can. We can ignore the dedication and hard work of each and every employee of this company. Everybody has given their heart and soul. Their dedication still inspires me to continue this journey. i What's the key of success? Vision and hard work. You really need to be honest towards your work and your product. Vision plays a very important role in the success of any company. Many people are hard worker, but in absence of vision you cannot see after a certain point.

FOCUS EISINESS

An inspiring growt history
*J C&ik' , ' , +

FIX B,i./tCHOOILS.(P).tTD

Better known as the makers of 'Bail Kolhu' Mustard Oil, Bareilly based company 'BL Agro Oils Ltd.' has demonstrated exceptional growth over the last decade and a half

T

he foundations of BL Agro Oils Ltd. dates back to pre-independence era when Kishan Lai Khandelwal and Bishan Lai Khandelwal started their commodity trading business. However, the business received a real boost only when a young Ghanshyam Khandelwal joined his Tau (uncle) and father in the year 1976. Soon he started expanding operations and in the year 1986 introduced branded mustard oil by the name of 'Bail Kolhu'. In 1999, the family business was c o n v e r t e d into a proper

organization and a company called BL Agro Oils Ltd. came into existence ('BL'being initials of Ghanshyam Khandelwal's father Bishan Lai). Since then, Ghanshyam Khandelwal, Managing Director of BL Agro Oils Ltd. has led a tremendous story of growth and success extracted strenuously from the seeds of passion, devotion and business ethics. "From the very beginning we have followed a simple business philosophy - to offer the purest possible edible oil to the consumer" says Khandelwal.

"The past years have witnessed many changes in our society, in people's living patterns and eating habits. We also have changed consistently with the changing times but our core philosophy still remains the same and that is to never compromise with the purity and overall quality of our oils." he adds. It seems that this philosophy has resulted into enormous trust, faith and brand value for BL Agro's products. It is a widely known fact in the industry that since its introduction, thousands of samples of Bail Kolhu Mustard

Oil have been lifted and inspected by the regulatory authorities, but not even a single sample has failed their tests. This is a real achievement for any edible oil

BL Agro is the most valued client of BOB Bareilly Region. They are banking with us since 2003 and therefore we have witnessed their many-fold top-line as well as bottom-line growth. The devotion and dedication of their management is exemplary and I feel it will soon take BL Agro to be among the top three companies of edible oil sector. R.K. Goyal
RM - Bareilly Region, Bank of Baroda brand and reflects on the c o m m i t m e n t a n d uncompromising attitude of company management. Today as one of North India's leading edible oil companies, BL Agro is engaged in Refining, Quality Control, Packaging and Marketing of many popular mustard, refined and other edible oil brands. Chronologically studying the journey of BL Agro, it is very evident that the company has operated dynamically throughout its life. The management seems to have farsighted the opportunities and invested consistently in capacity building and technological up-gradations. This strategy is working good for the company as is clear from the fact that in the course of just 14

years, BL Agro has enhanced its packing capacity to an astonishing 150 times. From a single room manual packaging unit in 1998 (situated in Madhobari area in Bareilly city) having a capacity of 5 TPD (Tonne per Day), the company grew to establish a state-of the-art s e m i - a u t o m a t i c p l a n t in Parsakhera industrial area on the outskirts of Bareilly. In 2005 this plant was commissioned with a capacity of 100 TPD which has since been enhanced to a whooping 750 TPD today. Spread on a sprawling 10000 sq. mtrs., the new plant also enabled BL Agro to set up its own refinery operations. The refining capacity that was just 50 TPD in 2005 grew to 150 TPD by 2009 and then to 300 TPD by 2012. For producing

иJ 1

undertook backward integration and set up its own consumables plant with matched capacity. With this the company started manufacturing pet bottles, jars, tins and other packaging material inhouse. To stick steadfast on its core philosophy of maintaining highest quality standards, BL Agro had established a state-ofthe-art Quality Control laboratory facility way back in 1998. Currently this laboratory is one of the largest and best-equipped in the entire country. Similarly the packing unit at BL Agro is one of the largest in India and the largest in UP with 750 tonne/day/shift capacity. Another major factor responsible for BL Agro's unparalleled growth is the fact that the multifold increase in production capacities was consistently matched by the increasing product demands - a fact that has been made possible by introducing aggressive distribution strategies and innovative marketing techniques.

Super Olien from Olien, the company is also setting up a separate 300 TPD capacity fractionation plant. The warehousing facilities of BL Agro are located next to an operational railway siding that is also used for transportation of company goods. The warehouse had a capacity of 6000 Tonnes in 2011. However, in the last one year the company has almost tripled the warehousing capacity to be at 16000 Tonnes today. To further boost its ambitious expansion plans, BL Agro

BL Agro has seamlessly transformed itself from nonsystematic culture to a professional corporate. The company not just adheres to tax compliance but it is also the highest tax payer in Bareilly. Vishal Arora Company's Chartered Accountant
And not surprisingly, the baton in these areas is held by the next Khandelwal generation. Executive Director at BL Agro,

rocus IUSINESS
BLAGRO OILS LTD. EMPLOYMENT GENERATION
Pur-e Per-fec-fTon

569

NO OF EMPLOYEE STAFF B NO OF EMPLOYEE LABOUR

478

467 445

367
328

130 88 25

и
2 0 0 5 0 6 2006-07 2 0 0 7 0 8 2 0 0 8 0 9 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12

BL Agro is the first such organisation in the entire region that uses railways to transport imported raw oils directly to its rail side facilities. Anil Chaudhary DGM Refinery Ashish Khandelwal states, "The c o m p a n y enjoys a c l e a r leadership position in most parts of Uttar Pradesh & Uttarakhand. In a short period, Bail Kolhu has also gained a substantial market share in Delhi NCR. With increasing demands, the distribution network keeps expanding day by day." "From time to time BL Agro Oils Ltd. carries out widespread promotional and consumer connect campaigns" says Richa Khandelwal Ravikar, Director-Marketing. "Idea is to continuously build upon the existing brand power. However the best promotion is our superior product quality and positive

consumer experiences" she adds. For a company on such rapid growth drive, it is very easy to get carried away in the winds of financial success. But at BL Agro the case is not so. Among the many corporate values that

BL A g r o w o r k s w i t h advanced Quality Control facilities. In fact with three Gas Chromatography systems, our laboratory is the largest and best equipped in entire Uttar Pradesh. At times we even go to external labs just to corroborate our own test results. Hari Mohan Verma Head - Quality Control Ghanshyam Khandelwal has instilled in his descendants as well as staff is one that 'success and growth do not mean much unless accompanied by trust and respect from the community'. Following his principles, BL Agro is today one of the most responsible corporate citizens also. As part of CSR initiatives, BL Agro provides opportunity to over 100 students from local educational institutes for conducting industrial training. The company is also very active in promoting art & culture in the

The growth has been very speedy in last few years. In fact, our company has had over 150 new recruits in last one year only. The working environment too is very professional here. Along with total statutory compliance, we do run various employee welfare and training schemes. Qadir Ahmed Head HR

BLAGRO OILS LTD. TURNOVER
,. PФ^'n m VALUE IN RS. CRORES
954.1658

354.0723 276.0412 111.1254 270.2696 m

421.2527 mm

87.0455 33.3482 1999-20 37.1401 2000-01 42.5708 2001-02 56.1247 2002-03 2003-04

75.7506

74.8066

I 111
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12

2004-05

2005-06

We are equipped with all modern machineries and technologies to produce edible oil that is superior on all quality parameters. Ram Babu Sharma GM Refinery region and keeps offering financial assistance for such activities. BL Agro Oils is also very sensitive towards environment

protection. Apart from having an effluent treatment plant with in the facility, using renewable fuel in the boiler, using Solar energy for small boilers as well as night lighting, the company also takes various environmental initiatives like organizing plantation drives from time to time. Exceptional success and growth without compromising on values and ethics has been the story of

With multiple crude oil sources, we are able to control the quality of our sourcing. Unlike other manufacturers, we are not bound to use own produce irrespective of the quality. Nagendra Singh Manager Operations BL Agro Oils Ltd., a story that will inspire many more new age entrepreneurs to come.

BLAGRO & INDIAN EDIBLE OIL ECONOMY
India is one of the world's largest edible oil economies with 15,000 oil mills, 689 solvent extraction units, 251 Vanaspati plants and over 1,000 refineries employing more than one million people. Total domestic oil produced during the year 2011 -12 (Nov-Oct) is 81.24 Lakh Tonnes Import of edible oil in India in the year 2011-12 (Nov-Oct) is pegged at approx 95 Lakh Tonnes India being deficient in oil has to import approx 54% of its consumption requirements India, for the year 2011-12, accounts for 8.05% of world's oil-seed production; 7.28% of world's oilseed crushing; 5.25% of world's oils production; 10.21% of world oil consumption; & 13.60% of world oil import Capacity utilization in 2011-12 increased due to higher production of oil-seeds; the processing of oil-seeds during 2011 -12 is reported at 150 Lakh Tonnes compared to 140 Lakh Tonnes during the previous year With steady growth in population and personal income, Indian per capita consumption of edible oil has been growing steadily
Source: COOIT, SEA 41st Annual Report 2011-12

