ELECTIONS 2012

HIMACHALPRADESH

WINNING HANDS DOWN
A 15% swing away from the ruling BJP saw the Congress romp to victory in the hills.

2012

BJP CONGRESS OTHERS

26

6

36

Total number of Assembly seats

68

2007

VIRBHADRAWINS CONGRESS LOSES
Congress trounces BJP in the polls but the real battle for leadership begins now
By Asit Jolly

VIRBHADRA SINGH CELEBRATES THE CONGRESS VICTORY IN HIMACHAL PRADESH
ANIL DAYAL

BJP CONGRESS OTHERS

41

4

23

BJP CONGRESS OTHERS

A
30

n incessant volley of celebratory firecrackers exploding outside Virbhadra Singh's home, the Holly Lodge, in Shimla on December 20 marked the revival of the Congress. The man responsible for single-handedly scripting this turnaround was found where he feels most at home: Right in the middle of the fireworks. The indomitable Raja of Bushair and five-time chief minister of Hima-

chal Pradesh, Virbhadra Singh, 78, romped home in style after a stunning victory over Chief Minister Prem Kumar Dhumal. BJP was hoping for a second term in office banking on a nationwide disillusionment with a UPA tainted by corruption. These are factors which worked against Congress in Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and even in Uttarakhand, where its victory in early 2012 was by a wafer-thin margin. Himachal has given the Congress its first decisive win this year. Dhumal had hoped that the allega-

tion of kickbacks during Virbhadra's tenure as Union steel minister would work against him. "People here know the charges against me are imaginary," Virbhadra said, adding with an `I-told-you-so' look. "I am an honest man of substance." Both Virbhadra and his son Vikramaditya, 22, wore their signature green-banded Himachali topis and pashmina mufflers, knotted casually under their identical Harris Tweed coats, and the veteran leader said, "I will need to get myself a big jharoo (broom) to sweep away

the deep rot in the administration." His government, he declared, will be an "aam aadmi ka sarkar (government of the common man)". Does that mean he will be chief minister yet again? Virbhadra is in no mood for a fresh controversy on the day he has won admittedly his toughest election. "There is a queue and I don't want to jump it," he said with a twinkle in his eye. "The decision on who will be chief minister lies with the (Congress) high command and I am a seasoned soldier of the party," he added, with the hint of a smirk. His rivals within the Congress insist Virbhadra Singh's march to the chief minister's office this time will not be the casual stroll it has been in the past. Former Himachal Congress chief Kaul Singh Thakur said, "Kaise

ban jayenge CM? Unke keh dene se kya hota hai. Faisla toh high command ne karna hai (How will he become CM? What he says does not matter. It will be the high command's decision)." Thakur hopes that his proximity to Union minister Anand Sharma will help him to the chief minister's office. Sources indicate that moves to scuttle Virbhadra's prospects were already underway, days before the results came in. Birender Singh, the AICC general secretary in charge of Himachal Pradesh, who is another Sharma loyalist, has made no secret of his intolerance for Virbhadra. He had held a meeting of party nominees in Delhi on December 16, ostensibly to discuss postal ballots. Party insiders say the exercise was designed to test their response to the notion of an alternative

leadership in the state. Another hopeful is the ailing Vidya Stokes, a Sonia Gandhi favourite. The anti-Virbhadra camp is planning to rake up the corruption charges against Virbhadra to prevent him from taking office. Even on victory day, Delhi's response was tellingly sluggish. "No, she (Sonia) hasn't called yet," Virbhadra told INDIA TODAY. "She will call. After all, the entire election campaign was conducted under her direction," he added. "The high command is aware the party would not have won half the seats it did, had Virbhadra Singh not been made PCC chief less than a month before the polls," said former minister Harsh Mahajan. He claimed that Rahul Gandhi repeatedly indicated that Virbhadra would be the chief minister if Congress won. Confident but careful, Virbhadra signalled he would not give in without a fight if denied the top job. "The people know me very well. This will be my sixth term as chief minister. This is only because people, even those who vote for BJP, have faith in me and my governance," he said. Perhaps seeking a bit of the magic from faraway Gujarat, Dhumal had begun the day with a phone call to "good friend" Narendra Modi. Three hours later, he was felicitating his arch-rival Virbhadra. In the end, nothing worked for BJP--least of all their campaign against the Centre's cap on supply of LPG cylinders for domestic use. Dhumal should perhaps have heeded Virbhadra's advice. "How long will you keep blaming the Centre for all the problems that afflict your people? In the end, you will have to deliver," Virbhadra told his supporters at Rajiv Bhavan. In an aside to an aide, he added: "Doesn't he (Dhumal) know that our villagers have endless supplies of wood as fuel, so they don't wait for gas cylinders to cook their food?" Such pragmatic advice can only be given by one who has his finger on the pulse of the people. Virbhadra Singh has delivered Himachal Pradesh to the Congress. Now his supporters are hoping that the party will return the favour. 

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

31

