NA TION

GUJARAT

By Uday Mahurkar

ou couldn't miss it even if you wanted to. A little township rising above the surrounding rural north Gujarat landscape, built over 2,500 years of ancient civilisation that now lie below its layered foundations. It even caught Hieun Tsang's (Xuanzang in Chinese) eye. He describes it as a scholarly city and home to "1,000 monks and 10 stupas" in his seventh century travelogue Si-Yu-Ki (Buddhist Records of the Western World). Vadnagar is now better known as Narendra Damodardas Modi's birthplace. The man who is heavily favoured to become Gujarat's chief minister for the fourth successive time, and has clear designs on the Prime Minister's Office (PMO), grew up here. He was the third of seven children of tea stall owner Damodardas Modi and his wife Heeraben, now 84. Today, Vadnagar could perhaps be fittingly rechristened as `Modinagar'. Located 112 km from Ahmedabad, the township owes almost everything, from public works to projects, to the Modi government's avid nurturing. Out here everyone, from skinny street urchins to portly shopkeepers, Congress supporters to BJP backers, happily chant the `Modi Mantra'. With a population of just over 25,000, the municipality showcases as much of Modi's will as his obvious gratitude to the people amid whom he was raised. The past five years have witnessed a magical transformation: Pothole-free streets paved with concrete, solar-powered lampposts that switch on and off like clockwork, and an 8-km ring road that conveniently links all parts of the town. Vadnagar has a civil hospital that would rival most private hospitals on equipment and cleanliness. A spanking new medical college-cum150-bed hospital is also on the anvil. Many local lakes have been beautified and turned into lively recreation spots. An air-conditioned hotel run by Gujarat State Tourism offers value-for-money stay. Himalaya International runs a food processing unit worth Rs 175 crore, that includes India's biggest mushroom producing unit, and em-

Y

THE TOWN MODI LEFT BEHIND

From metalled roads to solar-powered streetlights, the Chief Minister changes the face of his birthplace, Vadnagar

ploys 1,500 men and women, nearly 15 per cent of the city's eligible workers. "Vadnagar today gives us a glimpse of Narendra Modi's vision," says Sudhir Joshi. The Ayurveda practitioner's faith in Modi has been unwavering since the day they became friends in Class I at Vadnagar's B.N. High School. Joshi and Congress politician Nagjibhai Desai, another schoolmate, have fond memories of their buddy and his "early brilliance". The vaidya recalls how Modi contested and won the class representative elections in Class IX against heavy odds. "I feared he would lose. But he won over many from the rival group, and impressed our teachers by doing what he had promised his classmates he would do," he said. Though now in the Congress camp, Desai acknowledges Modi's capacity to take quick decisions. "A palmist once predicted that he would

FOURTEEN-YEAR-OLD NARENDRA MODI (LEFT) IN THE ROLE OF 19TH CENTURY KATHI CHIEFTAIN JOGIDAS KHUMAN, IN A SCHOOL PLAY

either become a saint or a great leader," he says. The devout may have lost out, but Desai points out that the prediction has turned out to be "dead accurate". Just as thrilled with the success of their alumnus, teachers at B.N. High School delightedly show visitors black and white photographs from an old school event where 14-year-old Modi played 19th century Kathi chieftain Jogidas Khuman, who waged a principled armed struggle against then rulers of Bhavnagar. The Chief Minister's eldest brother, Sombhai, 68, is Modi's only remaining link to Vadnagar since their father died in 1989. A retired government employee, he cares for the old and infirm at a home he runs. His siblings--Amratbhai, 65, retired from a private firm, Vasantiben, 57, married to a businessman, Hasmukhbhai, 55, a Life Insurance Corporation officer, Prahlad, 52, president of Gujarat's Grocery Shop Owners Association, and the youngest, Pankajbhai, an assistant director in the state information department at Gandhinagar--have all moved out. Mother Heeraben lives with Modi in Gandhinagar. Though the Chief Minister is their strongest common bond today, the siblings rarely rely on that link for personal advancement. As someone who has closely followed Modi's evolution, Sombhai, who also studied the final years of Vadodara as a princely state, says he sees shades of the legendary Sayajirao Gaekwad in his younger brother. "There were only two things he used to like as a young boy--swimming and reading," says Sombhai. "Vivekananda was his favourite read," he fondly recalls. On the bylanes of Vadnagar, Modi's alleged nuptial is not an embarrassing secret. Most old-timers know about it, and some among them are not shy of sharing how "Narendrabhai was married against his wishes when he was around 18. But he joined RSS in keeping with his ideals. He realised his folly and walked out of his marriage after apologising to his wife. She is a teacher in a village in Banaskantha district, and avoids talking about her marriage". He may have his detractors elsewhere in the state but you would be

"There were only two things he used to like as a young boy, swimming and reading. Vivekananda was his favourite read."
SOMBHAI Eldest brother of Narendra Modi

"Vadnagar encompasses Modi's vision for Gujarat and India. It gives us an idea how he would like India to be if he becomes the Prime Minister."
SUDHIR JOSHI Ayurveda practitioner and Modi's classmate in school

hard-pressed to find one in Vadnagar. His diehard fan club straddles the political spectrum, from former Congressman and taluka chief Diwanji Thakore, who supports Narendra Modi for his role in the development of Vadnagar, to RSS activist Bharat Modi, who sees him as "the man who is fulfilling Deendayal Upadhyay's dream". It is here that Narendra Modi also seems to have bridged the deep divide with Gujarat's Muslims. "Anyone who says Modi discriminates between Hindus and Muslims should come here," says sarpanch Abu Bakr Bhakka of Muslim-majority Molikpur village near Vadnagar. In the past five years, this once-poor hamlet has enjoyed comforts that were unthinkable few years ago-- a brand-new metalled road and a water supply scheme with taps in every home. Modi's rivals, both within and outside BJP, find themselves unnerved by his often assertive prime ministerial aspirations. But there is not a soul in Vadnagar who does not believe that Narendrabhai will make it to Delhi. And soon. 

50

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

51

