SPECIAL REPORT

BALTHACKERAY

SHIV SAINIKS ARRANGE GIANT CUTOUTS OF SENA SUPREMO BALTHACKERAY BEFORE ELECTIONS

LAST ROAR IN THE CITY
Will a headless tiger still stalk Mumbai, Gyan Prakash wonders
he year 1969 started in Mumbai thick with tension. At a rally in Kamgar Maidan on December 29, 1968, Bal Thackeray had issued an ultimatum. Standing against a backdrop of the Shiv Sena's snarling tiger mascot, he had declared that no New Delhi leaders would be allowed into Mumbai if the central government did not cede the Marathi-speaking districts of Karnataka to Maharashtra by January 26. He carried out his threat on February 7, 1969. When Morarji Desai, the deputy prime minister, visited Mumbai, all hell broke loose. The city became a battlefield, and Thackeray and other Shiv Sena leaders were arrested. Incensed Sena activists went on an angry rampage, burning shops, torching buses, and attacking police stations. A helpless Congress government suffered the ignominy of having to request Thackeray to issue an appeal for peace. Smelling victory, Thackeray consented and signed a statement from his prison cell that the government itself published and distributed. The snarling tiger had become the keeper of the zoo. Street protests were not new to Indian politics. Strikes, demonstrations, and rallies to express grievances and demands were routine in the young republic. But Thackeray unleashed his army not to voice complaints and win public support but to impose his political goals. He preached direct action to bend the state to the will on the street, rather than to negotiate a compromise. Law and author-

T

ity were asked to capitulate or face consequences. The political force that he so brazenly displayed in 1969 went on to cast a shadow on Mumbai well into the present. What licensed Thackeray's politics of the street was the notion of the Marathi manoos that he first showcased in the early 1960s in his cartoon weekly Marmik. Week after week, the journal depicted the Maharashtrians' plight. According to Thackeray, although Maharashtra and Mumbai belonged to the Marathi manoos, they lived in an oppressed state, ignorant of their sorry condition. Marathi speakers lived in a state of enslavement in their own land where the "sons of the soil" were denied employment. Emboldened by the positive response to his rhetoric, he founded the Shiv Sena in 1966. He spoke to vast crowds at the Sena's rallies, bemoaning the injustices suffered by the Marathi manoos and rousing it to action. For Thackeray, the Marathi manoos was not reducible to particular demands but was something altogether more general. Thus, he invoked grievances over language and unemployment not to seek their redress but to assert the universal claims of the Marathi manoos. Maharashtrians constituted a "people"; they stood for the society as a whole. Any discrimination against them was illegitimate and originated from its enemies. The enemy list started with South Indians, or Madrasis as he called them, who stole white-collar jobs from Maharashtrians. Also included in the list were

communists. Thackeray saw their ideology of class struggle hoods that had once flown the red flag now raised the colour as alien, and their presence in mill districts troublesome. saffron. To further their aims, the Sena was not averse to Then there were Muslims, who, in his eyes, were Pakistanis dealing with extortionists, bootleggers, smugglers, imand should have migrated to that country during Partition. porters and exporters, and builders, as well as the official With the political system unable or unwilling to defend economy. Enthralled by the appeal of defying authority, the the rights of the only legitimate "people", all methods were Sena's foot soldiers regularly descended on Mumbai's justified to expunge the presence of "foreign" elements in streets and bonded as a "people" to violently reclaim the city. Mumbai. Violence and intimidation were part of the Sena's As in 1969, time after time during the subsequent decades repertoire from the very beginning. The Sainiks vandalised the Sainiks shuttered the city into fear and silence. Udipi restaurants and prevented theatres in the city from The amorphous "people" found its concrete manifestascreening films produced in the south. When V.K. Krishna tion in the body of the Leader. At any real or perceived atMenon was denied a Congress ticket, he contested the 1967 tack on the Senapati, the Sainiks took to the street. Any parliamentary elections from Mumbai with CPI support, criticism of Thackeray appeared as an assault on the Thackeray welcomed the opportunity to slay both demons. Marathi manoos. On his part, the Leader also identified with his followers, and Here was Menon, whom he claimed to derive power scorned as a South Indian from his bond with them. with "rhinoceros skin", in The personality grew alliance with the commularger than the Sena and nists. Thackeray threw his the city itself. The Congress support behind the cooperated in building up Congress candidate and Thackeray, initially by opthe Sainiks regularly disportunistic patronage and rupted Menon's meetings. later by conveniently surTo the Sena leader's derendering to the force he light, Menon was defeated. exerted. By the early 1990s The Sainiks followed this the Leader's position had blow to the communists by catapulted to such heights attacking their office and that he enjoyed unprecemurdering the popular dented freedom. The communist MLA and trade Srikrishna Commission union leader Krishna highlighted the parts Desai in June 1970. played by the Senapati's Desai was killed barely fiery rhetoric and the a month after the Bhiwandi Sena's actions in the 1992riots when the Sena's in93 riots. The Commission flammatory rhetoric and also found many instances provocative actions lit the of direct or indirect police powder keg of communal complicity with Hindu riotviolence. Thackeray's aniers. Thackeray dared the mus against Muslims, howgovernment to act, but the ever, did not spring from A 1970S SHIV SENA RALLY DEMANDING JOBS FOR MAHARASHTRIANS Congress government the RSS's version of Hindu found it prudent to shelve nationalism and culture. He did organise the Sena into shakhas, or branches, like the the report. Balasaheb had become too big to touch. In subsequent years, celebrities vied for his approval. paramilitary structure of the Hindu supremacist group, but did not share its ascetic and traditionalist ideology. In fact, Film stars kowtowed to him. Directors seeking to portray he considered the RSS to be an organisation run by a bunch his role in riots on the screen sought his permission. of glum old men. Thackeray, on the other hand, appealed to His nephew broke from the Sena but was careful youthful, masculine virility. He advocated enjoyment and ac- to proclaim his fidelity to Balasaheb. The news of the tion, not asceticism and sacrifice. His opposition to Muslims Leader's impending demise sparked fears of violence and drew on raw, elemental energy, similar to the visceral en- anarchy. True to form, the Sainiks responded to a young ergy that powered his attacks on South Indians and com- woman's Facebook comment on shuttering the city after his munists. He advocated immediate action, not long death with vandalism. Now that he is gone, who will condrawn-out ideological battles, to purge the alien presence tain the energies of the Sena tigers? and rejuvenate the Marathi manoos. Thackeray's politics of action struck a chord with the unGyan Prakash teaches history at Princeton University and is the employed youth in poor neighbourhoods. Mill neighbourauthor of Mumbai Fables

COURTESY PHOTOGRAPHS BY BAL KESHAV THACKERAY A PHOTOBIOGRAPHY BY RAJ THACKERAY

Thackerayappealed to masculine virility.He advocated immediate action,not long ideological battles.

38

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 3, 2012

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

39

