MAIL

The Paranoid State
D E C E M B E R 1 7, 2 0 1 2

Crackdown on Internet puts India in the league of autocratic nations and alienates generation

The social networking platform is one where anyone in a democracy can voice his or her feelings and call a spade a spade. Muzzling the Internet does not behove a democracy.
K . C H I D A N A N D K U M A R , Bangalore

Autocratic State
Your cover story aptly brings out the Government's attitude towards social media and the threats posed by the loosely-worded IT Act ("The Paranoid State", December 17). The intolerance of the Government or individuals on several occasions have led social media users to suffer. While the Government must exercise provisions of Article 66(A) of the IT Act when required, it should be wise and exercise caution while cracking the whip on defaulters. This is especially because majority of social media users are youngsters, so sensitivity is required in handling such situations. There should also be awareness among the youth and other users and they should know to distinguish between what is appropriate and not for social media.
RAMESH SINHA, Gurgaon

PTI

Smart Move?
For cash transfer to work, we need to have a good system of identification of the poor ("UPA's Smart Card", December 17). As such, direct cash transfer is a good idea as it will reduce dual pricing. Finance Minister P. Chidambaram calls direct cash transfer scheme a "magical step" which aims at plugging the loopholes in the delivery system to ensure that the poor get complete benefits of government schemes.
BEENA MATHUR, Pune

Clamping down on Internet users for expressing potentially harmless opinions on social networking sites is a shameful act. Two girls, both in their 20s, were detained by the Maharashtra police for simply expressing their opinion on how the city should not be closed down following Bal Thackeray's death. Is India an autocracy or does an Emergency-like situation continue to exist in the country to date? The Article 66(A) of the IT Act should be amended so that citizens are not harassed for expressing their opinion.
A. SRIKANTAIAH, Bangalore

The Government's smart card scheme to give subsidies by cash has become controversial. If implemented properly by covering all who are eligible and by eliminating duplicates and leakages, it can prove to be a big boon for the country. At the same time, it can become a drain if it fails.
JACOB SAHAYAM, Thiruvananthapuram

The misuse of the IT Act by the police at the behest of the governments and their intolerant and frantic political masters must be censured. It can be considered

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

``
50

``

MAIL
as an attempt to strangle the right to freedom of speech, a fundamental right provided and ensured by the Constitution of our country. It also raises questions about the efficiency of people who claim themselves to be cyber law experts. They should have pointed out ambiguous and undefined terms like `grossly offensive' and `menacing character' and taken the matter to the apex court. However, it is also important to remember that freedom of speech should not be misconstrued as freedom to comment invariably on anything and everything, which may also appear as a misuse. Therefore as a responsible citizen, everyone should always look to maintain a balance.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

35
exit. That is the fate Tendulkar must avoid. Even if he's not dropped, he may not be able to avoid ridicule if his poor form continues. And for an icon of his standing, this will be no less an insult. Tendulkar should emulate Ponting or his idol Sunil Gavaskar, who left the game when he was still making runs.
J. AKSHOBHYA, Mysore

It is disheartening to see critics amending their statements about cricket icon Sachin Tendulkar. He is being panned by one and all for his poor form, with calls for retirement growing louder by the day. I feel that an introspection is needed from his end and a consultation from his near and dear ones before finally calling it a day.
MAYANK PANT, via email

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
DECEMBER 16-31, 197 7

Politicking with Disaster
`These political chaps just talk,' said Sharda Mukherjee, the elegant, silver-haired lady governor of Andhra Pradesh. She sat on a comfortable chintz-covered sofa, on the wide terrace of the Raj Bhavan in Hyderabad, overlooking a large stretch of immaculately tendered lawn. Fountains played softly in the distance, gazebos gleamed in the falling dusk, and against the wide steps leading up to the porch, mammoth pieces of marble statuary reflected the aura of unrestrained opulence. Everywhere, there was polished brass and shining silver. And from the hall came the sound of padding foot-

Time to Step Down
It is time Sachin Tendulkar retired ("Time to Go", December 17). Why doesn't he follow the example set by Ricky Ponting, who decided to call it quits after averaging 22.6 in the last 10 innings? Tendulkar's performance has been consistently poor over the last several months, despite a 76 at the Eden Gardens in the just-completed Test series against England. India has seen several great players in the past who refused to leave despite prolonged poor form and ultimately had to contend with an unceremonious

Sachin Tendulkar has been the biggest sporting icon that this country has ever produced.Yet, there comes a time in every sportsperson's life when he has to realise that it is time to go and make way for younger talent. Tendulkar, unfortunately, has not yet been able to accept the fact that his best years are behind him. It is sad to see him struggle against bowlers whom he would have hammered only a few years ago. He should take the cue from Ricky Ponting and announce his retirement now.
AMBAR MALLICK, Kolkata

Moving On
The Babri Masjid demolition in 1992 and the corresponding communal tensions in Ayodhya were unfortunate and a terrible blot on the country's history ("India Outgrows Ayodhya", December 17). The issue was more political than religious. It is encouraging to see that the nation is slowly but surely coming out of the shadow of its murky past.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Choices Aplenty
It is true that for Indian students wanting to study abroad, there is a plethora of choices ("The New World of Dream Destinations", December 17). Places like Australia, Singapore and China offer a wide range of courses and employment opportunities. Also, the cost of living in these countries is lower than in the US and the UK. No wonder Indian students are excited about the new destinations.
SOHINI BASAK, Asansol

Tendulkar has had his share of good times and after delivering for India for 21-odd years, I think it is time for the master blaster to bid adieu to the game. Tendulkar has made us, his fans, experience and go beyond those realms of cricketing achievement which were unimaginable at a time. But no one is eternal, not even Tendulkar.
ARJUN MUNSHI, Lucknow

MUKHERJEE--"IT'S A MATTER OFTIME"

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

steps of liveried bearers of Persian carpets. In her expressive manner the governor talked of the cyclone victims, devastated villages, feeding camps and medical aid. She spoke of the Citizens' Relief and Rehabilitation Committee she has initiated for all the local, national and international agencies to collectively pool in their resources. And she outlined the infinite number of relief programmes launched, the urgency for coordinating aid and streamlining assistance. by Sunil Sethi

06

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

