SIGNATURE
L O C O M O T I F

S. PRASANNARAJAN

ASHES OFTHE LEGEND
uneral flames illuminated the symbolism, and symbolism mattered more in death than in life. In another time in Mumbai's Shivaji Park, more than four decades ago, words were flames and they spread through the minds of Marathi manoos, "marginalised" and "exploited" in their own land. The words, Marathi manoos, meaning the Marathi-speaking people of Maharashtra, rhymed, and phonetic resonance added to the perpetuation of "arise, the persecuted!" Then, Bal Thackeray was a cartoonist who just abandoned his brush and sought a canvas larger than a cartoonist's--and an art darker and raw. Don't we know such types in the mythology of mass sorcery, in the legends of liberation? Long before him, elsewhere in Europe, wasn't there a diminutive young man who left the pastel planet of painting to restore the republic of the pure, uncontaminated by the greed of the outsider? Wasn't there a Russian seminarian who left the chapel to build a heaven on earth according to the Holier Book of ideology--and ended up creating a hell on earth? Or, wasn't there an amateur Chinese poet who would go on to become one of communism's most successful revolutionaries, whose later verses were written in the blood of others. That said, in life, Thackeray's historical size was smaller, and whose kingdom did not extend beyond the mean streets of a metropolis. Still it was a life that mimed the familiar passions and pathologies of the self-styled revolutionary-liberator. Thackeray's story too began as dissent, as a rejoinder to an exaggerated text of persecution and dispossession. As the leader of Shiv Sena--the name itself evokes the macho warrior cult--the erstwhile cartoonist discarded laughter and became the wholesale merchant of anger. The smirk was replaced by the snarl. Marathi exceptionalism was the raison d'être

F

of the Sena, and he was the warrior-leader, but the script of liberation would be incomplete without a bleeding protagonist and the marauding enemy. On Thackeray's post-cartoon canvas, the hero, fallen and on the verge of extinction, was the Marathi youth, and the barbarian at the Gateway to India was the "lungiwallah". The jobless Marathi, exploited in his own land, was a powerful sub-nationalist image of victimhood. The exploiter, the bogeyman, was the south Indian--the ubiquitous Madrasi, the migrant, the jobstealer. The narrative borrowed freely from the history of dictatorships: The "enemy" is a pre-requisite for the survival of the saviour. If there was not one, the paranoid benefactor would create one. In Mumbai, the city of possibilities, Thackeray didn't have to look hard for one; "enemies" were swarming the streets and the mills. They were soft targets. Thackeray's war on the outsider took a more sustainable ideological turn when he identified the communist as a bigger enemy. His sense of nationalism repudiated the imported slogan of the working class. He was one of the original anti-communists. It was a different Mumbai that gave such a spectacular--and tearful--farewell to Thackeray. The warrior and his Sena too changed. Kitsch--the aesthetic ideal of militant salvation theologies--was the only constant. It is the outsider who makes the city a cosmopolis, be it Mumbai or New York. The profusion of "enemy" has already made Sena pretty archaic. After shedding its apolitical veneer of cultural unipolarity, the Sena has over the years become the intolerant part of the political right. In his autumn, Thackeray himself was a patriarch presiding over a divided family, and the last flames soaring over the multitude in Shivaji Park said it all: The aura of the Tiger burned brighter than his power.  EXPELLED Rajya Sabha member Pyarimohan Mohapatra from BJD, after he allegedly attempted a coup against Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik on May 29. WON Congressional elec-

THACKERAY'S STORY TOO BEGAN AS DISSENT, AS A REJOINDER TO AN EXAGGERATED TEXT OF PERSECUTION AND DISPOSSESSION. AS THE LEADER OF SHIV SENA, THE ERSTWHILE CARTOONIST DISCARDED LAUGHTER AND BECAME THE WHOLESALE MERCHANT OF ANGER. THE SMIRK WAS REPLACED BY THE SNARL.

S I G N P O STS
DIED Former Union minister K.C. Pant. He was the defence minister between 1987 and 1989, when the Congress
PANT

party was in power under then prime minister Rajiv Gandhi. RETURNED IndianAmerican Sunita Williams, 47, to earth, after having spent four months in the orbit.

tion from California by Ami Bera. Bera BERA is only the third Indian-American ever to have been elected to the US House of Representatives.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

DECEMBER 3, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

