SP ORT

CRICKET
badly. The players felt that their best batsman, their `engine driver' over the years, was merely an unreserved passenger in the playing eleven. To avoid further humiliation, Team India requires policy and personnel changes, both within and outside. the latter's retirement meant Dhoni assumed charge in all formats. It's time to bring back split captaincy, a concept countries like South Africa, England, Australia, Pakistan and Sri Lanka have adopted and prospered with. Inexplicable team selections, order of play and field placements during the recent England series gave ample justification to shift a chunk of the load on Dhoni's shoulders to someone else. Sunil Gavaskar, Bishan Singh Bedi and Sourav Ganguly are just a few names in the list of former greats who want Dhoni out of the Test side or dropped as Test skipper. "Dhoni should feel lucky that he's still there. He is not a Test skipper. You need a skipper who is worthy of his place in the eleven. Tell me, is his 99 of any use to the team?" Bedi thunders, referring to his score in the fourth Test match against England. "I would make Virat Kohli the captain. He's got a sharp cricketing brain. You've got to trust young blood. We have been carrying a lot of dead wood for a long time." Former India skipper Ajit Wadekar says young players must be groomed. "Agreed, we can't win all the time, but here we seem to be losing all the time. Make Virat Kohli or Gautam Gambhir the Test skipper, groom Rohit Sharma and Ajinkya Rahane in the Test team and whenever there's a talented boy, don't rush him into the Indian team but monitor him in domestic cricket to ensure he's ready," he says.

BRING IN THE NEW
The list of what Team India needs to do to win again is long but possible. A new captain, better support staff, less glitz, more gumption.
By G.S. Vivek

BLUEPRINT
INDIA'S NOT-SO-MAGNIFICENT ELEVEN
SACHIN TENDULKAR
Time's up, master. At 39, after scoring 34,081 in 658 matches for India, he needs a long rest.

I NEW CAPTAIN FOR NEW-LOOK TEAM
From 2007 to 2008, India had two separate skippers--Dhoni for ODIs and T20s and Anil Kumble for Tests, before

AJINKYA RAHANE ZAHEER KHAN
At 34, and five short of 300 Test wickets, he must retire from the shorter formats and focus on fitness. Deserves a chance, be it at the top of the order or the middle. Has spent too long waiting in the wings.

YUVRAJ SINGH GAUTAM GAMBHIR
Try him for Test captaincy. An angry young man is the need of the hour. King of limited overs, but Tests aren't his cup of tea. Flopped again against England, scoring just 125 in five innings.

t was billed as the Revenge Series. Blanked 0-4 in England in 2011, Team India seethed with anger as it awaited Captain Cook and his men on home turf. Payback time, reckoned every Man in Blue. "You don't know how we felt when we toured England in 2011. Every little thing, from practice to games, was arranged to ensure we didn't acclimatise or perform well. And then we had a spate of injuries," says a player explaining the vengeful attitude. Slowly, the anger turned into disillusionment as curators ignored captain M.S. Dhoni's plea for turning tracks and dished out docile, hard, pace-oriented pitches in three of the four Tests in the series. The result: 2-1, England registering their first series win in India in 28 years. Overwhelmed by the urge for vengeance, players had degenerated mentally over the course of four Tests which began on November 15 and ended on December 17, humiliated that England had indeed done their homework well. Just before the third Test in Kolkata, a player dismissed a question if the pitch had been prepared to the team's satisfaction. "How does it make a difference?" he said. "Mumbai mein turner mila tha. Kya hua?" Though the selectors tweaked the team mid-series by dropping Zaheer Khan, Yuvraj Singh and an under-bowled Harbhajan Singh, it was Sachin Tendulkar's lack of run-scoring form that hurt Team India

RAVINDRA JADEJA
No place for the bitsand-pieces player. Tests are for specialists.

I

I BEST FACES FORWARD
Barring Tendulkar, no other player in the current line-up has decided to give up on any of the three formats; 10 current Test team members also figured in the 15-strong squad for the World T20 in Sri Lanka in September. There's a definite need for new faces, and to streamline them into particular formats. "You need to have specialists in a Test team, not guys who can chip in with the bat and ball. That's where the board should come in," says Kapil Dev, the 1983 World Cup winning skipper. Team India has to embrace life without Tendulkar while Zaheer needs to give up the shorter formats. Dhoni needs to skip Test matches, allow a more technically sound Wriddhiman Saha or Dinesh Karthik to keep wickets and ensure he is fresh physically and mentally for ODIs and T20s. Virender Sehwag looks dodgy to last till 2015, given his spate of injuries, and should think long and hard about his presence in all three formats. Yuvraj Singh is best kept to limitedover formats. The Test team requires thoroughbred fast bowlers like Ishant Sharma, Umesh Yadav, Ashok Dinda

R. ASHWIN
Photo Imaging by AJIT BAJAJ

SURESH RAINA
Big asset in T20s and ODIS. Started brightly in Tests but faltered later. Needs a fair run in Tests.

M.S. DHONI
Five years and 207 matches as skipper is too much on his plate. Skip Tests and lead in ODIs, T20s.

VIRENDER SEHWAG
Shift down to the middle order to bolster a fragile line-up and create a window for Ajinkya Rahane at the top.

Desperately needs wickets to seal Harbhajan Singh's fate in Tests. Still the best in ODIs, T20s.

VIRAT KOHLI
Dhoni's heir apparent after leading India to U-19 World Cup glory and his recent run of form. But a little patience would help.

42

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

NEW

DECEMBER 31, 2012  INDIA TODAY

43

SP ORT

CRICKET

INTERVIEW | SOURAV GANGULY

Back fast bowlers
If India is to ever become No.1 again, good fast bowlers will take you there. It baffles me why S. Sreesanth is taking so much time for a comeback. If R.P. Singh could bowl at 140 kmph in 2007 when he was 22, why is he almost finished at 27? It means they didn't work on strength and fitness. Prepare ahead, ready a core crop of 8-10 young pacers and monitor them so that they don't go the Sreesanth or R.P. Singh way. Zaheer Khan needs to challenge himself and get at least 15 per cent fitter.

"In picking talent,don't go byage"
As all stakeholders seek solutions to Team India's woes, former India captain Sourav Ganguly has a seven-point prescription for the country's cricket establishment. Ganguly tells TVTN Sports Editor VIKRANT GUPTA what it will take for the national team to bounce back. then any player can play under any captain. If leaders can weave common goals for teammates, there would be no clash between the two supposed captains in the same team.

Sachin has to take a call on his future
Let him decide till when he wants to play. It shouldn't be left to others. But my suggestion to him would be that if he sees himself playing in Tests in the future, then he must play in ODIs too. If he plays in the ODIs against Pakistan and England, it will help him stay match fit and get his confidence back before the Australia Tests.

Get spin masters
People say there aren't too many good spinners at the domestic level but more than that I am worried about the ones playing for India. Ravichandran Ashwin and Pragyan Ojha have the talent but they need a specialist spin coach to travel with the team. The spin coach has to be an Indian as he will understand the psyche needed in different conditions. Harbhajan Singh still has a lot to offer. He has more than 400 Test wickets, is just 32, and the selectors need to create a positive mindset for his comeback.

Ask Dhoni to choose, don't waste him
I am worried about M.S. Dhoni's workload: Captain and wicket-keeper batsman in all formats. It is humanly impossible for an individual to continue like this, especially in high-pressure games. My fear is we might lose Dhoni the match-winning batsman. I would want the selectors to ask him to pick the format in which he wants to continue as captain. Does defending the ODI World Cup in 2015 excite him? Or would he rather take up the challenge of leading India in the 15 overseas Tests beginning next winter? Back his choice as he cannot just be wasted.

Plan for World Cup 2015
I am sure India will start as a leading contender in the World Cup 2015. Yes, the conditions in Australia and New Zealand will be challenging but we need to identify match-winners in those conditions and persist with them. Identify the captain and give him the authority to devise his own methods. But in picking the right talent, don't just go by age; spot potential match-winners and back them.

Have faith in the batsmen
Yes, our batting has failed in the past 18 months. But I still have faith in the 7-8 top batsmen right now. I don't agree with suggestions that Virender Sehwag should be asked to bat in the middle order. Opening has been his strength. He needs to be consistent but I don't buy the theory that he is being given a long rope. The rope appears long but he is too valuable to be dropped.

Split captaincy
I believe it will work in India. If Sachin Tendulkar can play under a young Dhoni as he did in 2008,
RAMESH SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

and Parwinder Awana, while the likes of Irfan Pathan, Praveen Kumar and Bhuvneshwar Kumar can do duty in shorter formats. It's best to keep a separate, fit unit for ODIs and T20s. Also needed are different bowling attacks for different conditions--have a set of swing bowlers for tours to England and New Zealand and genuine quicks for trips to Australia and South Africa.

I DISBAND TEAM AROUND TEAM INDIA
The portly much-aged Duncan Fletcher looked completely a misfit, especially at the helm of a team which required young limbs to race ahead. Fletcher's contribution has to be seen and judged in terms of results, not inputs he gives players during training sessions. Fletcher's forte is strategising. Just six Test wins out of 20 in his twoyear tenure suggest a clear failure. His associates, fielding coach Trevor Penny and bowling coach Joe Dawes, have

also not worked wonders. India's fielding standards remain abysmal, with the slip cordon and close-in fielders still not settled. Asked to comment on India's bowling coach during the Kolkata Test, former Pakistan pacer Wasim Akram quipped, "Does India have a bowling coach? It doesn't look like that to me." Dawes has been at the helm for a mere nine months but his lack of expertise to help a struggling spin unit must be held against him. Pragyan Ojha and Ravichandran Ashwin have been turning to their personal coaches for advice.

I AN INDIAN COACH FOR THE BOYS
It's pertinent here to ask why BCCI has stopped considering Indians for the coaching post. "It's unfair to say Indian coaches are not good enough. We haven't been given a proper chance yet," says Vijay Dahiya, assistant coach of the IPL-winning Kolkata Knight

Riders and the Delhi Ranji team chief coach. Take, for example, Lalchand Rajput, under whom India won the World T20 in 2007. He has been head coach of the National Cricket Academy in Bangalore for four years and is in charge of the India A team. For some reason, he's never made it to the Team India coach shortlist. The expertise of legends like Sourav Ganguly, Rahul Dravid, Anil Kumble and VVS Laxman should be utilised all the way down to the grassroots level to teach youngsters the basics. Dravid has hinted he's not averse to coaching; Ganguly, who built an aggressive new Team India, must be tapped to effect resurrection.

I SECURING THE SUPPLY LINES
The board and the selectors have ignored the need to create bench strength. India's leg-spin bank has just three faces--Amit Mishra, considered too slow in the air, Rahul Sharma, con-

sidered too quick, and Piyush Chawla, who doesn't turn the ball enough. In the past, India A tours have been doled out as freebies to players, who have made it on parameters other than merit. Look at the fortunes of Unmukt Chand and Harmeet Singh, two players from the squad that won the Under-19 World Cup this year and have been hailed by Ian Chappell and Wasim Akram as genuine India prospects. Unmukt is struggling to keep his place in the Delhi Ranji team while Harmeet is yet to break into the Mumbai XI this season. They are at risk of falling by the wayside, like many other under-19 stars in the past. "To create bench strength is simple," says former India opener Navjot Singh Sidhu. "Fit people into their respective roles, and recognise and honour merit. Talent is nothing without opportunity. If you see a five-year future in a player, then invest in him. But do give the adequate importance to Test cricket because that's the mother ship. Everything stems from it."

44

INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

NEW

SP ORT

CRICKET
I THE ART OF INJURY MANAGEMENT

Legends on the Fall
Dump coach Fletcher and elevate Kohli or Gambhir, say former captains
SPLIT CAPTAINCY Keep Dhoni for ODIs and T20s, give Test captaincy to Gambhir or Kohli. ACCOUNTABILITY Make coach and support staff accountable.They are paid professionals. GRASSROOTS LEVEL Strictly monitor domestic cricket and its pitches. Groom players gradually.

BISHAN SINGH BEDI 66
Legendary left-arm spinner, former skipper

KAPIL DEV 53 1983 World Cup winning skipper
GET SPECIALISTS Pick only specialist batsmen, bowlers. Pick players according to the format. INDIAN COACHES Time to make use of Ganguly, Dravid, Kumble as coaches to help youngsters. PLANNING Time for BCCI to plan ahead for five years and invest in it.

YOUNG LEGS Sack M.S. Dhoni, make Virat Kohli the skipper. STRICTLY INDIAN Get rid of Duncan Fletcher, make Sourav Ganguly, Rahul Dravid part of support staff. REGULATE IPL Don't involve youngsters in IPL, they are lured by the money.

AJITWADEKAR 71 First Indian skipper to win overseas

Play Only Performers

Team India needs more Virat Kohlis and Pragyan Ojhas at its fulcrum.The veterans need to leave.

Injury management is another crucial aspect the cricket administration has seldom worried about. R. Vinay Kumar joins Umesh Yadav, Varun Aaron, Munaf Patel, Praveen Kumar, Zaheer and R.P. Singh in the injured lot, while S. Sreesanth has just played his first game after being out of action for almost two years. The Australian example is instructive. The team rotates players irrespective of the opposition. Even when pitted against South Africa in November to decide the No.1 Test ranking, Australia played with different bowling units in the three Tests, resting main bowlers Ben Hilfenhaus and Peter Siddle for the deciding Test because they were overworked. In the Indian team, on the other hand, an important bowler is pressed into service in every game until he breaks down. After a spate of injuries to fast bowlers, Australia discovered that a particular design of spikes in cricket shoes was the cause and advised players against wearing it. That is the level of detail missing in India.

I GOODBYE GLITZ, BACK TO BASICS
The glitzy money-rich T20 league, IPL, has ensured that Generation Z skips the long mile on the highway to fame. The shortest format has been blamed for young batsmen making do with the art of improvisation, thereby choking the pipeline of high-quality Test batsmen of the future. Punjab has barred players below 22 from playing in IPL or the T20 format to stem the rot but other states are yet to take the cue. The other aspect of strengthening basics is by playing more matches abroad, with a consistent bunch of players to hone skills in challenging conditions which have often proved to be India's nemesis. Humbled in England, humbled in Australia in 2011, and now humiliated at home. BCCI has typically been silent, waiting for public anger to subside. But this time, there's no getting away. It'll take a combination of quick fixes and sustained thought over the next one year to resolve the crisis. And hit a winner. 

SACHIN TENDULKAR VIRAT KOHLI
Age 25 Right-handed Batsman Tests* 10 Runs 700 Highest Score 116 Average 43.75 50s 3 100s 3 Age 39 Right-handed Batsman Tests* 10 Runs 462 Highest Score 80 Average 27.17 50s 3 100s 0

ZAHEER KHAN
Age 34 Left-arm Seamer Tests* 9 Wickets 22 Best Bowling 4/77 Average 39.50 5-wkt haul 0 10-wkt haul 0

PRAGYAN OJHA
Age 26 Left-arm Spinner Tests* 6 Wickets 33 Best Bowling 5/45 Average 25.9 5-wkt hauls 3 10-wkt hauls 0
46
INDIA TODAY  DECEMBER 31, 2012

* In the past 12 months

NEW

