Nation

INTERVIEW

"Scientists are demoralised. I am hurt"
Gopalan Madhavan Nair, 68, India's "Moon Man", was, until yesterday, one of the country's most respected and decorated scientists. Today, the former chairman of Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and architect of India's Chandrayaan-1 moon mission has been blacklisted by the Ministry of Space, which issued a confidential circular on January 12 barring him and three other space scientists from holding any government posts. Reason: the controversial deal struck in January 2005 between ISRO's commercial arm Antrix Corporation and private firm Devas Multimedia. Antrix was to lease to Devas 90 per cent capacity of S-band spectrum frequency on GSAT-6 and GSAT6A, the two satellites ISRO would build. Nair was Antrix's chairman and the others were members of its governing board when the deal was inked. The revenue from the deal to Antrix was $300 million, payable over a 12-year period. In 2009, complaints arose about the deal and a preliminary estimate by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) suggested the spectrum allotted to Devas could be worth Rs 2 lakh crore as against the $300 million (Rs 1,500 crore) deal. Subsequently, three inquiries were held and though none of the reports have yet been made public, the Cabinet Committee on Security annulled the deal on February 11, 2011. Nair tells Associate Editor M.G. RADHAKRISHNAN that he wants the Prime Minister to intervene. Q. Do you think you are being wrongly targeted? A. We have done nothing wrong. Let the Government conduct a proper inquiry. But what has happened is that a director at the ministry, who is not even in charge of projects like these, issued a secret circular tarnishing us even before we were told what wrong we have done. The correct procedure should have been to submit a report to a competent authority, who is the Prime Minister in this case. And if he finds that there are lapses, a proper chargesheet should be prepared. What has been done is a blatant violation of procedures. Q. Who are the people working against you? A. There could be people from both inside and outside the country. Q. Outside the country? A. Maybe. You know about vested global interests who had cooked up the ISRO espionage scandal and set back our space programme by several years. Scrapping this project will mean India will be deprived of a much advanced technology in mobile communications. Devas would have brought it to India at a reduced cost and much faster than what would have been possible without them. The technology would have revolutionised the applicability of hand-held communication devices by making them more accessible to people even in remote areas. Q. You have admitted to certain procedural lapses in the deal. A. Well, we did not formally inform the Union Cabinet in writing about the finalisation of the deal. But Antrix has not been mandated to do so as the Space Commission and the Government are duly represented on the governing board. Antrix is an autonomous body which has entered into such deals before too. For instance, the deal with Tata Sky. The Government was aware of the deal right from the beginning. Q. Why do you say that the CAG'S estimate of the loss is exaggerated? A. The CAG seems to have wrongly extrapolated the potential revenue arising from the terrestrial application of S-band frequencies. The S-band spectrum was intended for spacebased applications and hence would have brought in one-fifth of possible revenue. Besides, ISRO is responsible only for fixing lease charges. Department of Telecom should have decided the licensing fees. When the deal was made there were hardly any users for the S-band. The only user was Doordarshan, which also migrated to other bands. Q. Minister V. Narayanasamy has said that the inquiry committee had recommended action against you. A. I don't think he even understands the issue. Both the B.N. Suresh Committee and the committee headed by B.K. Chaturvedi, former cabinet secretary, had found there was nothing wrong in the deal except minor procedural lapses. Then, another committee was appointed, which did not even care to meet us. They just sent us some questionnaires. We responded but we did not get any reply. Most members of the committee attended only the first and last meeting. Q. You've attacked ISRO Chairman K. Radhakrishnan for what has happened. A. He seems to have a personal agenda in tarnishing us. We feel he has cooked up stories. I think as a non-performer, he is jealous of some of us. Q. Would you accuse the Prime Minister's Office for the controversy? A. I request the Prime Minister to intervene and conduct a proper inquiry. Q. What in your opinion would be the effect of the controversy on ISRO's image globally? A. Terrible. Devas has many prominent foreign partners and they have approached the International Court of Arbitration. ISRO's or Antrix's image of being incapable of carrying out contracts is not good for our space programme. Even the satellite that was ready to be launched in 2009 has been kept idle. Q. What are your plans now? A. I think the country's scientific community knows how the development has demoralised us. This is the first such experience of my life. I am deeply hurt. My initial reaction was emotional. But now, I am waiting for copies of the inquiry committee reports through RTI. I will decide my future course of action later. 

ASSAM

GOGOI
GITIKA TALUKDAR

AHouse Divided
Meghalaya claims Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi's official residence in Guwahati is on disputed land
he Assam-Meghalaya inter-state boundary dispute has stooped to a new low with the Meghalaya government claiming on January 23 that the Assam chief minister's official residence falls within its territory. "We have official records to prove that the land on which the official residence of the Assam chief minister stands, is disputed territory. I have all documents from the pre-1972 period to prove the same," said Meghalaya Revenue Minister Roytre Christopher Laloo. The minister, however, didn't produce any evidence to back his claim when INDIA TODAY spoke to him. "Discussions are on between the two states. I did not claim the plot. I said it was disputed area. Whether I produce the papers or not, the truth remains the same," Laloo said. Tarun Gogoi, the occupant of Guesthouse No. 1, Khanapara, Guwahati, laughed off the claim. "There is absolutely no dispute. Why are they talking to the media? I have not yet received any official communication from the Meghalaya government on this. And yes, I agree, the truth remains the same--it's with us," the Assam Chief Minister said. The two states have been locked in a boundary dispute ever since

T

"

Scrapping Antrix-Devas project means that India will be deprived of advanced technology in mobile communications.Devas would have brought it to India at a much reduced cost.

Meghalaya was carved out of Assam on January 21, 1972. Upping the ante, the Meghalaya Assembly on March 16, 2011, passed a resolution urging the Centre to set up a boundary commission to look into the matter. "We've received no response from the Centre so far but are hopeful of a favourable reply," Laloo said. The two sides, during chief secretary-level talks in August 2011, resolved to look into a dozen zones involving 2,700 km of disputed territory. On December 19, 2011, the Assam Assembly passed a counter resolution rejecting the need for another boundary commission. "A committee, headed by Justice Y.V. Chandrachud, had already looked into the border dispute and had submitted its report on July 27, 1987. We should go by it," said Siddeque Ahmed, Assam's minister of state (independent charge) for border areas. In January, the Assam government wrote to its counterpart in Shillong seeking details on the disputed areas in West Khasi Hills, RiBhoi and Jaintia Hills districts of Meghalaya. "Yes, there is some confusion regarding those areas. But I'm clear on where my residence stands and have enough documents to prove it," said Gogoi. by Kaushik Deka

BANDEEP SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

44

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 13, 2012

"

FEBRUARY 13, 2012  INDIA TODAY

45

