P O LL S A P A R T
CROSS-BORDER FRIENDS
hey are sworn rivals in Madhya Pradesh. But in Uttar Pradesh, Shivraj Singh Chouhan and Uma Bharati declared that they are "brother and sister". The BJP duo shared a dais after eight years when Chouhan, the Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister, went to campaign for Bharati in her constituency, Charkhari, on February 3. Chouhan apart, most BJP chief ministers are yet to campaign in Uttar Pradesh. The most noticeable absentee is Gujarat's Narendra Modi, who is said to be sulking with the leadership for putting his bete noire Sanjay Joshi in charge of the campaign. Jharkhand's Arjun Munda and Chhattisgarh's Raman Singh are also missing. But while one relationship has blossomed, another has withered away. Former BJP leader Kalyan Singh is not hiding his discomfiture at Bharati's entry into Uttar

T

HAND IT TO HER
It's hands folded all the way. That's the kind of discipline Mayawati evokes from the party cadre. The Bahujan Samaj Party rally in Gorakhpur on February 6 had party leaders standing a step behind Mayawati on the dais, hands folded in supplication throughout as she read out her 28-minute campaign speech. The moment Mayawati reached the venue, Naseemuddin Siddiqui, one of her key aides, exhorted the crowd to raise slogans. The slogan-shouting continued until she was seated in her chair. Then the compere introduced the party's contestants from various Assembly constituencies one by one. Each of them greeted Mayawati and the audience with folded hands. The reverence for Mayawati continued off-stage. Many in the

SO TWEET

R

MAYAWATI AT A RALLY IN GORAKHPUR

(FROM LEFT) BHARATI WITH CHOUHAN

Pradesh. He is worried she will disrupt his OBC-Lodh vote bank. Addressing a rally in Unnao on February 7, he said that Bharati had once said she was like his daughter. "But I don't want a daughter who joins hands with the enemy." Kalyan also poked fun at Kalraj Mishra, saying he was hoping to be the BJP's choice as chief ministerial candidate but got upby Shuriah Niyazi staged by Bharati.

crowd, particularly women clad in blue saris--the BSP's colour--waited with folded hands. Some had walked from Kaudiram to Gorakhpur, a distance of more than 30 km, to see her. Said one, "She's like a deity. We have a picture of her beside the gods in our house." Midway through the speech, there was a sudden ruckus as police stopped a woman trying to move in for a better view. Mayawati smelt an Opposition plot: "Virodhi dal ke kuch log meri sabhaon men kuttey bhej detey hain taki

sabha ka mahaul kharab ho jaye par aap log pareshan mat hoiye (the Opposition has unleashed dogs to disrupt my rallies but you need not worry)." The woman did not seem to mind the reprimand and sat down with a smile. Mayawati ended her speech with the party slogan `Chadh vipaksh ki chhatee par, mohar lagao hathi par (Wipe out the Opposition, put your stamp on the elephant)' . Speech over, the candidates finally unfolded their hands to join the crowd by Kumar Harsh in clapping for her.

ahul Gandhi's team of young MPs has been deployed on Mission Uttar Pradesh. Haryana MP Deepender Hooda, a Jat, is coordinating the CongressRashtriya Lok Dal campaign. He has set up a YASHBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com control room in Meerut to monitor the western Uttar Pradesh campaign. He is also one of the campaigners. Other Team Rahul RAHULWITH HOODA members Jitin Prasada and R.P.N. Singh have been asked to deliver the Assembly seats in their constituencies. A thrilled Hooda tweeted "Looking by Priya Sahgal forward to it".
PTI

WILD
C A R D
They may have given him a ticket but they certainly don't want to go to his party. Badshah Singh, a former tainted BSP minister who has joined the BJP, is contesting from Mahoba in Bundelkhand. The only party leaders who showed up at his campaign are Vice-President Vinay Katiyar and Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi.
by Ashish Misra

RICHA JOSHI

TICKET TO LIFE
t's a highly risky way to lobby for a ticket. Radhelal Rawat, the incumbent BSP MLA from Mohan seat, was told that he was being passed RADHELAL RAWAT over in favour of Jayprakash Rawat. A depressed Radhelal consumed poison on February 1, the day Jayprakash filed his nomination, and was rushed in the nick of time to hospital. There was another twist in the tale. The returning officer cancelled Jayprakash's nomination as invalid and the party had to fall back on Radhelal. He has not just got his life back but also something apparently more precious--the party ticket.

AMAR'S ANTICS

I

J

ayaprada is the crowdpuller at Rashtriya Lok Manch leader Amar Singh's rallies. Just as his chopper touches down at Azamgarh's SKP College maidan, the crowd shrieks excitedly at the first glimpse of the southern star. Jayaprada waves back with equal enthusiasm, breaking into an occasional namaste. She tells the crowd

in a choked voice that Mulayam Singh has wronged her. Then it's Amar's turn. "How many hours do you get electricity," he asks. The crowd roars back: "Four hours." "Yeh MaMu ka raaj khatam karna padega (we must end the rule of MaMu)," says Amar and then explains that Ma is for Mayawati and Mu for Mulayam. by Sudhir Singh

(FROM LEFT) JAYAPRADA WITH AMAR

Poor Sharad Yadav. The Janata Dal (United) president landed in Basti to campaign for his party candidate on February 2. To his dismay, all he found was an empty dais. The candidate was missing. The few onlookers who arrived had come to see the helicopter and not listen to Yadav.

Art Attack

A RANGOLI DEPICTING THE VOTER IDENTITY CARD AT A CHILDREN'S COMPETITION IN BULANDSHAHR TO ENCOURAGE VOTING

by Surendra Trivedi

34

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

P O LL S A P A R T

HEAL THE NATION
A Catholic priest tries to change the rules of the game in the Goa Assembly elections
It's yet another mix of religion and politics but with a totally different slant. Father Bismarque Dias, a young Roman Catholic priest, is standing as an independent candidate from Cumbharjua in Goa, the Assembly constituency under which falls the World Heritage Site of Old Goa. The wiry, jeans-and-tee shirtclad young priest has already made an impression with voters. Established politicians, including the local Congress MLA, builder and sand miner Pandurang Madkaikar, are feeling the heat of Dias's soaring popularity. Not surprisingly, the Priest's family has been threatened and their home vandalised. Undaunted, Dias has come up with a unique Kindness Manifesto in the form of an apology to Goan youth for what the elders have done unto them. Some of the highlights: 1 "I confess and apologise on behalf of all the adults of the world for our wrongdoings to all the precious children and our beautiful earth. 2 When you were hungry, instead of organic food, we gave you junk food. 3 When you were thirsty, instead of water, we gave you Coke and destroyed your health. 4 When you needed a hug, we showered you with material gifts. 5 When you yearned for our pres-

BISMARQUE DIAS SETS OUT ON HIS CAMPAIGN TRAIL

ence, instead of our time, we gave you TV and computer games. 6 When you were eager to learn, we gave you book knowledge and called that education. 7 When you wanted to explore the world, instead of walking by your side, we gave you cars and bikes. 8 When you tried to succeed honestly, instead of encouraging you, we taught you to bribe. 9 When you wanted a cool atmosphere, instead of providing shade,

we cut trees and gave you ACs. 10 When you looked for a better future, instead of good leaders, we took money for votes and gave you corrupt leaders. I am extremely sorry. I believe the cry of the earth is also the cry of our beautiful children. I commit today, to do whatever I can to give you what my ancestors gave me: A Healthy Earth." Clearly, the Anna effect has reached Goan shores. by Bevinda Collaco

I may not have gone where I intended OF THE WEEK to go, but I think I have ended up where I needed to be.
-- Samajwadi Party leader

STRAWS IN THE WIND
The opinion polls back Samajwadi Party
STAR NEWS -NIELSEN February 3 NEWS 24 CHANNEL AND OBI/SCL (UK) February 5

BET-O -METER
INDIATODAY has been tracking the

satta market from January. The figures haven't changed.
UTTAR PRADESH
February 6

SP BSP CONG BJP RLD IND/OTHERS

135 101 79 61 20 7

127 108 78 57 16 17

Samajwadi Party 120 / 130 Bahujan Samaj Party 100 / 110 BJP 80 / 90 Congress + RLD 60 / 70
Even bets. Rates quoted by bookies in Lucknow.

Akhilesh Yadav on January 14

Compiled by Abdus Salam

36

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

