Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

EXTRA ATTENTION
Bollywood bit part players, Ravan and Eddie, come centrestage
By Anvar Alikhan

THE EXTRAS
byKIRAN NAGARKAR Harper Collins Price: RS 599 Pages: 467

BETWEEN THE COVERS The Extras gives us fascinating insights into life on the footpaths of 1960s Mumbai.Ravan and Eddie speak volumes on the nameless,faceless, behind-the-real-scenes people in Bollywood. Nagarkar's storytumbles out like the warm,brown, rushing waters of a Mumbai monsoon flood.

om Stoppard did something interesting: he took two minor characters from Hamlet, Rosenkrantz and Guildenstern, and created an entire play around them. Kiran Nagarkar has done something similar: taken two Bollywood extras--the Rosenkrantzs and Guildensterns of our time and created a novel around them. And the two extras he's picked up are none other than Ravan and Eddie of his eponymous earlier novel, now grown up, 20 years on. The Extras is a novel for all of us who, while watching an old Hindi movie, have idly focused not on Dev Anand or Waheeda Rehman, but on that guy in the background behind them, and asked: What was his story? What were his dreams, his loves, his betrayals? Where did he come from? What became of him? Ravan Pawar and Eddie Coutinho are, 20 years on, still living at CWD Chawl, with their tough, steely-vertebrated mothers. Their lives run on roughly parallel, but distant tracks. The former is now a taxi driver, who had earlier played in the Cum September Jai Bharat Band, and is silently in love with Pieta, Eddie's sister. The latter is a bouncer in an `auntie's joint', who plays with a pop band and is in love with the slutty Belle. They both keep getting in and out of trouble with sundry tormentors: with shadowy underworld characters, visa and immigration authorities, their respective love interests, and, not the least, the police. Then an unseen hand seems to pull a lever, and the tracks of their lives imperceptibly converge. Ravan and Eddie both join acting classes run by K.K., the has-been film star; they both become extras, hanging around Rajkamal Studio; they both, by a sheer stroke of luck, get the opportunity to dance with Helen in Apne Dil Ki Suno--a dance num-

T

ber that becomes a big hit. They both become celebrities in the gullies of Mazgaon. And this, they naturally assume, is the first step on an inevitable upward path to success. After all, nobody ever set out in life saying, "Oh wow, what I really want to be is a filmi extra". But, if that is so, how do you explain the thousands of extras scraping out a living at the grim marginalities of Bollywood: all those faceless, nameless people you see or, rather, don't see in the background of every dance number, fight sequence or crowd scene. That's a lesson Ravan and Eddie have to be taught before they can really be redeemed. Nagarkar is a wonderful story-teller and his story tumbles out in torrents, like the warm, brown, rushing waters of a Mumbai monsoon flood. The dark, humorous prose of Ravan and Eddie seems to have evolved through the years into something more compassionate, but no less funny, meandering through whimsical riffs on subjects such as brass bands, Mumbai taxis, Morarji Desai's Prohibition policy and bus-conductor-turned-comedian Johnny Walker, before arriving at the truth of "Jate thhe Japan, pahunch gaye Cheen, samajh gaye na (Transliteration: You want to go to Japan, but arrive in China instead)." One final reflection: why is it that my favourite Indian authors have this thing about falling from great heights? Rushdie had his Saladin Chamcha plummet 29,002 ft from an exploding Air India aircraft; Allan Sealy had his Great Trotter tumble 2,000 ft from a hot-air balloon; Nagarkar, somewhat less ambitiously, had his baby Ravan leap 50 ft from the fourth floor of the CWD Chawl. Never mind. The Extras is a rambunctious celebration of life that's lived at ground level, on the footpaths of 1960s Mumbai. Anvar Alikhan is an advertising professional and columnist

SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

FEBRUARY 20, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

75

NEW

