Nation

TAMILNADU KERALA

PAST CATCHES UP
Congress may be left red-faced if the governor's role in a land denotification case in Hyderabad is reinvestigated
amil Nadu Governor and former Andhra Pradesh chief minister K. Rosaiah, 79, is in fresh trouble with evidence building up against him in a land denotification case in Hyderabad. On July 15, 2010, as then chief minister, Rosaiah had denotified 9.14 acres of prime land at Ameerpet in Hyderabad through a government order. The government had done this on representations made by private parties--Dr G.N. Naidu, K. Vijayakumari and nine others. The land was acquired for the construction of a district commercial complex in 1997. K. Mohanlal, a petitioner and a member of the Telangana Advocates Joint Action Committee (TAJAC), is planning to approach the Supreme Court in two months seeking the governor's removal on grounds of corruption. If the petition is accepted by the court, it can come as a major embarrassment for Congress. Two IAS officers--B.P. Acharya, who was Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority (HMDA) commissioner, and S. Appa Rao, the then principal secretary of municipal administration under Rosaiah--had testified against him in the Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB) court in Hyderabad on January 24. On February 7, another IAS officer, C.V.S.K. Sarma, the then principal secretary to Rosaiah and now principal secretary, horticulture and sericulture, identified the then chief minister's signature in the files. "These files were circulated as `most

CHRISTIAN MARX
CPI(M)'s Last Supper could

T

important' from the chief minister's office," said T. Sriranga Rao, counsel for the petitioner. The court will now appoint an amicus curiae to present arguments based on evidence and it will be heard on February 15. Initial investigation in the case started in December 2010 when Mohanlal had filed a complaint in the ACB court alleging that by favouring private parties, Rosaiah had caused a loss of Rs 200 crore to the state. No evidence was, however, found against Rosaiah and the ACB court was requested to close the FIR on March 9, 2011. This led Mohanlal to file a counter petition in the ACB court on August 25, 2011. The court decided to examine the witnesses. Defending Rosaiah, a Congress leader said that he would prove his innocence. "Already one investigation has shown that he has done no wrong. Besides, TAJAC is close to the Telangana Rashtra Samithi,'' he said. "The ACB court has the power to summon the governor but for that the President's permission is required," said a legal expert. by Sreekala G.

well be a desultory meal

THE CONTROVERSIAL POSTER

ON JULY 15, 2010, AS ANDHRA PRADESH CHIEF MINISTER, ROSAIAH HAD DENOTIFIED 9.14 ACRES OF LAND IN HYDERABAD.
52
INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

K. ROSAIAH

he CPI(M)'s attempts to influence Kerala's dominantly anti-communist Christian community appears to have backfired. The state's Catholic church strongly objected to a picture of a crucified Jesus in a strange poster at a CPI(M) exhibition in Thiruvananthapuram. "Their attempt to make Jesus a comrade has hurt our sentiments," read a statement by the Kerala Catholic Bishops Conference. The CPI(M) hit back saying no church can claim monopoly over Jesus, who was a revolutionary. Marxists, however, received support from non-Catholic church leaders. The Marxists came in for further embarrassment when a poster allegedly put up by a trade union affiliated to CPI(M), burlesquing the famed Da Vinci painting, The Last Supper, appeared. In the poster named Capitalism's Last Supper, Christ was morphed into US President Barack Obama and Sonia Gandhi's face appeared in place of Mary Magdalene. They were flanked by Congress and BJP leaders the CPI(M) despises. The `disciples' included Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, BJP leader L.K. Advani, Kerala Chief Minister Oommen Chandy and even French President Nicolas Sarkozy. "This exposes CPI(M)'s bluff about its regard for Christ," said Chandy. The poster disappeared soon. by M.G. Radhakrishnan

T

NEW

