UP FRONT

PRASENJIT K. BASU

WHERE IS RAJIV'S LEGACY?
n the capital markets, and the private sector more bulge, the Arab one manifests itself in lofty and rising generally, it is widely accepted that India's economic youth unemployment rates, providing the timber for a success of the past 20 years was achieved despite the revolution of unmet expectations. The current Congress leadership's myopic agenda infirmities of the state. Yet, the present leadership of the threatens to take India increasingly toward the West Asian Congress party is intent on deepening a statist agenda. Congress leaders assume that NREGA contributed to and north African rather than East Asian economic trajectheir electoral victory in 2009, and are sure that the Food tory. Ironically, the liberalisation of India's economy actually began under Indira Gandhi in 1980, albeit haltingly, Security Bill is the ticket to re-election in 2014. While NREGA is a great tool to spread largesse to politi- when she agreed to take a $5 billion loan from the IMF. Rajiv cal intermediaries, and ensure a modest trickle to the poor, Gandhi substantially expanded those reforms in 1985, beit hugely distorts the rural labour market, makes the most ginning with a reduction in income-tax rates, lower import labour-intensive industry unviable, and has contributed to duties and modest de-licensing of industry. the upward pressure on wages and prices that the RBI In 1991, the Congress election manifesto, drafted under Rajiv Gandhi's leadership, contained a radical programme struggled to contain in 2010 and 2011. At a time when the fiscal deficit over the past 12 months of economic liberalisation, most of which was eventually has risen to 5.7 per cent of GDP (a full percentage point higher implemented by P.V. Narasimha Rao's government. than promised in the last Budget), the Food Security Bill will The 20th anniversary (last July) of Narasimha Rao's cause more permanent damage to the fiscal balance. economic reforms went uncelebrated by Congress, despite More perniciously, the Bill will effectively kill the oper- the fact that Rao's finance minister is now our Prime ation of the free market in foodgrain, severely hurting Minister. Ironically, the party led by Rajiv Gandhi's widow India's farmers, who want to be able to export their sur- and son is running away from his own inheritance. plus grain, not be obliged to sell it to the state, which will Instead, the Congress continues to embrace the ideothen attempt to sell it at far below cost to 75 per cent of logical hangover of the Indira policies of 1969-74, which India's citizens. Thankfully, Agriculture Minister Sharad led to economic stagnation and inflation rates of over 20 Pawar is openly opposed to this scheme, which would thor- per cent. They inevitably caused a politico-economic crisis oughly undo the gains of the Green Revolution. that brought Jayaprakash Narayan and Morarji Desai out The 1991 reforms (and those of 1999-2003) freed up the of political hibernation to head movements in Bihar and organised corporate sector, and unleashed its untapped po- Gujarat that gathered nationwide support, eventually ousttential. But the vast unorganised sector remains subject to ing Congress from power in March 1977. a Licence Raj that allows babudom the freedom to harass Indira was more pragmatic (and pro-business, exhortand exploit the poor in urban areas--while the Essential ing "more work, less talk") during the Emergency, and in Commodities Act constrains farmers her final term as PM (1980-84), when SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com from getting remunerative prices for India's economy pushed onto a their produce. higher-growth trajectory (5.5 per cent India is now in the midst of a onceannually, rather than the 3.6 per cent in-history Demographic Dividend that average annual growth in 1950-79). began around the year 2000, and will The lesson Rajiv drew from his last until 2035. As the dependency first five-year term was that a more ratio steadily declines, the national liberalised economy would generate savings rate rises, increasing the promore growth and jobs. Belying the portion of national income that can be export pessimism of the past, India's invested, thereby boosting productivexports of goods and services have ity, the ultimate guarantor of prosperexpanded more than twelve-fold in ity. This is the virtuous circle that the past 20 years. The original spur China (1978-2012), Japan (1950-90) came from Rajiv Gandhi. What a pity and South Korea (1965-2010) have that Rajiv's legacy has been buried by benefited from in the past. his party, in pursuit of a headlong But the need to create jobs is the plunge into statist policies that now key to ensuring this virtuous circle. threaten the future of India's ecoRajiv's legacy has been Some Arab economies (Egypt, Libya, nomic miracle. buried by his party in Syria, Saudi Arabia) show the dangers pursuit of a headlong of a jobless demographic transition. Prasenjit K. Basu is an economist and Unlike India's or Indonesia's youth plunge into statist policies. president of the India Club, Singapore

I

12

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

NEW

