NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA
AP

Moms On the Warpath
Moms in the US have found something other than TV soaps to worry about. Onemillionmoms.com, a project of the right-wing American Family Association (AFA), has launched a protest against JCPenny department stores for choosing TV host Ellen DeGeneres as their spokesperson. DeGeneres's fault? She's openly gay and married to TV actor Portia de Rossi.While the company stood by its choice, commentary continues online. "AFA is absolutely right to protest JCPenny's use of Ellen DeGeneres. JCPenny is desensitising US families to sexual deviancy."-- Bryan Fischer, AFA "Bill O'Reilly (TV host) & Bernie Goldberg (journalist) are clueless on the homosexual issue regarding JCPenny hiring Ellen.It's a religious issue."-- Pastor Patrick Hall, decrying DeGeneres supporters. The group Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation's petition on their `Stand Up For Ellen' website received over 36,000 signatures.

TWO GEMS FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet Point of View
In his latest blog post titled Festivals and Freedom,author Amitav Ghosh comments on the Salman Rushdie and Jaipur Literature Festival controversy and the changing relationship between writers and readers.He writes,"Through the last century the relationship between readers and writers was largely impersonal.This was,I think,one of the reasons why writers were able to take greater risks in hurling defiance at society at large."
AMITAV GHOSH
VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Word on Mumbai
On vanityfair.com,diarist Tom Freston writes about the legacy of Mumbai's Café Leopold as a literary haunt and a witness of the 2008 terror attacks.In Everyone Goes to Leo's he says,"Leo's has not changed much since I was a regular there in the 70s.What's new is the stack of Shantaram books by the cash register and all those bullet holes--the two new narratives of the Leopold Café legend."
CAFE LEOPOLD

DEGENERES (RIGHT) WITH PORTIA DE ROSSI

app alert

Top of the Lot
It's all about knowledge this week. These apps bring you the best text from the web: Stanza enables you to download free eBooks from various sources. Read It Later is a handy app that enables you to save pages from the web to read later. Wikipanion gives you quick access to Wikipedia articles and lets you tweet from them.

Q& blog watch A Raj Ganpath, Fitness Trainer
A US-educated, BITS Pilani graduate, Raj Ganpath, 29, gave up a tech job to start a fitness blog. Today, he helps people tackle their health issues through his blog www.rajganpath.com. Q. Why did you start the blog? A. I was an unhealthy kid. As I grew up, I learnt that eating right and moving around will keep me healthy. It changed my life and I wanted to change others, so I started the blog. Q. Which fitness blogs do you follow? A. Anthony Colpo, Jason Ferruggia and Martin Berkhan of leangains.com. Q. How does your blog help people? A. My readers keep in touch with me and I advise them. I also have a fitness group where people consult with me.

More for Less
viral video
Independent filmmakers' perpetual rant is about lack of funds for promotion. 20th Century Fox solved the problem for their low-budget superhero flick Chronicle with a grassroots marketing strategy. They sent human-shaped RC planes into the New York City air, giving the illusion of flying teens and making bystanders do a double-take. A video of the stunt went viral soon after and the promotion clearly worked as Chronicle debuted as the week's No. 1 movie with $22 million (Rs 110 crore).

web wow

Fun Learning
Many websites promise to do good if you visit them. But the UN World Food Programme-run www.freerice.com, does so while educating you. On the homepage is a question and each time you give a right answer, the UN donates 10 grains of rice. The site's large number of visitors have helped donate millions of grains of rice per month.

RAJ GANPATH

72

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

