Nation ANDHRAPRADESH

OFFICERS TAKE ON MINISTERS
Bureaucrats and politicians spar as CBI targets IAS officers and lets off the masters
IAS OFFICERS SPEAK TO THE MEDIA AFTER THEIR ASSOCIATION MEETING IN HYDERABAD

A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

fficers of the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) in Andhra Pradesh have decided to abandon decision-making and make an appeal to the Prime Minister against the `baffling ways' of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). At an emergency meeting of the state IAS Officers Association in Hyderabad on February 3, a day after they met and complained to Chief Minister Kiran Kumar Reddy, they reiterated that the entire Cabinet should be held accountable for the policy decisions taken by the government on land allotments or incentives given to individuals or organisations. They alleged a witch-hunt of bureaucrats in the name of investigating the Jaganmohan Reddy illegal assets case, the Emaar land scandal and the Obulapuram Mining Company (OMC) mining scam. Bureaucrats are peeved at the manner in which the CBI calls in IAS officers for questioning and lists them among the accused, while glossing over the role of ministers and other politicians responsible for initiating unlawful decisions. They have also decided to hire lawyers for the two IAS officers arrested and lodged in Chanchalguda Prison--B.P. Acharya

O

in the Emaar land scandal and Y. Srilakshmi in OMC mining scam cases. "Ministers were squarely responsible for all government decisions and the CBI must examine them if it considers any decision wrong," said S. Bhale Rao, the IAS Officers Association president. The irony here is the association remained silent when Rao, then principal secretary (health), was suspended by the then chief minister Dr Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy (YSR) for not doing his bidding to issue orders in violation of rules in September 2004. The political class has not taken kindly to the charge that they were being let off while officials are being made scapegoats. They are furious with the IAS officers for their statements questioning the manner in which the CBI is probing the scandals. "They are not children but responsible people. How can they put the whole blame on ministers and claim to be innocent?" said senior Congress

IAS OFFICERS HAVE DECIDED TO HIRE LAWYERS FOR TWO COLLEAGUES LODGED IN CHANCHALGUDA PRISON.

leader and ex-minister J.C. Diwakar Reddy. "It is the responsibility of IAS officers to let a minister know if his or her decision ran counter to law. If they know who had taken unlawful decisions and forced them to issue government orders, they should tell the CBI who they are," said Rajya Sabha member V. Hanumantha Rao. Former finance minister Yanamala Ramakrishnudu of Telugu Desam Party (TDP) said, "Although the minister is the government, according to the rules of our system, IAS officers who do not render advice as per the law are also accountable." Others contended officers can't claim immunity. "No country in the world provides protection that they enjoy under Article 311 of the Constitution," said bureaucrat-turned-politician and Lok Satta party President Dr Jayaprakash Narayan. "The protection was meant to enable IAS officers to give dispassionate advice," he added. Accusing the then YSR ministry of indulging in massive corruption and spawning scandals, TDP chief N. Chandrababu Naidu said, "The image of Andhra Pradesh has suffered as officials are airing their grievances publicly, instead of using their powers to reject what may have been suggested by politicians. They should give a thought to consequences when they yield to pressure." With the bureaucracy raising the banner of revolt and politicians hitting back, the Chief Minister has a crisis of confidence in governance on his hands. Though he assured officials that he would ensure that CBI goes only by the book without harassing anyone, he steered clear of the demand of collective responsibility that makes ministers culpable too if anything goes wrong. It can only mean a delay in decision-making.
by Amarnath K. Menon

50

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

