GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

FAMILY RULE
he British have finally discovered what the whole of India knew. That it pays to be close to Rahul Gandhi. Devastated at losing the Rs 50,000-crore fighter jets contract to France, some British newspapers have spun a theory that it's because British Prime Minister David Cameron didn't pay enough attention to Rahul. The Guardian quotes Cameron as saying he has excellent relations with Manmohan Singh, but notes that power within India's ruling Congress party rests with the Gandhis. It also points out how Rahul snubbed Cameron by flying out to London shortly before the British PM landed in Delhi in 2010. Rahul is considered close to Labour leader David Miliband. They share a common love for village sleepovers in UP.

T

AP

CAMERON

SIPRA DAS /www.indiatodayimages.com

RAHUL

REAGAN

FLUSH WITH POWER
he way to Mumbai's heart is through its toilets. Or at least the Congress believes it. The party is all set to promise construction of 10,000 public toilets in the city in its manifesto for municipal corporation polls on February 16. The Mumbai Development Index 2010 shows that Mumbai needs 1.20 lakh toilets whereas it has only 65,000."We will construct public toilets under every alternate flyover," Mumbai Congress spokesperson Kishor Joshi told INDIA TODAY. Ah, but first they will have to build flyovers.

ON THE TREADMILL THE HAND

T

J

JAYALALITHAA INAUGURATING THE WOMEN-ONLY GYM

Jayalalithaa has a gift for the 14 women MLAs in Tamil Nadu Assembly--a women-only gym. At a cost of Rs 16 lakh, the gym has it all; two treadmills, a twister, a propel elliptical cross trainer and an electrical body massager. Only a full-time instructor is missing. The Chief Minister took a good look at it when she inaugurated it on February 1. She didn't use any of the equipment though. Not to be mean, but it wouldn't hurt.

THAT MOCKS
No one spares Congress in Twitterverse. Last week there were two figures of fun. One was Vilasrao Deshmukh, whose son Riteish got married to fellow actor Genelia D'Souza (Congrats Genelia, said one wag, for getting an Adarsh sasur). The other was Kapil Sibal, who had a new word invented in his honour, Sibaleth. Among the Sibaleths: I Sibal says army chief was born in NDA regime. I Somebody told me Kapil Sibal blamed Alexander Graham Bell for the 2G scam. I Kapil Sibal can run a marathon and fluidly claim zero fluid loss. I Kapil Sibal blames Britishers for loot, Congress just followed the policy. I Sibal: It's not my fault that I said "zero loss" . It was continuation of Aryabhata's policy.
SIBAL

MAKING A MARK

G

uess who was new on Twitter last week? Justice Markandey Katju, going by the fashionable handle of mark_katju (also his email ID). He was immediately welcomed by star tweeple Omar Abdullah, Shashi Tharoor, Bibek Debroy and the lovely Gul Panag, who said she would "keep checking" his tweets regularly. But he was gone all too soon, his Twitter account deleted.

KATJU

CHANDRA DEEP KUMAR /www.indiatodayimages.com

STAGE FRIGHT
The stage at BJP President Nitin Gadkari's rally in Mohamadabad constituency of Ghazipur district, Uttar Pradesh, collapsed. But the only thing hurt may have been his pride as it set off a cottage industry of jokes. Here are a few: Nitin Gadkari brought the house down. A politician truly worth his weight in gold. I Gadkari walks into a cricket match.The batting order collapses. I And worse, if all the world's a stage, the world is telling Nitin Gadkari to lighten up.
I I

GADKARI

14

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

NEW

GLASS HOUSE MUSCLE MAN
SUKHBIR

LASTING TIE

C

learly, Jitendra Singh has been influenced by his boss' six-pack. The Union minister of state for home, who is close to Congress General Secretary Rahul Gandhi, wants youngsters in his parliamentary constituency, Alwar, to be fit for recruitment to paramilitary forces. So he has bankrolled the setting up of 350 gymnasiums, using all his MPLADS fund for this year totalling Rs 5 crore. Alwar has recently been sanctioned training centres for Subsidiary Intelligence Bureau, BSF, CRPF and Indo-Tibetan Border Police by the Central Government at a cost of Rs 500 crore. Besides this, 800 acres of land have been earmarked for headquarters of the Special Protection Group in Tijara, a town in Alwar.

I
AMARINDER

PARTY TIME
fter a punishing campaign that ended with polling on January 30, Punjab politicians are winding down in style. Shiromani Akali Dal President Sukhbir Badal headed straight for the super-luxurious Oberoi in Gurgaon where the Rs 3,00,000 per day presidential suite isn't a problem since he co-owns the property. Amarinder Singh, already anointed the Congress's chief ministerial choice by Rahul Gandhi, is once again the centerpiece of Chandigarh's posh party circuit. Aspiring ministers and officers hoping for plum postings jostled to catch the "Maharaja's" eye at one such dinner at former Jalandhar MP Rana Gurjit's house on February 3. They, and we, will know what happens soon.

A

ndia-Pakistan relations may have soured over the years but one crossborder tie hasn't. Senior BJP leader and former actor Shatrughan Sinha took time out on January 18, during his visit to Pakistan, to meet his NATH "darling sister'' Zain Zia, daughter of the controversial former president, late General Zia-ul-Haq. He was in Islamabad as part of a delegation of Indian parliamentarians,
SINHA

The University Grants Commission (UGC) has not had a full-time chairman since February 2011.The three-member search committee is finally set to recommend a shortlist to the Ministry of Human Resource Development. However, accusations of irregularities against two frontrunners, Deepak Pental, former vice-chancellor of Delhi University, and R.C. Sobti, vice-chancellor of Panjab University, may delay the process. Pental has been rapped by the V.K. Shunglu Committee which inquired into the execution of the Commonwealth Games and Sobti has been under a cloud for improper recruitment of teachers at his university. Also, HRD Minister Kapil Sibal is preoccupied with his other portfolio, telecom, and may not make a decision in a hurry.

PSSST...

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

SINGH
PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

"All the political leaders in India, all the top ones, have an obsession with prime ministership. This is not Rahul Gandhi's obsession. I have another obsession."
RAHUL GANDHI,
SUBIR HALDER /www.indiatodayimages.com

AICC

General Secretary

"The truth can never be hidden. Subramanian Swamy can appeal in the high court, in the Supreme Court and then in the end, he can appeal to God."
KAPIL SIBAL, HRD Minister

"If we fall short of majority in forming government in UP, I would prefer to drown in Saryu river than strike an alliance with either SP or BSP."
UMA BHARATI,
BJP

leader

BHARATI

and also took along NCP leader Supriya Sule and BJP colleague Shahnawaz Hussain to meet her. Sinha makes it a point to visit Zain once a year. "I try to be there every year on July 29, Zain's birthday, because of the special bond that we share,'' says Sinha. He doesn't remember the exact year when he was first invited by General Zia to his house. "It was in the 1980s and Zain was just a child. She was my fan and the president invited me at her insistence." On this trip, however, he says, Zain gave him a reason to fight with her for the first time. "She said Shatru bhai is the best, but when is Salman Khan coming?"

with ASIT JOLLY, ROHIT PARIHAR, DHIRAJ NAYYAR, BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA, S. SENTHIL KUMAR, KIRAN TARE

16

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

