Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

FALLS AND FRACTURES
If you don't fall,you don't break.That's the bottom line on fractures.Here's new research on fracture risks.

1 Pill popping

People with chronic illnesses-- hypertension,diabetes,asthma and thyroid--and those on long-term medication are believed to be at a higher risk of fractures, especially in the hip.

DOCTOR'S DESK
Dr Rajesh Malhotra, Professor, Department of Orthopaedics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi.

2 3
Chair test
If you have a history of not being able to get up from a chair effortlessly or without assistance,beware. Very often an important indicator,especially for hip fractures.It could be a risk.

Poor eyesight
It has been found that fracture rates in those with moderately impaired (20/30 to 20/80) or poor vision (20/100 or worse) in one or both eyes have elevated fracture risk.

T

he rule of thumb on the fracture front is: higher the age, higher the risk. But certain types of fractures cluster according to age. Wrist fractures are more common in the 40s and 50s while hip, shoulder and ankle fractures are more common in the 70s and 80s. Long dependence on some medicines, especially steroids, enhances bone fragility. Genetics is the crucial overall factor. It determines the strength of your bones. Having a parent with brittle bones markedly increases your risk of getting a fracture. Lifestyle modification can improve bone health, from physical activity, especially weight-bearing exercises, to adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D. One word of caution: make your home fall proof. Most patients with fractures report two things: a fallfrom a height or missing a step. Bathrooms are where most falls take place. Poor vision, loose rugs, loose wires, steps, barely (and sometimes fashionably) lit stairways can lead to unexpected falls and fractures.
as told to Damayanti Datta

4 Coffee and tea

In a 2010 study by Apollo hospital in Delhi,those who drank more than one cup of tea or coffee per day were found to be two times more likely to have a fracture.

5

Alcohol & smoking
Both smoking and alcohol are considered a risk factor for fracture.They cause low bone mass,decreased bone formation,an increased incidence of fractures and delayed fracture healing.

6

Vegetarian diet
Ahigher fracture risk has been noticed in vegetarians,often due to inadequate intake of protein as well as considerably lower mean calcium and vitamin D intake,essential for bone health.

7 Calcium & vitamin D

In India,200-600 mg is the standard daily dietary calcium intake for adults.It should be 1,000-1,300 mg/day,say experts.Apart from foods rich in these two (paneer,milk, curd,almonds and fish),take supplements.And,remember,calcium pills do not contain vitamin D.You need both.

64

INDIA TODAY N FEBRUARY 20, 2012

