The World DHARUN RAVI

IS HATE ON TRIAL OR IN DIAN?
Indian student in the US is accused of bias intimidation after his gay roommate commits suicide in New Jersey's Rutgers University
By Indira Kannan

hen Tyler Clementi stepped off the George Washington Bridge in New York on September 22, 2010, towards a 200-feet drop into the Hudson river, he not only ended his life, he also upended the life of Dharun Ravi, his roommate at Rutgers University in Piscataway, New Jersey. Both were 18; their lives had intersected only a month earlier. In a trial scheduled to start on February 21, a jury will decide whether Ravi, an Indian citizen who has spent most of his life in the US, is guilty on 15 counts of invasion of privacy, bias intimidation, evidence tampering, witness tampering and hindering apprehension or prosecution. Clementi was gay, and one of his trysts with another man in the room he shared with Ravi had reportedly been captured by the webcam on Ravi's computer on September 19. Ravi had viewed the encounter--for "two seconds", according to a brief by his lawyer--along with his friend and fellow student Molly Wei from her room, and then tweeted about it: "Turned on iChat and saw my roommate making out with a dude. Yay." Ravi allegedly tried to set up a second viewing again on September 21, but Clementi had turned off the power to Ravi's computer before his visitor arrived. He had also complained about Ravi's snooping and requested a room change. A day later, he jumped off the bridge after posting on Facebook,

W

AP

"Jumping off the gw bridge sorry". Initial media reports claimed Ravi and Wei had "broadcast" Clementi's tryst on the Internet via live streaming. They also alleged that Clementi had been "outed" by the broadcast and that his suicide was the result of his humili-

Ravi wants his day in court so the world sees that he's not this ogre, this evil homophobic young man.
STEVEN D. ALTMAN, Dharun Ravi's lawyer

ation. It has since been disclosed that there was no broadcast or live streaming, and that Clementi had been out of the closet when he joined Rutgers. The charges against Ravi do not link him to Clementi's suicide. But the count of bias intimidation means he is being charged with a hate crime, or targeting Clementi due to his sexual orientation, and could send him to jail for up to 10 years if found guilty. Ravi was offered a plea bargain under which he could have

DHARUN RAVI LEAVES MIDDLESEX COUNTY COURT

avoided jail time. But he turned it down and chose to go to trial. Ravi's lawyer Steven D. Altman explained, "If he took a plea deal, he would definitely have a criminal record. He's not going to stand there and plead guilty to something he never did, and he never did anything or thought or believed in any bias or discrimination against his roommate." Since Ravi is still an Indian citizen, a

criminal record would have technically made him eligible for deportation. A trial carries obvious risks, of a conviction, and potential jail time and deportation. "In my opinion, he will not be deported but I can't promise that. If anybody pleads guilty to criminal offence in the US, you can be deported," Altman said. According to him, Ravi has already effectively been under house arrest since the story broke: "Here's a young man who was extremely social before this happened, who had a large, large number of friends, was always out, having fun doing what 18-year-olds do, and now he's basically restricted to his house." It was quite a turn in the life of the teenager. The son of immigrants from Tamil Nadu, Ravi graduated in 2010 from one of the top-ranked public schools in New Jersey. He was a brilliant student, earning close to the maximum possible SAT score, and a computer wizard who reportedly drove a BMW to high school. His high school yearbook photograph shows a cheerful and confident teenager with a curly mop and a toothy grin. Once he had been assigned a roommate at Rutgers, Ravi set about trying to find out what he could about him. Clementi was a talented violinist. Ravi's online search eventually led to a gay porn website, and the discovery that Clementi was gay. The portrait of a brash teen that emerges from the chat and text messages sent by Ravi, which are now part of the public record, as well as those disclosed in a recent article in the New Yorker magazine, is not exactly a flattering one. In the messages, Ravi reacts when he discovers that his future roommate is gay (F*** MY LIFE/ He's gay); "poor" (Dude I hate poor people); and allegedly uncool (I was f***ing hoping for someone with a gmail but no). But in other messages, he also declares he feels bad for Clementi, and that he didn't have a problem with his roommate being gay. In a brief to the court, Altman argued that several messages posted by Ravi and by Clementi himself show that Ravi was not homophobic, but were not disclosed to the grand jury that indicted Ravi. Altman says the trial will prove his client was not prejudiced against gays. "I think (the case) is going to turn in the jury's mind when they see that nothing

ever happened because of any bias or any discrimination or any prejudice, that all that happened was the misbehavings of foolish, immature, typical 18-year-old college freshmen for the first time by themselves in a dormitory setting." The high-profile case has also put the Indian American community in the spotlight, and most people are unwilling to comment on it. When reached on the phone, Raahi Singh Grover, a former resident advisor at Clementi and Ravi's dorm and to whom Clementi complained about Ravi, said he didn't want to talk about the case. Several students at Rutgers, who had been acquaintances of Ravi's or Wei's, did not respond to email messages asking for comment. Even a usually vocal group like the South Asian Lesbian and Gay Association of New York City, or SALGANYC, finds itself "between a rock and a hard place", says Aneesa Sen, the group's Support Chair. She said the news of Clementi's death was shocking, but the uproar surrounding this case was equally sobering. "Our first thought was that it's become a big deal because Ravi is South Asian, and it seemed racerelated at least from this perspective," she said. "There was no media attention on the bullies in other recent cases of young gay suicides, only on the victims. It seemed like Ravi was being scapegoated." But SALGA-NYC couldn't say this without seeming to justify Ravi. The trial is likely to be one of the most high-profile cases of the year. Gay rights groups are politically influential in the US and have kept up the pressure on this case. However, many legal experts, some of whom are gay themselves, are questioning whether the charges against Ravi are too harsh and politically motivated, and whether it would be fair to send a 19-year-old to jail for 10 years for what might have been a college prank gone horribly wrong. Even if he is acquitted, Ravi will find his life has changed forever. He was given the option of withdrawing from Rutgers instead of being expelled, and did so. But the online world that first informed him about Tyler Clementi's life will also ensure that his own life forever remains an open book for anyone who wants to check up on him. I

FEBRUARY 20, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

55

