UP FRONT

SUNANDA K. DATTA-RAY

THE LOSTPOETICS OFPORN
ornography lost its allure when it went online. ing a train journey. The Marxist theoretician's knowlWriters like Jean Genet and Susan Sontag edge of where "juice" could be found was as remarkinsist that far from being erotic, it's art, it's intel- able as the bespectacled and bearded RSS lectual, it's literature. But the searing light of day is sarsanghchalak's reading taste. Perhaps Tropic of the real enemy. It's another of life's magic mysteries Cancer is as popular in Marxist cells and RSS shakhas that the Internet has destroyed by revealing all to as Growing Up in Samoa was in St Xavier's. If boureveryone at the click of a mouse. geois youth found delight in one, budding revolutionFor me nothing will ever match the furtive thrill of aries, red and saffron, sought inspiration in the other. the well-thumbed Pelican paperback of Margaret Promise of things to come, Kahane's teenage son Mead's Growing Up in Samoa doing the rounds of our Maurice Girodias designed the cover of that first ediclassroom at St Xavier's College in Calcutta. That was tion of Tropic. In 1953 Girodias founded the Olympia 1954. The sea voyage to England later that year press. Two years later he published Lolita by Vladimir revealed pornography of a more brutal kind when Nabokov, a professor at Cornell University. someone brought on board at Port Said--called the I regarded this as more of an epochal event than armpit of Europe--the paper that is now making the Lady Chatterley's Lover trial in 1960. D.H. headlines, the News of the World. There was no Rupert Lawrence was old hat by then and the spectacle of Murdoch then, but looking back, I can understand the literary giants taking up the cudgels in defence of free comment that of all newspapers, only the appropri- speech cultural theatre. The outcome was a foregone ately nicknamed Screws of the World lived up to conclusion. The tongue-in-cheek ad in a newspaper's C.P. Scott's stern "facts are sacred, comment is free" Jobs Wanted column "Titled lady seeks gamekeeper" dictum. Its facts permitted no tampering for they were stole the show. But Lolita, rejected by Doubleday and court reports of rape, incest, murder, and other Simon & Schuster and denounced as "sheer unrecrimes. Of comment, the Screws had none. strained pornography", shattered the sound barrier. But no one called the Screws pornography. The It rode the New York Times bestseller list, enriched then owners boasted it was as the language with at least two English as roast beef and Yorkshire new words, and freed Alice from pudding. Pornography thrived on the prisons of Wonderland and the wrong side of the English the Looking Glass. Sociologists Channel. Parcels posted there might claim Lolita unveiled a were always "damaged in transit" whole new world that flourishes in and the Royal Mail had to apologetGoa, Bangkok and other playically repack them. grounds of the Western world. But Jack Kahane, a novelist who irrespective of sexual preference, called himself a "booklegger", tried the novel conveys the sense of to play England against France by secrecy and danger that is essential setting up the Obelisk press in Paris to pornography. to avoid England's censorious laws Genet's definition of a valid while publishing in English to esliterary genre whose poetic purcape French prudery. Literary pose collapses if it arouses readers treasures like Radclyffe Hall's The sexually or Sontag's claim that Well of Loneliness and James pornography is ultimately about Joyce's Finnegan's Wake reached Perhaps Tropic of Cancer death and not sex are far less us in England but not many redamaging than the mouse that at is as popular in Marxist membered that Obelisk had also once summons up words and cells and RSS shakhas as published Tropic of Cancer in 1937. pictures, leaving nothing to the Growing Up in Samoa Leaving aside a few steamy imagination and no sense of was in St Xavier's. If passages, Tropic was even more privacy either. impenetrable than Ulysses. It had O for the innocent but secret bourgeois youth found to be intellectual. titillation of Growing Up in Samoa! delight in one, budding No wonder Ashok Mitra found revolutionaries sought Guru Golwalkar absorbed in "a Sunanda K. Datta-Ray is a inspiration in the other. juicy novel by Henry Miller" durwriter and columnist

P

12

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 27, 2012

NEW

