LEISURE
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Power of Pink

GOING UP
Anticipation to see the video of Kareena Kapoor's Fevicol Se item number for Dabangg 2 after the song was released last week. The size of the British royal family,with the Duchess of Cambridge Kate Middleton being said to be pregnant.

GETTY IMAGES

GOING DOWN
FOTOCORP

Madhuri Dixit and Juhi Chawla were rival glamour queens of their time, but they are going rustic for their first film together. Ra.One director Anubhav Sinha has roped in both for Gulab Gang, based on Sampat Pal's Gulabi Gang, a group of vigilantes who fight for women's rights in rural Uttar Pradesh. Opponents better watch out.

Chances of Shah Rukh Khan and Salman Khan becoming friends again, with Shah Rukh categorically denying a patch-up. The average height in the Bigg Boss 6 house following the entry of Jyoti Amge,the world's shortest woman.

Shine on Rusty ALL IN THE FAMILY
Vrinda Kher,20,could be any other budding actor,only that she is daughter and niece to actors Raju and Anupam Kher.And she makes her film debut in Maaya, Vanilla And Strawberries with television directorproducer Ravi Rai,an old family friend."I know her since she was 20 minutes old," he says.She plays Nanhi Chaddha--a talkative and silly,but honest Punjabi girl in the film about five young strangers who become a family.Newcomer Aman Uppal, Namit Das,Ali Fazal and Sara Khan complete the picture. The adventures of Ruskin Bond are back on air, this time with his great granddaughter Shrishti as part of the cast. Ek Tha Rusty, a TV series based on the author's stories, first ran on Doordarshan in the 1990s. When drector Subhadarshini Singh decided to continue the story in Ek Tha Rusty II, Shrishti took a break from boarding school in Bhubaneswar to play Kamla, Bond's one-time love interest, with Vipul Gupta in the title role.

SPAT OF THE WEEK
Director Sanjay Gupta alleged that the story of Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara was lifted. Its writer, Reema Kagti, finally reacted, saying in an interview,"He does not have a single original frame in his seven films." He has been in attack mode on Twitter ever since.

BUZZ OF THE WEEK
Anushka Sharma's lips are all everyone wants to talk about.After all, they do appear fuller don't they? We are waiting to see how she makes this one go away.


FOTOCORP

Compiled by Nishat Bari

72 Volume XXXVII Number 49; For the week Nov 27-Dec 3, 2012, released from Friday onwards

