Living
WILDLIFE T R AV E L PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H WILDLIFE SOCIETY SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

ROAD LESS TRAVELLED
By Aditi Pai
MUMBAI

MUMBAI

HIGH ON TRAVEL
Chirag Bhandari, 25 and Rakesh Verma, 25
An engineer from IIT Bombay, Bhandari quit his job and with Verma, a photographer and animation expert, set up High on Travel with a Rs 4 lakh investment in July 2011. Assistance in picking unusual holidays like campIDEA ing in Batalik or cycling through Nagaland's tribal villages. Help travellers connect with local guides and homestay owners.

BIG

New travel companies are as offbeat as the vacations they offer. Pleasure has become serious business.
bar of homemade chocolate at a small chocolaterie in a sleepy French village in 2009 is all it took for Chirag Bhandari, 25, to make the big switch from a flourishing corporate career to helping people vacation. The chemical engineer from IIT Bombay came back from his road trip, quit his consulting job and set up High On Travel in July 2011 with a kitty of Rs 4 lakh. "I interacted with several locals at that little shop, enjoyed the village charm and realised that life can be much more meaningful if you connect with local ecosystems," he says. Now, his holiday marketing company offers information on such offbeat experiences as cycling through Nagaland's tribal villages, tea tasting in Munnar, or camping with the locals in the Batalik villages in Kashmir. "Travel is a way of building value in society and sensitises you if you do it right," he says. Travelling right, for him, means shedding the comforts of luxury resorts and Michelin-starred restaurants to stay and eat with the locals. Bhandari, with his team of six, is among the growing tribe of young entrepreneurs who are viewing activitybased travel as their ticket to success. From mountain biking to party trooping across the world, these holiday planners are offering a range of experiences off the beaten path. Seven months on, Bhandari isn't exactly raking in profits but hopes to break even soon. "A lot of city people are getting interested in experiential travel that al-

A

WHITE COLLAR HIPPIE
Vikrant Chheda, 30 and Sachin Parikh, 31
Chheda put his environment management business on hold, tied up with friend and software entrepreneur Parikh to start White Collar Hippie in July 2011 with an investment of Rs 15 lakh. Band on a Bus tours to the Sunburn Festival in Goa IDEA and experiential vacations that encourage you to "travel, not holiday" .
MUMBAI

BONOBO ADVENTURES
Sahil Timbadia, 27
Restaurateur Timbadia turned his passion for adventure sports into a business opportunity, setting up Bonobo Adventures in October 2011. His maiden tour was a rafting trip down a lesser known stretch of the Bhagirathi river. His investment is his "personal experience and expertise" . Has extensive tie-ups for his tours. Adventure trips. Next in line are multi-sport IDEA trips to Bhutan and a Sri Lankan holiday with kite surfing and trekking.

BIG

BIG

lows you to see a place beyond the tourist spots and appreciate the local cultures. It's catching on," he says. Sensing the desire in the young, urban traveller to soak in the sights and smells of a place, Mumbai-based couple Suchna, 32, and Yogesh aka Yogi Shah, 36, set up The Backpacker Company in 2003 with an investment of Rs 5 lakh, to take holiday-makers backpacking across Europe. With their help, travellers can explore the cafes of Florence, cycle down Munich's bylanes or go island-hopping in Greece. "Indians are not independent travellers; they want the security of a group, yet the flexibility to explore what they want," says Yogi, who quit his family business to start this venture with wife Suchna, a former air hostess. Most of their clients are in the 20 to 40 age group, with women accounting for 60 per cent of all travellers. They even

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

MUMBAI

THE BACKPACKER CO
Yogesh Shah, 36 and Suchna Shah, 32
Businessman Shah and wife Sucha, a former air hostess, put their travel experience to use and launched The Backpacker Co in 2003 with Rs 5 lakh as investment. Girlfriend Getaways. All-girl trips with IDEA stays in exclusive women's-only floors of hostels where possible.

BIG

have all-girl trips called Girlfriend Getaways with stays in women's-only floors of hostels. "Women are more independent and adventurous and backpacking is catching on, especially among those with international exposure," says Yogi. Catering to a middle class that is increasingly well-travelled, holiday planners are bringing in international concepts like flashpacking (a high budget tour with no fixed itinerary) and couch surfing (where like-minded travellers host each other in homestays). "Such journeys change your outlook on life and reshape your idea of ambitions and goals," says Vikrant Chheda, 30, an

environment management businessman, who launched White Collar Hippie in July 2011 with Sachin Parikh, 31, on a Rs 15 lakh investment. Selfconfessed "adventure junkies", they encourage you to "travel, not holiday" with tours that teach you juggling with horse riding, sand sculpting in the Thar or exploring Kerala through its architecture. In December 2011, they took a group of music lovers with a Mumbai band to the Sunburn Festival in Goa as part of their Band on a Bus series. For those looking to learn how to fish while in Thailand or hone their culinary skills in Italy, advertising professional Manjari Verma, 30, and Avani Patel, 28, a marine biologist-mountaineer set up Broken Compass in March 2010. After years of testing their planning skills on friends, they now repackage popular destinations. The numbers are growing steadily but experiential tourism is still waiting to rake in the big bucks. A majority of Indians continue to opt for package tours, a major hurdle that the new-age travel entrepreneurs face. "People are looking for unique experiences and offbeat travel but it is still in a nascent stage. There is still a large demand for packaged travel," says Sahil Timbadia, 27, the newest entrant to the world of adventure travel. Partner at Bonobo, a popular bar at Bandra in Mumbai, he set up Bonobo Adventures with a maiden trek-and-raft trip down the Bhagirathi river in October 2011 followed by a party in the ancient town of Devprayag, Uttarakhand. Timbadia has invested a few lakhs in the venture and tied up with certified local organisers. A multi-sport trip to Bhutan and a kite surfing-trekking combination in Sri Lanka are in the pipeline even as he juggles his restaurant with his new venture. Ask him why he decided to dabble in travel and his response is quick: the current craze for offbeat vacations is a business opportunity. "We have a growing economy and people have high disposable income. The spending on travel is increasing." All in all, a win-win for the tour planner and the vacationer who wants to tread the road less travelled.
with Shravya Jain

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

50

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

FEBRUARY 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

51

