Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N BOOKS REVIEWS CINEMA E Y E C AT C H E R S

Family Business
After directing Ranbir Kapoor in Rockstar, Imtiaz Ali is teaming up with his mother Neetu Singh, 53, directing her in a television commercial for IndusInd Bank. In her first ever TV ad she plays a mother to Jimmy Shergill, out shopping for a surprise gift for him. "Neetuji is one of the greatest actors we've had. Ranbir has learnt a lot of acting skills from her," says Ali. No argument there.

WEEK WRAP-UP

THE HIGH AND THE LOW
DHANUSH The national award-winning Tamil actor has signed his first Hindi film Raanjhnaa with director Aanand Rai. SHAHID KAPOOR The Mausam star has bagged the role of Batman in Siddharth Anand's Hindi remake of The Dark Knight. We're worried.

TWO GOOD
Head Start
His debut film Pyaar ka Punchnama was a sleeper hit at the box office and actor Divyendu Sharma made a mark.The 28-year-old won two awards for best debut actor and best comedian for his role as Liquid aka Nishant Agarwal. He will be seen next in David Dhawan's remake of Chashme Baddoor, essaying the role of a poet played in the original by actor Rakesh Bedi."I'm greedy for all kinds of roles and don't want to be the cliché hero," he says. Not the right moment for over-confidence. Former Kingfisher calendar girl Esha Gupta, 24, has finally struck it big with two films opposite Emraan Hashmi, Jannat 2 and Raaz 3, where she replaces Jacqueline Fernandes. This after her intended debut in 2009, Hum Aap Aur Pyaar, with long forgotten model-actor Upen Patel, never took off. Says producer Mahesh Bhatt, "She has the allure and Indian sensuality needed for Jannat, and we decided to repeat her in Raaz after we had issues with Jacqueline and her interpretation of the dresses." Things sure are looking up for the former Miss India International, who was once compared to Hollywood actress Angelina Jolie. YOGEN SHAH

FOTOCORP

Identity Crisis
The trailer of Saif Ali Khan and Kareena Kapoor starrer Agent Vinod is reminiscent of Ek Haseena Thi and Race. It is the perfect blend of suspense and drama with loads of action and highspeed car and bike chases. We hope the movie delivers what it promises.


Compiled by Nishat Bari, Avantika Sharma and Prachi Rege

64

Volume XXXVII Number 6; For the week Jan 31-Feb 6, 2012, released on January 30

