UP FRONT

by HORMIS THARAKAN

CURSE OFPERSONALSECURITY
lection campaigns in several states have once again Group (SPG), which was set up to protect the prime minisbrought into sharp focus the close nexus between ter following Indira Gandhi's assassination. Its first direcpower and personal security privileges that prevails tor, Dr S. Subramaniam, was a stickler for rules and in our country today. I am told that it's in Uttar Pradesh, procedure, who made it clear to his youthful protectee, with its proximity to the national capital, that the plethora Rajiv Gandhi, that on matters relating to prime ministerial of leaders who descend on the state with their security de- security, the director of SPG was the boss and not the prime tail, in addition to those who hail from the state, are caus- minister. The young officers handpicked from various cening maximum impact of muscle power of security. tral police organisations and the IPS for the close protecIt is interesting to trace the evolution of personal tion ring of the prime minister were smart, well-trained security in India. There was a time when no one, includ- and well turned-out. The safari suit then came to be ing the prime minister, had overbearing security. I remem- identified with the personal security officer. It was not long ber in vivid detail an incident from the early 1980s. My before every chief minister started setting up a personal mother-in-law was visiting us in Delhi and I had taken a security detail of his own. Unfortunately, many came to beday off to show her around. I drove to South Block, parked lieve that if a policeman wore a safari suit, he automatimy car next to the entrance to the PMO and left my wife and cally became a qualified personal security officer. The Election Commission has done a great deal of work mother-in-law in the car as I went in to attend to some urgent work that had come up. When I returned, my mother- to put things in order. The guidelines regarding use of in-law was ecstatic--prime minister Indira Gandhi had security vehicles are very clear. A minister or any other political functionary is not allowed during election period walked past our parked car, on her way home for lunch. It is well-nigh impossible to imagine getting to park to use pilot cars, even if the state administration has anywhere near the entrance to the PMO these days. It was, granted him a security cover requiring presence of armed as all of us know, the assassination of Indira Gandhi that guards to accompany him. Officers of various services are changed the security scenario in our country for all time mustered from distant states to oversee the elections so to come. Rajiv Gandhi's assassination seven years later as that there is no favouritism. Similarly, police contingents a former prime minister during an election campaign are sent across India to man posts and maintain law contributed in many ways to the over-protective character and order in faraway election-bound states. Eight compaof the security arrangements made for candidates and nies of Kerala Armed Police are currently deployed in Punjab for the elections. campaigners during elections these days. Such vigil on the part of the Election Commission and But long before that, one's security entitlement had its officers may bring down the use become a status symbol, not only of personal security as a symbol of among netas but also among bupower during election time. But reaucrats. When the initial exerthis is a perennial problem which cises for security classification has its impact on the ability of the were undertaken, the then director police to serve the public. A lasting of the Intelligence Bureau, M.K. solution will emerge only if our anNarayanan, came up with the innoalysts are able to produce profesvative idea of grading security risk sional threat assessments and the in the reverse order. As against the personal security strategy for normal practice of grading the high-risk protectees is overhighest class as `A', he called the hauled. We need to look at an unhighest risk class `Z'. It was obtrusive, low-key approach expected that the clamour for (except for the prime minister), higher security based on ego and which this country's intelligence status would be minimal if such a chiefs have traditionally used for classification system was followed. The assassination of Indira their own protection. The only However, it was not long before the problem is that those who want to protectee class caught on to this Gandhi changed the security be in the limelight may have little stratagem. Once the secret was scenario in our country. Rajiv use for such low-key protection. out, everyone started clamouring Gandhi's assassination confor the highest level of security, not tributed to the over-protecjust Z but Z-plus. Hormis Tharakan is a retired IPS tive nature of security for Much thought had gone into the officer who served as chief of candidates during elections. formation of the Special Protection Kerala Police and RAW.

E

12

INDIA TODAY  FEBRUARY 6, 2012

SAURABH SINGH /www.indiatodayimages.com

