GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

SWEETHEART WISHES

S

KAUSHIK UDAYSHANKAR

THE POSTER BY NARAYANASWAMY

ome people will go to any lengths to please their boss. AIADMK party worker P. Narayanaswamy, 48, wanted to wish Tamil Nadu Chief Minister J. Jayalalithaa for her 64th birthday on February 24 through posters tacked up on buses and walls of the city. "Looking forward to her 64th birthday. Respected Tamil Nadu Chief Minister, the God of my heart, champion of people," the posters read in Tamil. "I pray that she should live in prosperity," continued the message endorsed by T.K.M. Chinnayya, state minister for animal husbandry, and other party members. Except sometimes, mere words aren't enough. Accompanying the message was a large photograph of Narayanaswamy, who works for the Metropolitan Transport Corporation; and on his bare chest was a smiling picture of Amma. "I have been making these posters for 10 years. This is my way of thanking her," said Narayanaswamy. He spent a total of Rs 18,000 on these posters. Next time, send her a greeting card. Please.
T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

BOLLYWOOD DREAMS
FOTOCORP

BOSS OF LUCKNOW

NOT AT HOME

I
DEEPSHIKHA AND DHIRAJ DESHMUKH

ilasrao Deshmukh's status as Congress's unofficial ambassador to Bollywood was further solidified when the youngest of his three sons, Dhiraj, got married to film producer Vashu Bhagnani's daughter, Deepshikha. Dhiraj, 30, runs a film finance company. Deshmukh's eldest son and political heir, Amit, 38, is married to a former TV actor, while Riteish married fellow actor Genelia D'Souza on February 4. Cosy.

V

t's not just Rahul Gandhi. Even his mentor-in-chief, Digvijaya Singh, has a lot riding on the Uttar Pradesh elections. If the Congress fails to cross 60 Assembly seats (the current benchDIGVIJAYA mark of respectability), knives will be out for Diggy Raja. The Brahmin lobby at the party headquarters in Delhi has been watching his closeness to Rahul with growing nervousness. Digvijaya has been camping in Lucknow for the past two months. "Tougher the battle, greater the thrill," he tweeted on January 17 as he caught a flight to Amausi Airport. Rahul's team of Youth Congress leaders, deputed in Uttar Pradesh, report to him. Digvijaya makes it a point to touch base with the party office at least once a day, even if it is at 12 at night. His favourite jasmine tea is always on offer, despite his staff's best attempts to add milk to it.

I

YASHWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

UNHAPPY BIRTHDAY
Former Karnataka chief minister B.S. Yeddyurappa can't even celebrate his birthday without a controversy. He cut a cake at his home on February 27, his 70th birthday, and gave a piece to a blind child from an NGO. But he put the cake in the child's mouth with a knife. The incident has angered NGOS. Incidentally, this was the first time in 70 years that Yeddyurappa also hosted multiple parties on his birthday. While a few supporters were treated at a hotel, he hosted a separate bash for journalists. His dwindling supporters organised pujas for him and plastered Bangalore city with posters wishing him a happy birthday, something that didn't happen even when he was chief minister.

ntelligence Bureau (IB) chief Nehchal Sandhu had a surprise visitor two weeks ago. Rahul Gandhi's friend, Union Minister of State for Home Jitendra Singh, 40, went to meet the IB director for a general briefing. The first-time MP from Alwar then paid a visit to CBI Director A.P. Singh. This particular visit raised quite a few eyebrows in North Block since CBI does not report to the home ministry but to the Department of Personnel and Training. CBI sources say that it was just a courtesy call. We'd still like to know what was discussed.
SINGH

YEDDYURAPPA

14

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

GLASS HOUSE
TWEETER IN CHIEF

PARTY RIGHTS
S. Vijayalakshmi, 56, is keen that son Jaganmohan Reddy's Yuvajana Sramika Rythu Congress Party (YSRCP) has an office in the heart of Hyderabad. She's the lone MLA elected on the YSRCP ticket, in May 2011. She wants Legislative Assembly Speaker Nadendla Manohar to allot her accommodation in the MLAs' residential quarters as well as an office room in the precincts of the legislature. As the YSRCP's honorary president, she is eager "to meet people, party workers and legislators" at both places. She will have to forego the MLA's house rent allowance of Rs 12,000 a month. But with an annual income in 2009-10 pegged at Rs 7.20 lakh and assets valued at Rs 24 crore, that's loose change.

KOLKATA FLYOVERS WEAR A NEW LOOK

C

hief Election Commissioner of India S.Y. Quraishi has joined Twitter, or rather "surrendered" to it. Going by the handle @DrSYQURAISHI, he tweeted that his son convinced him to join the micro-blogging site. His tweets suggest that he will take the initiative to connect with people. "I am going to give answers soon. It is difficult to answer all questions together as you may understand but I will try," he wrote in response to a question. As long as they are not related to election results, we presume. We wish him better luck than Markandey Katju, who abandoned the site after a short-lived dalliance.
YASHWANT NEGI /www.indiatodayimages.com

Y

SUVASHIS MULLICK /www.indiatodayimages.com

BLUE MOOD

T

VIJAYALAKSHMI

A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

he Kolkata Municipal Corporation is contemplating a rebate in property taxes for citizens who paint their homes blue. Government offices and park railings are already being painted blue. Very soon, Kolkata's 30,000-odd taxis will also change from black and yellow to white and blue. The joke doing the rounds on social networking sites is, with Mamata Banerjee taking so much interest in the Tollygunge film industry of late, they will be making `blue' films.

QURAISHI

An air of mystery continues to surround the next move of Commerce Secretary Rahul Khullar.The Ministry of External Affairs announced his appointment as India's ambassador to Belgium and the European Union on February 6. Khullar continues to function as commerce secretary and there has been no announcement of a successor in Udyog Bhavan.The rumour mills suggest that Khullar is not willing to go abroad and will be appointed secretary of the Planning Commission when incumbent Sudha Pillai retires at the end of March.

BUZZ...

DUE DATE
As counting day, March 6, approaches, Sukhbir Singh Badal and Amarinder Singh are coming home. The Badals, among them Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal and MP Harsimrat Kaur Badal, returned from a quiet South African vacation to await the verdict in Chandigarh. Amarinder, who alternated between moments spent with his ageing mother in Patiala's Moti Bagh Palace and campaigning in Palia and Rampur, is also back in Chandigarh. Manpreet Badal, the man likely to play spoiler, has been ensconced in the state, bolstering his party PPP's confidence.

"You're only two years older than me darling. When I first emerged from my mother's womb, I was already rehearsing my Academy thank-you speech. Mercifully for you, I've forgotten it."
CHRISTOPHER PLUMMER, Winner of

Oscar Best Supporting Actor

"I have been told that people don't muster courage to write against the Bihar government or its officials. Press doesn't enjoy freedom at present (under Nitish)."
MARKANDEY KATJU, PCI Chairman

"Ponting and Tendulkar are going backwards. For some strange reason they can't see it themselves but it is obvious for the rest of us."
NEIL HARVEY, former

Australian cricketer

PLUMMER

with AVANTIKA SHARMA, SOWMYA AJI, LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI, PRIYA SAHGAL, ASIT JOLLY, KIRAN TARE, BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA, PARTHA DASGUPTA, AMARNATH K. MENON AND DHIRAJ NAYYAR

16

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

