He alth
Scientists are trying to figure out how to measure something as subjective as happiness. Some new research on the scientific map.
Time = Money Happiness = Zero
Here's a word of warning for time-is-money workaholics. New research published in the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology shows that the more one treats time in terms of money, the more one loses the ability to `experience' time and everyday happiness.

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

IMAGINE AND BE GLAD
Imagine. It's the easiest route to happiness. Think out-of-the-box and be happy. Researchers in psychiatry from Washington University at St. Louis, US, have tracked people on their response to a personality test, the Temperament and Character Inventory, for over a decade. It appears that three traits that determine the greatest well-being and life satisfaction are: noveltyseeking, tenacity and the capacity to get lost in the moment, and doing what one loves to do. These are classic characteristics of the creative personality. So search your brain for that spark and be happy.

Joy of Flying Solo
Sociologists at New York University, US, have conducted more than 300 interviews of `singletons' across all ages and classes and have come to the conclusion that people who live alone may be happier and more socially engaged with friends and neighbours than their married counterparts.They found that those living solo are more likely to eat out, exercise, attend extracurricular classes, public events and volunteer for social work.

SMILE AND LOOK YOUNG
A study from the Max Planck Institute in Berlin in a journal, Psychology and Aging, shows that smiling women look younger. In a study of over 1,000 photographs of men and women, women's faces were estimated on average three years younger than their male counterparts. People who smile look attractive, the researchers report.

With "very happy" people, India ranks Number 2 out of 24 countries in a survey conducted in February by French marketing company Ipsos. Indonesia tops the list at .

43%

57%

TECHNOLOGY SPELLS UNHAPPINESS
A new study from Stanford University, published in February in Developmental Psychology, a journal published by the American Psychological Association, shows how technology affects happiness and emotional development. The study on the online habits of more than 3,400 girls between age 8 and 12 found that those who say they spend significant time on computers, smartphones and other devices are less happy than their peers who say they spend less time on screens. The reason, say researchers, is that girls need to experience the full platter of communication that comes from face-to-face contact--body language, facial expression and verbal cues.
I

Compiled by Damayanti Datta

88

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

