Na tion CIVILAVIATION

HAWK EYE ON THE SKY
From shutting down helipads to conducting safety audit of aircraft, the DGCA chief believes in swift action
hen Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) chief E.K. Bharat Bhushan, 57, ordered financial surveillance of all Indian airlines in October 2011, there was panic among the operators. Given Bhushan's track record, they knew it would be difficult to hide the real picture. DGCA discovered that economy measures being followed by most airlines were hurting safety and maintenance standards. Bhushan is not averse to wielding the stick. He had earlier shut down Maha-

W

laxmi Racecourse helipad in Mumbai on July 27, 2011, grounding, among others, the Ambani brothers, the Poonawallas, the Ruias and the Hiranandanis. The helipad was shut for three months after an inspection audit found that it did not adhere to safety standards. "It was for their own safety," says Bhushan. The DGCA chief had ordered a safety audit of all helipads across the country following the Pawans Hans helicopter crash in Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh on April 19, 2011, that killed 18 on board. By then, his credentials as a nononsense officer were firmly established. After taking charge of DGCA in December 2010, Bhushan presided over a crackdown on a fake licence

BHUSHAN WANTS DGCA TO BE AN ACCOUNTABLE ORGANISATION. HE HAS INITIATED STEPS TO BRING TRANSPARENCY IN THE BODY.

BHUSHAN

racket that saw the arrest of 17 pilots and three of his officers. He uncovered rampant nepotism in DGCA, where nine senior officers, including the joint director general, were found to have helped their children become co-pilots and then land a job with various airlines without taking the mandatory government clearance. Bhushan sent the report to the Ministry of Civil Aviation in August 2011, recommending major penalties against eight officials. It hit an expected wall of silence and inaction there. Bhushan feels action against the officials is essential to send a strong message. DGCA, responsible for the safety of the flying public, conducts examinations and issues licences to pilots and engineers. Bhushan says it is a challenge to head the organisation, when the aviation sector is growing by the day. Domestic passenger traffic grew by 17 per cent in 2011, crossing the 60million-mark. A three-fold increase is expected by 2020. Bhushan wants to make DGCA a dynamic organisation. He has changed the examination system for licensing of pilots, making it online and transparent. All pilots above the age of 40 will now have to undergo medical examination twice a year. Bhushan has also revamped the safety department of DGCA. Not surprisingly, the 1979-batch Kerala cadre IAS officer is not the most popular DGCA chief ever. The civil aviation ministry is already working on guidelines for appointment of a fulltime DGCA head to ensure that Bhushan is excluded from the list of contenders. Additional secretary and financial adviser in the ministry of civil aviation, he has been holding the office as additional charge for 14 months. Earlier principal secretary, Kerala Tourism, Bhushan is passionate about exploring exotic places. When it comes to work, he has high regard for tennis partner and senior colleague Vinod Rai, the comptroller and auditor general of India. by Bhavna Vij-Aurora

MARCH 12, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

43

