PUNJAB

Criminal Connect
Police seize 721 mobile phones from prisoners

Nation

PTI

KARNATAKA

BJP LEADERS AT A STRATEGY SESSION IN BANGALORE

COLLATERALDAMAGE
The Assembly porn scandal involving Yeddyurappa loyalists has hit his chances of a quick comeback
orn has managed to do what corruption couldn't. A scandal involving two staunch followers of former Karnataka chief minister B.S. Yeddyurappa who watched porn on the floor of the Legislative Assembly has hit his voter base hard, making his position vulnerable. Yeddyurappa, who managed to turn every adversity into a boon, including jail stay and corruption charges, appears to have failed this time. He has been unable to stem the tide of disgust sweeping the RSS-BJP over the scandal that resulted in the resignation of three ministers. Former ministers Lakshman Savadi and C.C. Patil were filmed watching porn on the mobile of a third minister, Krishna Palemar, in the Assembly on February 7. With just a year to go for the next state elections, Yeddyurappa's monolith Lingayat community support base has developed cracks. "Our support for Yeddyurappa has shrunk even though he is our tallest leader,'' former chairperson of Veerashaiva Mahasabha (a Lingayat

idespread use of mobiles by prison inmates in Punjab has W been brought home by the state's director general of police (DGP) (prisons). On February 18, DGP Shashi Kant revealed that 721 mobile phones had been seized from jails in the state from undertrials and convicts. Accusing his colleagues of deliberate inaction, Kant alleged that no attempt was made to track call records of phones even though some of these were seized from well-known drug peddlers.

P

YEDDYURAPPA'S SUPPORT AMONG THE LINGAYATS IS AT AN ALL-TIME LOW.
44
INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

body) and former Congress minister, Bhimanna Khandre, told INDIA TODAY. Yeddyurappa's support among BJP MLAs has even been reduced to 15 from 70-100 earlier. It was evident when he tried unsuccessfully to get back the chief minister's post or that of BJP state president after the scandal broke. BJP President Nitin Gadkari, who had supported Yeddyurappa so far, told him to shelve his ambitions during a chintan baitak in Bangalore on February 24. The former chief minister's opponents within the party have swung into action. Municipal Administration Minister Balachandra L. Jharkiholi held a meeting of the biggest subcaste of the Lingayats, the Panchamashalis, at Gokak on February 20 to which Yeddyurappa was not invited. Instead, Chief Minister D.V. Sadananda Gowda, whom Yeddyurappa is trying to dislodge, was the chief guest. "BJP needs the support of the Lingayats. But Yeddyurappa's actions have made it very difficult for us to support him, so efforts are on to retain the Lingayat support without him,'' a senior party leader admitted. The Lingayats, said to be the largest community in the state, comprise an estimated 17 per cent of Karnataka's six crore population.
by Sowmya Aji

CENTRAL JAIL, PATIALA

The phones recovered over the past three years include 110 from Ludhiana Jail and 85 from the high security prison at Nabha. Nearly a third of the 18,000 prisoners in Punjab have been booked under drug charges. "Timely action by the police could have exposed the nexus between the drug mafia and their patrons," he said. "I know for sure that many police officers and politicians are involved," Kant claimed. He, however, refused to take names. His allegations have hit the police department hard. Punjab DGP Anil Kaushik has rejected the allegations made by Kant as baseless.
by Asit Jolly

RAJESH SACHAR

