So ciety GUJARATRIOTS

THE BOYWHO IS TORN BET WEEN TWO NAMES
As a two-year-old, Muzaffar was lost during the riots in Gujarat. He was adopted by Hindu parents. Ten years on, his biological family wants him back.
By Uday Mahurkar
MUZAFFAR, ALIAS VIVEK, WITH HIS FATHER SALIM

n February 28, 2002, at 6 p.m., when bloodthirsty Hindu mobs were targeting Muslims for the killing of 59 Ram sevaks at Godhra railway station, a two-year-old boy was crying in despair. In Gulberg Society in east Ahmedabad, where 69 persons were butchered, Muzaffar had fallen from the arms of his aunt Firoza, 18, who was hiding in the home of Congress leader Ehsan Jafri. Firoza was with her brother, Salim Shaikh, and nephew Imraan, when the mob pounced on her and butchered her in the melee. Jafri was also murdered. Muzaffar, Salim's son, survived. His cries came to the attention of anganwadi worker Vikram Patni and his wife, Veena. They took pity on the boy and brought him to their three-room home in Chamanpura before reporting it to a constable. The policeman advised them to keep the boy as the situation was too volatile. But by the end of a fortnight, the couple had fallen in love with the little charmer and adopted him. Muzaffar had become Vivek. The story should have ended happily there, as a beautiful but sad forever, if it wasn't for the intervention of the Special Investigation Team (SIT) appointed by the Supreme Court to probe the 2002 riots. They traced Vivek's original parents, Salim, 35, and Zebunissa, 32, and brought the three together. Now Vivek lives a divided life. Monday to Saturday, he lives with Veena, 59, whose husband passed away in 2004. Every Sunday, he meets his biological parents and brothers Imraan, 14, Faizan, 10, and Firdosh, 9, who refer to him fondly as Muzzu. He studies in Class VI at the municipal school near Veena's home. He adores Hrithik Roshan, whom he watched in Dhoom 2, and believes in Sachin Tendulkar because "he plays for his country

O

We are indebted to Veena for saving him, but I can't afford to lose Muzaffar again.

ZEBUNISSA SHAIKH, Muzaffar's mother

If he wants to live with Veena, we cannot stop him. If he is reared as a Hindu, it's God's will.

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

SALIM SHAIKH, Muzaffar's father

with dedication". But he is confused, Through the week, he prays to the image of Veena's family goddess, Chamundamata. He is clear that he can't live without "Veena Maa". "I can't live without her though I like my original Maa and Bapuji (Zebunissa and Salim) too," he says within earshot of his biological father. In the next moment, he breaks down, sandwiched between two faiths and two families. In November 2008, on the advice of

SIT, Salim and Zebunissa filed an application in the court seeking Vivek's custody from Veena. But to their dismay, they found that Veena was not ready to part with Vivek. She argued that he was her only support after Vikram's death, concealing from the lower judicial court in Ahmedabad that she has a son and three daughters, all of whom are married. Vivek, eight years old at that time, and emotionally attached to his adopted mother, took the

same stand. As a result, the court ruled in January 2009 that Vivek should live with Veena as she was the one who reared him with love and care. The judgment came as a shock to Salim and Zebunissa who longed for their lost child. The couple appealed to the Gujarat High Court in 2009 seeking Vivek's custody. The high court was moved by the episode and in a balancing act ruled in 2010 that till further notice, Vivek should live with Veena

except for the weekends when he should go to live with his biological parents. For two years now, Salim has been riding his motorcycle to Veena's home in Chamanpura every Sunday and bringing Vivek back to his new, tworoom house in a lower middle class locality in Vatva area. By evening, he's back home with Veena, who supports the family with the Rs 10,000 she earns a month as a fish vendor. Salim, a factory worker who now

earns Rs 7,000 a month, still can't forget the day he lost Muzaffar and Firoza. "On that horrendous day, we ran for cover. My wife had gone to live with relatives in another part of the city. When we fled, we thought Firoza too was following us with Muzaffar. But we later found that Firoza was killed by the bloody mob and Muzaffar had gone missing. When we didn't find Muzaffar for many months, we thought he had died and even did his last rites according to the Muslim custom." When SIT offered Salim hope in November 2008 and told him to come to a Government hospital for a DNA test, he was clueless. "Then 15 days later, they called both of us to the office saying there might be good news for us. They showed us an old photo of a small child. Before they could go on, we told them it was Muzaffar. Zebunissa started weeping with joy but I was more stoic," says Salim. According to an SIT official who played a key role in tracing Salim, it was only in their second attempt that they succeeded. They had earlier called a Muslim couple whose DNA didn't match Muzaffar's. Veena and Vikram had initially told the SIT team that they found Muzaffar four months after the riots, when they actually located him a couple of hours after the Gulberg massacre. Salim says if Muzaffar is unrelenting in his decision to live with his adopted mother, he will allow him to do so. As he says: "In that case, even if he is reared as a Hindu I will take it as God's will. After all, it was Veena and Vikram who saved his life. Our problem is Zebunissa. She cannot live apart from Muzaffar." Prashant Bhimani, Gujarat's leading psychologist, says, "Such incidents can leave a child permanently traumatised. The best way to curb the trauma in this case is to allow Muzaffar to take his life's decision. Salim is very prudent to think along those lines since it can bring the boy out of the trauma." Zebunissa weeps silently, reliving the trauma of losing Firoza. "We are indebted to Veena for saving Muzaffar but I cannot afford to lose him again now that I have found him." That's the price cataclysmic events wreak on families caught in the middle. Even 10 years on. I

90

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 12, 2012

MARCH 12, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

91

