GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI

FUNNY SIDE UP
Where there is an election can humour be far behind? No, and the wits at large did not disappoint.Here are some perfect gems. The good news is, all you have to do is chip the handbags off the statues, and they'll look like Mulayam. Breaking news: Hit-and-run case in Uttar Pradesh. Elephant run over by cycle.
BJP could have won in UP if Duckworth-Lewis method was applied half an hour after counting began in the morning.

The Congress is very close to claiming that Rahul Gandhi did not even campaign in UP. Congress played every card--caste card, communal card, regional pride card--in the UP elections, but unfortunately the joker card worked. RahulG has proved that he is the biggest well-wisher of minorities by pushing his party to absolute minority in UP.
REAGAN

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

JAYACHITRA

BLAME IT ON ME
SUBIR HALDERwww.indiatodayimages.com

JAYALALITHAA

Thank God Rahul Gandhi addressed the media at 10 Janpath on March 6, accepting responsibility for the defeat. It ended days of attempts by the Congress to take the rap. Take a look. And we forgive you the eye-rolling. "Why blame Rahul? What has he been saying? Rahul hasn't promised complete change immediately."
Salman Khurshid, Union minister of law and justice, on March 5

"Why should a campaigner accept responsibility? It's the candidate and the organisaton that is responsible. Our campaigner did his job brilliantly. I am to be blamed if things do not work out."
Rita Bahuguna Joshi, Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee chief, on March 6

CM ON SCREEN

F

ormer actor and current Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, J. Jayalalithaa, 64, will be immortalised on the silver screen. A.M.R. Ramesh, who has wrapped up his film Vana Yuddham--a biopic on sandalwood smuggler Veerappan, has revealed that Tollywood actress Jayachitra, 55, has been cast as Amma. Jayalalithaa is an important character in the film as she was instrumental in planning the encounter along with DGP Vijayakumar. Ramesh is confident of the film's release and her approval. "Jayalalithaa ma'am has learnt about it already," he said to the media. We will take his word for it.

"Rahul and Sonia Gandhi are our national leaders. Rahul is not attached with one state. He goes to every state to help the party improve its performance."
Rashid Alvi, Congress spokesperson, on March 3

STALIN IS FACEBOOK

ot to be outdone by the posters that appeared for J. Jayalalithaa's birthday on February 24, DMK cadres went all out to celebrate M.K. Stalin's 60th birthday on March 1. Posters of Karunanidhi's heir were put up all over Chennai. While some

N

STALIN'S `FACEBOOK' POSTER

posters were the usual waving, smiling, flashing the victory sign, others were cleverly designed. One poster caught the attention of many. It was a large blue and white logo of popular social networking site, Facebook, with Stalin's

face beaming next to it. "Our address that gathers all the party cadres is the DMK's Facebook, " said the poster, implying that Stalin was the DMK's Facebook and therefore gave party workers an identity. His Facebook page has only 1,404 likes though. Ouch.

14

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

GLASS HOUSE
MAIL TODAY

QUIRK OF FATE

GUEST-IN-LAW
s if his indiscreet TV interviews were not enough, Robert Vadra has now taken to a new role: That of chief guest. His first appearance, on February 20, at an event to announce Home Expo India 2012 in Delhi, went almost unnoticed. However, his next outing as chief guest at DLF Gold Course in Gurgaon managed to make news. The self-confessed fitness freak, Vadra fainted as he was giving away prizes to the winners of the Madhavrao Scindia
RAMESH SHARMA

H

e inaugurated Nirmal Nagar Police Station in Mumbai on December 24, 2002, as minister of state for home. Now it may be the burial ground for former Mumbai Congress president Kripashankar Singh's ambitions. Mumbai Police's Special Investigation Team, led by Rajwardhan Sinha, filed an FIR with the same police station against Singh for amassing assets worth Rs 300 crore disproportionate to his monthly income of Rs 45,000. That's a real twist of fate.
FOTOCORP

A

KUMARASWAMYWITH RADHIKA (RIGHT) AND SHAMIKA

WHAT AN ASSET

T

SINGH

here is no end to the woes of former Karnataka chief ministers. After several rounds of antics of one former chief minister, B.S. Yeddyurappa, it is the turn of his bete noire, H.D. Kumaraswamy. An advocate-activist, T. J. Abraham, has filed a "representation" with the Lokayukta's office seeking the details of the assets belonging to Kumaraswamy's "second wife" Radhika, 28, a former top actor of the Kannada film industry. Radhika has gone to town, releasing photographs of herself with Kumaraswamy and their three-year-old daughter Shamika to newspapers in Bangalore. She has also produced and released a Kannada movie Lucky in March. All the posters have pictures of both her and Kumaraswamy as producers plastered on the city's walls. So Abraham's contention is that the list of Kumaraswamy's assets, as an MP, is not complete unless Radhika's assets are also included. Hmmm.

VADRA

RISING STAR
hile Rahul Gandhi failed miserably in Uttar Pradesh, a young Turk of Congress shone in the North-east. Following his success in scripting a historic landslide victory for Congress in Assam in May 2011, Health and Education Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma was asked to supervise the Manipur elections. He delivered again. Sarma, 42, ensured that the Congress not only retained power, but also increased its tally from 30 in 2007 to 44 this time.

W

"Mahatma Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, what they did was hard. It takes time. It takes more than a single term."
BARACK OBAMA, US President

Golf Tournament on March 4. The SPG commandos accompanying him quickly carried him away in a golf cart. He was rushed to nearby Medanta Medicity for a check-up. What caused the black-out is not known. But it was enough to set off a spate of unkind jokes.

OF THE

"I hope to God that this is the last time the Government misuses and misappropriates the funds of PSUs and tries to bridge the fiscal deficit by this strategy."
YASHWANT SINHA, BJP leader

YOGEN SHAH/www.indiatodayimages.com

"When they (Indian team) get through an achievement, they snarl, snap and swear but when they drop a catch, they smile. It should be the other way round."
SUNIL GAVASKAR,

WEEK
Congress not winning Amethi and Rae Bareli is like a Rajinikanth movie not getting an opening in Chennai.
CHETAN BHAGAT

Former cricketer

GAVASKAR

with KIRAN TARE, KAUSHIK DEKA, LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI, BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA, SOWMYA AJI

16

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

NEW

