Nation

MAHARASHTRA

SON CASHES IN ON PRESIDENT'S NAME
Amravati MLA Rajendra Shekhawat allegedly used his status as the son of President Pratib ha Patil to further his business and political interests
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com VIKAS KEMDEO

By Kiran Tare

ajendra Shekhawat, the MLA son of President Pratibha Patil from Amravati, courted controversy on February 15 when local police seized unaccounted cash of Rs 1 crore from a car headed for his home, two days before the city voted for the municipal corporation. This is not the first time his name has cropped up for the wrong reasons. The high-profile Shekhawat, 45, allegedly used his status as President's son to acquire a 532 sq m plot of land worth Rs 1.50 crore and in possession of the National Cadet Corps (NCC), for a college run by Vidya Bharati Education Society (VBES), a charitable body, while he was the organisation's chairman. VBES runs 21 educational institutes including colleges and schools in Amravati. INDIA TODAY is in possession of documents which show that land, which was previously with the NCC, was transferred to VBES. Shekhawat's name surfaced in the cash episode when Arun Bodhankar, driver of the car, asked a constable on duty about the home of the Congress MLA. "It was 1.30 a.m. and the driver was new in the city. He thought the constable would know where Shekhawat's home was. The alert constable got suspicious and inspected the car thoroughly. To his shock, there was a stack of Rs 1 crore lying on the rear seat. Then he alerted his superiors and the cash was seized," a senior officer with Amravati Police Commissionerate told INDIA TODAY. While the Opposition alleged that the money was meant to be distributed among voters, Shekhawat said it was party funds meant to be distributed among the 87 Congress candidates in the fray. The question remained: Why did the candidates need money on the day campaigning ended and why was the money not deposited in their bank accounts, as made mandatory by Election Commission?

R

(CLOCKWISE FROM ABOVE) SHEKHAWAT; VIDYA BHARATI PREMISES; NCC LAND DOCUMENTS

"It is not possible to get possession of government land in just six months unless you have strong political influence."
SUNIL DESHMUKH, Former Minister

In 2007, when Patil was on the verge of becoming President, VBES got lease of 10,117 sq m of land, adjoining the Vidya Bharati College, on April 26, 2007, to construct a students' consumer centre, canteen, employees' cooperative society and a hostel. The land had been under the possession of NCC till then. After 2007, a portion of the land, 532 sq m, remained with NCC for conducting Sunday parades of its cadets. In 2010, VBES got possession of the 532 sq

m land--a year after Shekhawat became MLA. Shekhawat had sent a proposal to the divisional commissioner in January 2009 asking for possession of the 532-sq m plot for developing a playground. After he became MLA in October 2009, he wrote to then school education minister Balasaheb Thorat on January 14, 2010, "requesting" for a change in the venue of the NCC parade ground from Vidya Bharati College to the Zilha Parishad School's ground in

front of the state transport depot. On January 27, 2010, Vinod Bodare, a desk officer in the Maharashtra School Education Department, wrote to the deputy director for sports and youth services of Amravati division seeking his opinion on Shekhawat's letter. On February 22, 2010, the director recommended that the land no longer be reserved for the NCC parade as "alternative lands were available for the parade". He suggested that the parade

ground be moved to alternative sites such as Sant Gadgebaba Amravati University, Vidarbha Institute of Science and Humanities, Dasera ground and Zilha Parishad school. Bodare wrote on April 3, 2010, to Amravati Municipal Commissioner Navin Sona for his opinion on the transfer. After getting the commissioner's nod, the land was handed over to VBES in June 2010. "It is not possible to get possession of a government land in just six months unless you have strong political influence," says Sunil Deshmukh, former Maharashtra minister of state for finance. "Shekhawat pressured officials to work in his favour using Pratibhatai's clout," he alleges. Shekhawat also stands accused of misusing Patil's position to consolidate his base. In December 2011, Patil inaugurated a flyover near Kondhali, 20 km from Amravati, on the NagpurAhmedabad highway. The function was included in her official itinerary on the insistence of Shekhawat, who saw it as an opportunity to project himself as a leader keen on development ahead of the municipal corporation polls. "The inauguration of a flyover lowered the President's dignity but Shekhawat did not care," says Pradeep Shingore, BJP president in Amravati. Shekhawat rubbishes the charges. "What I can say is that the allegations are baseless. I do not want to elaborate on anything else at this point," he said. In 2007, Shekhawat ran pillar to post to get a Congress ticket from a ward in Worli, Mumbai, for the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation polls. He was denied a ticket. Now, under his leadership, the Congress has emerged as the single-largest party in the 87member Amravati Municipal Corporation by winning 25 seats. Currently, Shekhawat is among the most powerful leaders in Maharashtra Congress. Will his clout last beyond July, when Patil steps down from office? 

50

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

NEW

