NET FLUX

by AVANTIKA SHARMA
A group of IITians from Mumbai and Kharagpur has launched India's first online TV channel Theviralfever.com.After researching at various colleges across the country, the channel was started by Anurabh Kumar, 29, and his friends Himanshu Bhatnagar, Sandeep Jha, Deepak Mishra,Amit Golani, Biswapathi Sarkar,Vipin Goel and Jyotirmoy Dutta. Viralfever promises to have you in splits with spoofs of popular reality shows, TV serials and films. Kumar, who worked briefly with Red Chillies Entertainment, had scripted a pilot for a series on the lines of American shows like Friends and Seinfeld. But there weren't any takers."We decided to blend our two powerful skills-- creativity and tech expertise--to create an exciting entertainment space," he says.The programming is divided into two sections:TV originals, which spoofs TV shows, and youth idea lab, airing students working in remote villages.Also on the cards are shows like Penis Monologues and Jha.One, a spoof on Ra.One. TWO GEMS FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

Revolutionary Road

smart sheet On Film
As all eyes turned to Pakistan with documentary filmmaker Sharmeen Obaid-Chenoy bringing home the country's first Academy award,journalist Omar Waraich discusses the film Saving Face in Will Pakistan's Oscar Win Help Stop Acid Attacks on Women? on Time.com."The idea of the film came about when Jawad's (Dr Mohammad Jawad,a British surgeon of Pakistani origin) name appeared in AFP the press after he helped the British television presenter Katie Piper recover from an 2009 acid attack by an associate of an ex-boyfriend," he writes.
OBAID-CHENOY

THEVIRALFEVER.COM HOMEPAGE

Empower by Force? blog watch

Railway Chronicles
London-based journalist Monisha Rajesh's blog 80trains.com was the result of boredom and is now turning into a book called Around India in 80 Trains. She was browsing a map of India and noticed the boom of its domestic airlines connected around 80 cities. Inspired by Jules Verne's classic tale, Rajesh, 30, decided to travel India by train. Her blog chronicles her journey, which started in Chennai in January 2010. Along the way, Rajesh and her photographer Harald Haugan review the books they're reading, the best restaurants, their favourite places to bed down, and of course their favourite train journeys.

buzz feed

New Games
Social gamers rejoiced when Zynga, maker of Facebook games like Farmville and Words With Friends,launched its online gaming platform on March 5.The site promised to introduce many new games alongwith the old favourites.Stealing Facebook's thunder? We think so.

app alert

Top of the Lot
Move over Apple fans. This week's apps offer ones for fun and for convenience. All for your Android phone: Gesture Search Lets you search your phone by drawing on your touchscreen. Toddler Lock This topgrossing app will have you addicted to "The Doodler" in no time. Astro File Manager Copy/move/rename files, back up apps and send files as attachments.

In a Bbc.co.uk blog post,business editor Robert Peston writes Time to force women into boardrooms? On whether a mandatory increase in the percentage of women in positions of power will effectively improve the work culture,Peston asks, "The question,of course,is whether compulsion will produce inferior companies--will businesses take `any old woman'on to the board just to hit the mandatory quota?"

web wow

Just Kidding
Wonder how to keep your child occupied and away from the trash on television and online? Poptropica provides the answer in the form of a fun, interactive website that educates your child as he/she solves puzzles and plays games online. Built for children aged six to 15, the website also features comics and books. Launched in 2007, it has 75 million users, of whom 35 million are in the age group of 15-25. Clearly, the child in you will love it. with Prachi Rege
MARCH 19, 2012  INDIA TODAY

MARC SETHI

75

