Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

NEW HOPE FOR THE HEART
So long, diseased heart valves could be replaced only through risky surgeries.A bold new non-surgical procedure opens up new possibilities for the first time in India.
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

"My patients had severe symptoms and very few options"
Fifty per cent of patients suffering from aortic stenosis can face sudden death, if not treated on time. But the problem with stenosis is that old age, a history of bypass surgeries or other health factors like lung or kidney disease often make it impossible to carry out surgeries. Back in 2004, when I worked on one of the first cases of catheter-based valve replacement in the world, it was done on a cumbersome cardiopulmonary bypass, with a large device inserted inside the body surgically. But this time around, open heart surgery was not an option for my patients.Two of them had already gone through bypass surgeries, were frail and over age 75.Another had extreme calcification of aortas, necessitating the use of a ventilator in the recent past.The new procedure proved to be a life-saver for them.All my patients are now doing well.
Dr Ashok Seth, chairman, Cardiovascular Sciences and chief of Cardiology, Fortis Escorts Heart Institute, New Delhi

RISKY SURGERY FOR THICK VALVES
Doctors call it `aortic stenosis' . Patients know it as `abnormal narrowing of the aortic valve' . For the uninitiated, the aorta is the largest artery in our body and the three-leafed valve that guards the opening between the aorta and the left chamber of the heart is the aortic valve.The valve makes sure that oxygen-rich blood from the heart is pushed down the aorta and does not flow back in.With age, calcium deposits form on the valve and make it thick and stiff.That puts strain on the heart and forces it to pump harder.With diminished blood supply, chest pain, breathlessness, fainting spells and even sudden deaths follow. Until recently, a diseased valve could only be replaced by putting a patient on a heart-lung bypass machine, cutting open the chest and then stitching up the new valve inside the heart.The trauma of such major surgical procedures may soon become a thing of the past.

A PROMISING ALTERNATIVE
In the last few years, Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation (TAVI) has generated excitement as a promising alternative for extremely high risk patients. Dr Ashok Seth, chairman and chief cardiologist at the Fortis Escorts Heart Institute in Delhi, and his team of surgeons conducted the rare non-surgical procedure on three elderly patients last week. "It is the first such procedure in India," he says.

1

The two-hourlong procedure was done in the cath lab without opening up the chest. A small incision was made in the groin.

2

The TAVI valve, made of nitinol, an alloy of nickel and titanium, was inserted through a catheter (or tube) up the groin. The catheter travelled up the aorta to the heart and replaced the diseased aortic valve.


3

As told to Damayanti Datta

