UP FRONT

KRISHNA KUMAR

THE PRIMARYCRIME
ho wants to be a primary school teacher in road. In Uttar Pradesh, Classes I and II--the formative India? No one, really. The job requires a Class years of a child's career at school--are assigned to XII certificate with a two-year diploma. The para-teachers as a matter of policy. Over 10 years have salary is so measly that it can only be seen as a supple- passed since these outrageous measures were taken. mentary income. It's no wonder that the majority of A whole new generation of children with poor literacy aspirants come to it as a last resort. And once they and numeracy skills is now passing through the secondget into a primary school, they keep trying to enhance ary classes across northern India, from Rajasthan to their qualifications, in order to `move up'--meaning, get Bengal and the North-East where thousands of teachers were appointed without training. a secondary teacher's job. It is ironical that the Right to Education (RTE) law has This reality contrasts with the rhetoric that the primary school years are the like nation's foundations. furnished the basis of yet another decision which could Yes, research across the world shows that a nation's have disastrous consequences over the next decade. economic and social well-being depends on the RTE demands improvement in the pupil-teacher ratio. quality of its primary and pre-primary education. In The new ratio of 1:30 and other provisions of RTE are India, we don't look at things that way. Even when a supposed to be implemented by the summer of 2013. break comes into sight, we choose to ignore it and let States that have the highest shortfall of trained teachthe enthusiasts get sick with frustration. That is the ers have decided to meet this deadline by training their story of Delhi University's Bachelor of Elementary teachers in distance mode. These are the states with Education (B.El.Ed) programme. the poorest quality records and the most appalling In the last 15 years or so, it has produced more than cases of discrimination in schools on the basis of caste a thousand superb teachers. Anywhere else in the and gender. Teachers trained through distance mode world, they would have been treated as a special work- cannot be expected to meet such challenges. force. But here? The Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Apparently, these states feel that they have no choice the state government have failed to recognise them as in the matter, so they are not looking for alternatives. Their training institutions are also in a dismal state, TGTs, or Trained Graduate Teachers. Why? Because they don't possess a B Ed degree which you need to teach be- and the national body in charge of accreditation yond Class V. Bureaucratic cynicism has ensured that and reform of teacher education is itself passing the `elementary' stage (Classes I to VIII) does not become through a prolonged illness. Professional training in SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com any field requires rigour and a a salary band. Never mind the congenial institutional ethos. Constitution which has been amenTeacher education lacks both, and ded by Parliament to make eight distance technology cannot magiyears of elementary education a cally compensate for the chronic Fundamental Right. The Governneglect this sector has suffered. ment continues to hold that there is The situation calls for fresh a fundamental difference between thinking and rescheduling of RTE the primary (I to V) and the upper primary (VI to VIII) stages, and that compliance with Parliament's apthe primary teacher must get subproval. It will be a sad joke indeed if stantially less salary. a historic law which promises to During the 1990s, several states equalise educational opportunity in decided to appoint para-teachers our stratified society is turned into instead of regular ones. They were an excuse for killing what dignity given fancy names, such as guruji is left in the job of a teacher. It in Madhya Pradesh, shiksha mitra took India a century--since the deResearch shows that a in UP, vidya volunteers in Andhra feat of Gokhale's bill in 1911--to legPradesh, and so on. They were paid islate children's right to education. nation's economic and a fraction of the regular salary. The It would be neurotic to treat RTE as a social well-being depends idea of saving money proved so atgame of compliance. on the quality of its tractive that Madhya Pradesh deprimary and pre-primary cided to wipe out the old cadre of Krishna Kumar is professor of education. In India, we teachers. Now, Bihar and Chhateducation at Delhi University and a don't see things that way. tisgarh have embarked on this former director of NCERT

W

12

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

