Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

HISTORYAS COSTUME DRAMA
Rodricks celebrates the multicultural fabric of Goa that defines his design
By Malvika Singh

W
MODA GOA: HISTORY AND STYLE
byWendell Rodricks Collins Price: RS 3,999 Pages: 220 BETWEEN THE COVERS Moda Goa,in the words of its author who is a well known fashion designer,"is a premier step to document at a national and international level,the history of Goan costume".His narrative is laced with cultural nuggets.

endell Rodricks loves Goa. He represents, with aplomb, the best of the refinement, sense and sensibility of Goa. It was, therefore, with trepidation that I picked up this book with a stunning blackand-white cover photograph of a gorgeous woman, impeccably groomed, looking out at the world with a quiet confidence. When a person is so completely part of the ethos of a place, it can be a difficult task to bring out a careful and appropriate selection and rendering of the real and palpable Goa, different from "Incredible India" and "hippie paradise". Moda Goa fights the obvious and predictable effortlessly and every page reveals a compassionate and well-researched past and present of a vulnerable spot on the western coast of India. It is a place where the diversity of Indianness lived in harmony, as it welcomed, engaged with, influenced, and absorbed what it wanted to, with such ease. Through this openness emerged an unusual fabric of a hybrid culture where respect for diversity was a given. Being a port, Goa looked outwards, and was not rigid or insular in its attitude. Rodricks's romance with the soil and ethos of Goa, something that clearly runs through his veins, comes out clearly. He spent hours poring over the works of historians and chroniclers, adding all the empirical data to his deep-rooted instincts about the land he belongs to. It is a delightful read, accessible and never didactic. Important periods in the history of Goa are chronicled with clarity, and laced with nuggets of people, manners and customs, fabric and dresses, jewellery and beauty treatments, all indigenous, all ingenious and all back into the mainstream today. It would have been wonderful to have had more social, oral histories, all of which would have added yet another vital dimension to a book of this sweep and scope. Moda Goa, to quote the author, "is a premier step to document at a national and international level, the history of Goan costume". Here, tribal influence blends into the Hindu customs, adopting the modes of dress that came across the seas from countries and cultures that were exploring for the riches and spices. And everything blends

A MODEL IN A RODRICKS SHOW, 2010

MARCH 19, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

into the textures and colours of Goa's woven cloth that is draped around the body and the stitched garments that came later with Portuguese influence. Rodricks takes the reader through Hindu iconography and dresses of gods and goddesses, the red and green colours of the blouses that invoke the mother goddess. He tells us how Lord Vishnu is worshipped by artisans, weavers and dyers because of the belief that all fibre and fabric emerged from the navel of the God. There are endless such references and information, which add huge value to the understanding of clothing and colour--what is worn when and why. The book tells us how the Muslim influence, the introduction of silk and fine thread embroidery, of muslins from the looms of Dacca and brocades from Varanasi came together in Goa. They were then exported to the rest of the world and became a part of the directory of

Rogue's Day
The art of the novelist makes a despicable character endearing
By Bunny Suraiya

REKHA WITH WENDELL RODRICKS (LEFT) IN 2005

fabric in Goa as well. Interspersed are details about sringaar, beauty treatment, and the use of jewellery as traditional embellishment, hair-styling and the use of fresh flowers and spices, stitched into the hems of garments to envelop the wearer in fragrance. The costumes of Goa are diverse and the story, as told in this book, unravels through changing historical perspectives, putting clothing, style and fashion into the context of a multicultural society sitting on the crossroads of trade between the East and the West. It is in this rich context that Wendell Rodricks emerged as a designer, used his cultural legacy and created a contemporary idiom on how fabric can be draped to create high fashion and international acceptance. The book is a riveting account of Goa, the land, its history, its many influences and its people. 

ozing charm from every pore, Maqil `Sunny' Karam (MSK), the adored first son of a comfortablyoff Pakistani family, traipses blithely through life in a picaresque journey that takes in three continents--while also taking in the scores of people who THE FLYING MAN fall victim to his wiles. Gloriously narcissistic (his most meaningful conby Roopa Farooki Headline versations are held with his own image Price: RS 499 in the mirror), magnificently amoral, Pages: 339 an unabashed devotee to the gospel of I-Me-Mine and a gambling-addict, his erratic progress leaves in its wake abandoned wives and offspring, swindled friends, unpaid taxes, fortunes won and lost, and a slew of aliases--Mike in America, Mehmet in Cairo, Michel in France, Mikhail in Hong Kong and Miguel in Spain. The receding hair that comes with age and the discovery of three open pores on his facial skin are major calamities, and the inevitable sagging and wrinkling of his butt is a matter for consternation. Yet, despite or because of these flaws, MSK is one of the most appealing rogues to emerge from recent fiction. He could be the direct literary descendant of that entertaining scallywag, Mr Jingle, in The Pickwick Papers. Roopa Farooki has mastered the task of creating a despicable character and making the reader love him. In part, this could be because she herself loves him--there is a revealing sentence in the acknowledgments that thanks her father, a gambler, "for all the strange and various journeys he took in life that helped inspire this novel"--but it is also a tribute to her writing skills, which are considerable. There are eloquent turns of phrase that stop the reader and compel a second reading for the sheer appreciation of the prose. For example, here is one of MSK's deserted wives reflecting, "...some things can be broken without anyone noticing the consequences (hearts, dreams and ambitions, airyfairy, flexible, shifting things) and some things can't (the Wedgewood tea service with the pink scalloped edge)." The Flying Man is taken from the title of one of Tagore's poems. The woman whom MSK thinks of as Wife No 2 quotes from it to him: "Land and sea had fallen to his power. All that was left was the sky." Apt in its description of the powers of the hero who holds this enjoyable, touchingly funny book together by virtue of his admirable chutzpah. 

O

72

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

