The Big Story EDUCATION

IN KARNATAKA, PAK ISTAN IS PART OF INDIA
Indian schools are becoming laboratories of disaster, with children being fed not just inaccurate information but also politically coloured renditions of reality
By Asit Jolly

HISTORIC BLOOPERS
PUNJAB
 Punjab can't seem to

extbooks across schools affiliated to various state education boards in the country are dishing out not just history and information that's incorrect but even politically coloured content.  Class III Urdu-medium schoolchildren in Andhra Pradesh are taught: "Hindustan ke vazir-e-azam P.V. Narasimha Rao hain (P.V. Narasimha Rao is India's prime minister)."  Two social science textbooks for Class V and VIII, drafted by a Karnataka government committee, carry a map of Akhand Bharat (indivisible India) wherein Indian civilisation envelopes Pakistan, Afghanistan, Tibet, Nepal, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Bhutan and Sri Lanka--essentially a concept envisioned by the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS).  The Class VIII social science textbook of the Punjab School Education Board (PSEB) defines heavy industries thus: "Industries in which very heavy type of raw materials are used are known as heavy industry."  PSEB's Class VIII civics, written by subject expert Darshan Singh, includes this gem: "Constitution of every country has some basic principles. Chinese constitution is based on communism, while the American constitution is based on Capitalism (sic)."  Class VII students in schools affiliated to PSEB must make sense of this discussion on fresh and saline water: "The water on the earth surface is found in

T

the form of rivers, canals, lakes, seas and oceans. Several Mineral Salts are being dissolved in this natural water. These minerals are very useful for the growing Animal Kingdom, Plants and trees. These water bodies get water from the different sources like, by rainfall, melting of the highest snow covered peaks, the water flow through the rivers to the plants. This form of water is a Fresh Water. Some of this water seeps in the earth, an excess amount of salts left on the surface, In a way, water is being filtered. This water is used for domestic purposes and is brought up out from the earth by means of tubewells, hand pumps." (Spellings, capitals, punctuations as in the original.)

FICTION, NOT FACTS
"Students would be safer not reading these books," says M. Rajivlochan, 53, a professor of history at Chandigarh's Panjab University. Government-run and aided institutions that employ what Rajivlochan describes as "disabling" textbooks, constitute a majority of the schools in the country, catering significantly to the poorest students. More than 70 per cent of the schools in Punjab, 72,000 Karnataka schools, 64,000 in Andhra Pradesh and 95 per cent of all Gujarat schools use books published by state education boards or councils. Oblivious of the bloopers, PSEB's Officiating Chairman Suresh Tandon, 59, takes great pride in his textbooks. He claims the content is wholly based on the NCERT's National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005. Punjab isn't an aberration. In Andhra Pradesh, books published as

make up its mind about the status of women. Page 171 of the Social Science7 from the section `Society in the North India (800-1200 AD)', published by the Punjab School Education Board, says women were respected and highly educated and had the freedom to choose a husband. But the same page further on reads, "The condition of the women was not good in Muslim society. Mostly they were illiterate. Purdah system was also in vogue." Read a little more and it says, "The position of women in the Hindu society was pitiable. Mostly they were illiterate. They adopted Purdah."  On modern industries, Social Science-8 (Page 144) under `The importance of growth of modern industries' reads, "In the 20th Century under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi, the cotton and silk clothes were started making, with this the Indian textile industry survived."  In the Social Science-8 (Page 140) textbook, tribal hero and freedom fighter Birsa Munda is described as a man with divine powers who was regarded as a "representative of God" in the chapter that deals with the 18th century tribal revolt in the Chhota Nagpur area in Bihar.

to make money and build St Peter Basilica."  The portrayal of Mussolini (pic left) as a friend of the Catholic church: "Mussolini entered into a pact with the Catholic church and made it the official religion in order to sanctify his dictatorship."  The description of Dutch Renaissance theologian and social critic Desiderius Erasmus as having lampooned the Catholic church for its outdated principles in his book In Praise of Folly .

KARNATAKA
 In the Class V social science textbook, the only reference to one of the top administrators Karnataka has seen, Tipu Sultan (pic below), is with regard to the infamous Tipu Drop at Nandi Hills, just outside Bangalore. The textbook says Tipu Sultan threw all his enemies down to their death from this drop. Historians say prisoners condemned to death were given this punishment, and that it was the norm in that period in history. "By highlighting only this kind of element in the textbook, the drafters are calling him a scoundrel, which is a totally colonial view of history," says social sciences Professor Narendar Pani of the National Institute of Advanced Sciences, Bangalore. Tipu scholar Karimuddin says it's a deliberate attempt to vilify Tipu, which was first attempted by the British and now followed by saffron elements.  Hanuman's birthplace was "rediscovered" in Anjanadri in Karnataka's Koppal district, says the Class V social science textbook.

KERALA
The Kerala Catholic Bishops' Conference has objected to references related to historical figures in the Class X social science (2006) textbook published by the State Council for Education and Research Technology. These include:  A reference to Pope Leo X, which reads, "He commercialised the issue of `indulgences'--church's pardon letters to sinners--in order

The Big Story EDUCATION
DANGEROUS SUBTEXTS
MIND YOUR LANGUAGE PLEASE
 "Mangal Pandey

choose death then to surrender. He shooted himself (see pic)." --Class VII social studies, Gujarat.  "Collusion (collision) between planetary bodies caused hear (heat)." --General science book for Class VI, Andhra Pradesh.  "India is called a Tropical country because the line of cancer passes through, divides the country into two equal halves." -- Class VI social science, Punjab. There are other contentious issues.

KERALA
 The CPI(M) objected to a line in the chapter Murikkan of the Class VII Malayalam (2011) textbook which read, "The landlord Joseph Murikkan by introducing paddy cultivation in backwaters rescued the people from starvation."  In a chapter about secularism in the Class VII social science textbook, religious groups opposed this line: "Parents belonging to two different religions proudly say their child has `No Religion' while asked at the time of his school admission."  The Catholic church was unhappy with a statement in the Class X social science textbook: "Catholic church had imposed strict fetters on pursuit of knowledge and reason during the feudal period."

Aryans. They called the region they lived in as Saptasindhava (Saptasindhu)." There is no mention of the fact that Aryans migrated to India.  "Cows were considered as invaluable wealth by the Aryans. Victors in wars would seize the cattle of the losers, as a sign of occupation. The wealth of each person used to be measured in terms of how many cows he owned. It was considered wrong to kill cows."  Activities suggested for children in the Class V social science textbook on page 153 include listening to the recitation of the Vedas, and reading children's Mahabharata and Ramayana and enjoying them.  Which are the four Vedas, and who are the gods and goddesses that people worshipped during the Vedic period, are questions asked to Class V students.

PUNJAB SCHOOL EDUCATION BOARD SPENDS RS 65 CRORE ANNUALLY ON TEXTBOOKS

recently as 2010 and 2011 continue to have an embarrassing array of errors despite a curriculum revamp in 2008-09, in consultation with NGOS such as Pratham, Bhumi and Eklavya. The social studies book for Class VI says the Russian Revolution dethroned Czar, the king of Russia, in 1971. Similarly indifferent to fact, textbooks in Gujarat peg the number of Indians engaged in agriculture at just "10 per cent".

GUJARAT
 For Class IX students of social

COLOURED BY POLITICS
In both Karnataka and Kerala, political groups use schoolrooms to settle scores. Karnataka's Class V and Class VIII social science textbooks, currently being printed at a cost of Rs 14 crore for distribution in 37,500 primary and upper primary Kannada-medium schools, have provoked protests and debate over their allegedly saffron content. The `Akhand Bharat' map locates every major Hindu shrine across the subcontinent, completely ignoring shrines of other religions. C.S. Dwarakanath, a former chairman of the Karnataka Permanent Backward Classes Commission, is incensed. "What is the need for putting this map?" he says. He points to other claims in the text, such as Hanuman's birthplace being rediscovered in Anjanadri in Karnataka's Koppal district. Activities suggested in the Class V social science textbook on page 153 include "listening to the recitation of the Vedas, and reading children's Mahabharata and Ramayana and enjoying them". "They want children to be brainwashed into thinking this is history," he says. Primary and Secondary

studies, a forest is randomly defined as "a group of trees".  Vastushastra, the ancient architectural science, is described as an "inseparable part of astrology" in the Class IX social studies textbook.

PUNJAB
Definitions, the Punjab way:  Heavy industries: "Industries in which very heavy type of raw materials are used are known as heavy industry."  Hydel power: "When these turbines rotate, electricity is produced by frictional force." --Class VIII social science textbook.  In the same book, a map depicts Jodhpur (Rajasthan) as one of the flashpoints of the 1857 war of independence. Jodhpur is shown in central India (see map) near Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh.

KARNATAKA
The Class V textbook (draft under print, 2012) gives readers new insight in its social science chapters:  "People who lived in the valley of the Sindhu and Saraswati rivers about 5,000 years ago are called

22

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

The Big Story EDUCATION
Education Minister Vishveshwar Hedge Kageri, an RSS man, insists the textbooks adhere to NCF 2005. "There is no attempt at saffronisation at all," he says. G.S. Mudambaditaya, the man handpicked to head Karnataka's first school textbook revision in 15 years, also says the protests are quite premature. "Those protesting haven't even seen the final version of the draft," he says, adding that over 500 teachers reviewed the drafts. Dwarakanath, however, claims an entire chapter on the Vedic age was authored by the pontiff of the Brahmin Sringeri mutt, Bharati Tirtha, and included without any changes. "They try to paint a rosy picof the Catholic church. Ideological politics also came into play. The CPI(M) objected to a line in the chapter Murikkan of the Class VII Malayalam (2011) textbook which reads, "The landlord Joseph Murikkan by introducing paddy cultivation in backwaters rescued the people from starvation." However, Achuthanandan's vehement objections that eulogising feudal symbols like Murikkan amounted to "ridiculing land reforms that made Kerala a just and progressive society" went unheeded in the corridors of power in Delhi. Earlier, in 2007, protests by numerous religious organisations forced "This just cannot work. There are thousands of errors with devastating consequences. Designing curriculum and textbooks is a huge responsibility," says Sachidanand Sinha, 54, of the Centre for the Study of Regional Development at Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University, whose report on the Status of Education in Punjab (2011) was included in the recommendations of the Punjab Governance Reforms Commission. Besides inaccurate content, textbooks are often bereft of local context and indifferent to gender and minority issues. Punjab's Class VIII social science textbook mentions "80,000 animal species" found in India but fails to list even one from the state itself. Similarly, in a state where environmental degradation is widespread, the books are silent on Punjab's polluted rivers and subsoil water. Skewed male-female sex ratios and the widely prevalent practice of female foeticide, too, are given a complete miss. Sudesh Ahlawat, 74, director of Ludhiana's Drishti Innovative Conceptual School--a charitable institution-- agrees that the real failing of India's school story is in the delivery of education. "Teachers are simply not trained to tackle challenges," she says, insisting that inaccurate or incomplete information in textbooks would hardly be that serious a problem if teachers were better qualified. No wonder learning levels among students in Indian schools are going downhill. The PISA (Programme for International Student Assessment) 2009 report based on extensive testing of nearly 5,000 upper primary students in the educationally advanced states of Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu ranked India 73 out of 74 countries. Eighth graders from India barely matched the math skills of South Korean third graders. "The results confirm the worst of what anyone has been saying about the levels of learning in Indian elementary education," says Lant Pritchett, professor at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government.
with M.G. Radhakrishnan, Sowmya Aji, Sreekala G. and Uday Mahurkar

`` ``

Students would be safer not reading these books. Punjab should urgently carry out a complete rewrite of its social science texts.
M. RAJIVLOCHAN, Professor of history at Panjab University

The texts are essentially glorifications of Hindu Brahminism. They want children to be brainwashed into thinking this is history.
C.S. DWARAKANATH, Former chairman, Karnataka Permanent Backward Classes Commission

ture of the Vedic period, claiming women had equal rights and even wore the sacred thread, which is not true at all," he says. The books also have glaring omissions, he adds, like eminent figures of the Dasa tradition-- Purandara Dasa and Kanaka Dasa, all non-Brahmins. "There is no mention of Dravida culture at all. Aryans are assumed to be original inhabitants of the country. The texts are essentially glorifications of Hindu Brahminism," says Dwarakanath. Next door in Kerala, soon after the United Democratic Front (UDF) ousted the Left Democratic Front (LDF) in May 2011, the Kerala Catholic Bishops Conference demanded the withdrawal of sections of a Class X social science text deprecating the role of the church. The UDF government removed the contentious chapter following a brief inquiry. "UDF was only wagging its tail to its master," sniped former chief minister V.S. Achuthanandan, alluding to UDF's dependence on the support

the then CPI(M)-led LDF government to withdraw an entire chapter on secularism in the state's Class VII social science textbook.

UNLEARNING CURVE
Andhra Pradesh's Primary Education Minister S. Sailajanath, 48, admits the situation is grim. He says in-house sample surveys indicate that about a third of the 14-year-olds in the state's schools cannot write or do basic calculations. Punjab, however, chooses to remain ignorant amid its desperately failing school system. Contrary to Tandon's assertion that textbooks are periodically revised on the basis of classroom response, schoolteachers say feedback is discouraged. "They keep reminding us that the books are being supplied free," says Baljit Kaur, 43, a Hindi teacher at the Government Model Senior Secondary School at Manauli in Mohali district. She says students invariably have to buy alternative texts to get the correct information.

24

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 19, 2012

``

``

