Feature

Fill your next getaway with everlasting memories as you surround yourself with the beauty and tranquility of the mountains. Treasure every moment with your near ones in the crisp, fresh mountain air, on the long walks along woody trails. Take in the brilliant sunrises and share with them the spectacular panorama of stars at night.

So, while you're in the mood to pamper your king or queen, head towards the Queen of the Hills, Mussoorie. Located just 250 kilometers north of Delhi and at a height of around 7000 feet, Mussoorie has an infectious colonial charm. The holy river Ganga can be seen from one end of the ridge and the Jamuna from the other - a stretch of around twelve miles in all - from Cloud's End in the West to Jabarkhet in the East. Jaypee Residency Manor at Mussoorie is where your romance with the mountains begins with a 360 degree breathtaking view of the mighty Himalayas.

This unique property, deserves every accolade it has received from its regular guests who return every year to experience its luxurious accommodation, creative cuisine and unmatched recreational facilities. Spread over nine acres of lush green on a hilltop, Jaypee Residency Manor, your own paradise, is a tribute to the majesty and splendor of Mussoorie "the queen of hills". Whereas, all 94 living spaces showcase a majestic view of the Himalayan ranges, the suites and executive rooms open out to private terraces. A charming character and superlative facilities make each room a beautiful sanctuary. Utmost care has been taken not to upset the ecpsystem. The property has trees such as silver oaks, Baanjh (Infertile; so called

N nnimPACTreature
Mussoorie is a fascinating hill resort offering breathtaking views of the Shivalik ranges as well as the Doon valley, along with options for everyone, trekkers, sight-seeing aficionados, bird lovers and admirers of colonial architecture. Another mesmerizing phenomenon to experience from here is winterline - straight line that seems to have cut the stunningly beautiful horizon in two. This can be viewed only from two places in the world, Switzerland and Mussoorie. because it doesn't bear fruit but is great in absorbing water, keeping all the area around it moist and green long after it stops raining) gulmohar, walnut, badaam singara, lemon trees and many more species of plants. A perfect place for families, the hotel has offerings for every lifestyle with extensive leisure facilities like an indoor temperature controlled swimming pool, Tamaya - spa, salon and wellness centre, a leisure mall featuring electronic games, bowling alley, kids room and outdoor play areas. This fairytale retreat is a complete holiday destination in itself. There is nothing like fresh mountain air to build up a good appetite, Jaypee Residency Manor offers some exceptional options to satiate it. These include Captain Young's Cafe for casual dining, Regency multi-cuisine restaurant with live music in the evenings, Marshal's Lounge, the bar with a colonial setting and Terrace Grill open-air dining during summer months. Jaypee Residency Manor has designed special rejuvenation packages keeping in mind the varied sensibilities of our guests. So whether it's a family looking for a fun filled vacation or a couple with a quest for absolute revitalization, there's something for everyone. Spa enthusiasts can avail the Spa Indulgence Package at the in-house spa, Tamaya that brings a specially crafted repertoire of traditional & authentic treatments to relax and heal the body. Spectacular views, unbridled luxury, extensive leisure and an un-interrupted encounter with nature combined with exceptional service promise to make every moment this vacation a perfect moment.

B>jSl£3 I

Mussoorie Fact File
Altitude: 2000 meters Temperature: Summer 28(Max) & !4(Min) Degrees Celsius Winter 18 (Max) & 0 (Min) Degrees Celsius Nearest Airport: Jolly Grant, 50 km Railway Station: Dehradun, 40 km Bus Station: Mussoorie (Direct buses from Delhi, Dehradun) Sightseeing: Landour Cantonment, Lai Tibba, Camel's Back Road, Sir George Everest's House, Cloud's End Private Wildlife Estate, Kempty Falls

JAYPEE RESIDENCY MANOR
Barlowganj, Mussoorie 248122 Tel: 91-135-6602000 Fax: 91-135-2631022 Email: reservations.jrm@jaypeehotels.com Visit: www.jaypeehotels.com

