Mail

Return of the Sirens
MARCH 12, 2012

Bollywood's women get better roles and bigger brands. In 2012, they will go from being beautiful Barbies to power performers.

N. RAJENDRAN,

PTI

Shining Bright
The Dirty Picture with Vidya Balan in the lead has spawned an era where a lead actress can carry a movie solely on her shoulders ("Return of the Sirens", March 12). Balan has changed the image of the typical Bollywood actor forever. She deserves all the praise coming her way. It is high time other actresses learn to act and not just look glamorous. For a movie to click--as Balan quips--you need entertainment, entertainment and entertainment. Today's lead actresses are entertaining the audience like never before and the filmmakers are laughing all the way to the bank.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore

Tide of Disgust
Seeing Karnataka MLAs watch porn in the House not only comes as a rude shock to the public, but also to the Lingayat community for being let down by its representatives ("Collateral Damage", March 12). The Lingayat community did the right thing by distancing itself from Yeddyurappa, who wants to come back to occupy the hot seat. What is more surprising is that a section of BJP is questioning journalists and doubting their intentions instead of taking action against the guilty MLAs.
K.R.SRINIVASAN, Secunderabad

It is probably for the first time in the history of

The journalists have done a great job by filming MLAs watching porn in the Assembly, thus revealing to the public the shameless acts of their representatives. They not only violated their oath, but also shirked their responsibility of addressing the pressing issues of the common man.
SUMAN PATEL, Delhi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

``
Palakkad

``

Talented and beautiful actresses are ruling the Indian film industry. Kudos to these feisty women of cinema for the image makeover.

Bollywood that womenoriented films are doing big business and are getting their due. Actresses have broken the glass ceiling and started taking up non-conventional roles. If this trend is to continue, then producers might have to be persuaded by the male stars not to sidetrack them in the future. Hats off to the leading ladies of Bollywood for bringing in winds of change.
BIBEK SENGUPTA, Kolkata

The new-age Hindi film industry actresses possess supreme acting skills. They strive to do their best, holding promise to give us many unforgettable films. Without any doubt, these performers can perform roles in Hollywood films with equal finesse. We need more of their tribe to take the Indian film industry to

Mail
greater heights. Male actors have all the reason to feel insecure. The actresses may soon go home with fatter pay packets than theirs.
SANJIV GUPTA, Australia

35
to go places. They know exactly where to take their companies and how to get there. Most are deserving scions of the thriving business families. The shareholders of such firms have little to worry about.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Supporting Anna
Corruption destroys economic growth and increases poverty. It is in the form of hidden bribes, tax evasion, money laundering, etc as well as lack of integrity by police, judges, attorneys, bureaucrats, government ministers and many others ("Anna Hazare: Hope of the Hopeless", January 2). Commendable efforts by Anna Hazare and others to eliminate corruption and an anti-corruption bill in Parliament may prove to be a Sisyphean ordeal because persons involved in corruption understand that ethical behaviour cannot be legally enforced unless caught in the act and parties which are always ahead can find new ways to mask the illegal activity. Governments are not good at running business enterprises because of manipulation by power-hungry politicians in co-operation with senior civil servants. The road to economic growth, sound fiscal policy to encourage investment and to defeat corruption is to reduce the size of the government. Transparency also leads to less corruption. We believe India's Prime Minister is now astute to rally support of its ruling elite to downsize Government operations to reduce corruption and increase transparency.
K.K. PURI, Canadian Rotographics Limited, Toronto

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
APRIL 15-31, 1977

The Petticoat Protest
Prime Minister Morarji Desai had rather more guests than he had bargained for on Monday, March 4.Amid the usual throng of well-wishers that gather faithfully at Duplex Road every morning, were a 100-odd militant looking females and one solitary male, carrying not garlands like the other visitors, but banners that proclaimed "Women for Democracy and Democracy for Women" .The odd procession marched in to confront the Prime Minister, and Desai, Prime Minister for barely two weeks, was faced with a situation he was not sure how to deal with."Poor Vajpayee," exclaimed one woman after it was all over, "he's just become minister for external affairs and he was almost, thanks to our rigid Prime Minister, confronted with an international crisis." Said journalist Usha Rai,"He's one of those bigoted Indian men who feel a woman should walk 10 paces behind the man." What sparked off the strange scenario was a remark made by the Prime Minister in an interview published in a recent issue of Time magazine which quoted Desai as saying that though earlier he had championed the cause of women, he had revised his views after the experience of three women prime ministers.
by Shirley Joshua

Young Scions
The article on inheritors made for an interesting read ("Born with Silver, Hungry for Gold", March 12). It is heartening to know that India's family businesses will be passing on to intelligent, educated, capable and well-broughtup young inheritors. Most of the young heirs and heiresses featured in your magazine come across as very sharp and professional, aware of their responsibilities. They seem all set to enhance the wealth handed down to them, but what is more admirable is their involvement with philanthropic and charitable causes. Despite being born with silver spoons, their commitment to social causes and compassion for lesser mortals is creditable.
RANJANA MANCHANDA, www.intoday.in

No Regrets
Mumbai's encounter specialists started with an aim to eliminate underworld dons, extortionists and other hardened criminals ("Killers in Khaki", March 12). But on achieving success and receiving laurels, they went berserk and tried to become megalomaniacs. They started indulging in greed and self-aggrandisement resulting in their entanglement in crimes they were not supposed to commit. They proved the maxim that power destroys those who wield it.
ANKIT SHARMA, Pune

Your article on the inheritors to some of India's strongest businesses was truly a good one. The advantage of being born with silver spoon is that you have a platform ready for your launch and you don't have to struggle like the common man. These young scions are destined

It is apparent that the beleaguered, supposedlyelite encounter specialists of the Mumbai Crime Branch are by and large, like quite a few courageous and efficient police officers, victims of an almost incorrigible corrupt system. Equally pertinent is the fact that almost all of the 500-odd killings in about a decade comprised underworld gangsters. In a sense, this ended up sanitising the society to a very great extent.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

WOMEN DEMONSTRATORS OUTSIDE THE PM'S HOUSE--DEMANDING AN APOLOGY

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

