The Big Story

POST-POLLPOLITICS
By Priya Sahgal

THE DAYAFTER

Murmurs against Team Rahul in Uttar Pradesh. An open show of strength against the high command's choice for Uttarakhand chief ministership. Congress grapples with many woes.

RAHUL GANDHI

HARISH RAWAT

T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

PTI

ongress President Sonia Gandhi was mathematically wrong and politically correct when she told the media a day after the Assembly results were announced on March 6: "Let's not forget we made it in one state." The Congress had won Manipur, though Sonia was referring to Uttarakhand. Caution may have been wiser. The numbers were delicate. Worse, in six days, there would be a revolt in Uttarakhand, where the Congress had won one more seat than BJP. With 32 MLAs, it was three short of the halfway mark. On March 9, the Congress staked claim with 39 MLAs including three indendents, one UKD and three BSP MLAs. It was now time to select the chief minister. That's when things began to go wrong. On the evening of March 12, Sonia Gandhi chose Vijay Bahuguna, 65, an MP from the state, as the next chief minister. Immediately, supporters of Harish Rawat, 63, another MP and Uttarakhand Congress heavyweight, revolted. The next day, even as Bahuguna was taking oath in Dehradun, 18 MLAs rushed to Delhi and camped in Rawat's front lawn, with drums and bugles. Only 11 Congress MLAs attended the swearing-in. "I am the Balika Vadhu of the Congress. Mujhe nyay chahiye (I am the child bride of the party. I want justice)," a bitter and metaphorically enigmatic Rawat told reporters. His followers elaborated. Almora MP Pradip Tamta pointed out that it was Rawat who was the star campaigner and yet the chief minister's chair was given to a relatively junior leader. It is rare for a decision of the party high command to be challenged by a public show of strength. Although Union minister Vilasrao Deshmukh was unhappy when Prithviraj Chavan replaced Ashok Chavan as Maharashtra chief minister in November 2010, he did not make his displeasure public. In Uttar Pradesh, murmurs against Team Rahul have begun. Party workers blame Congress General Secretary incharge of Uttar Pradesh Digvijaya Singh, Congress Working Committee (CWC) member Mohan Prakash, state Congress chief Rita Bahuguna Joshi and Rahul's secretary Kanishka Singh for the debacle. Supporters of Amita Singh, the party can-

C

36

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

37

NEW

The Big Story

POST-POLLPOLITICS
was given to Saeed Shervani, brother of former SP leader Saleem Shervani. No other names were suggested to CEC. Shervani came fourth. Similarly for the Sirsaganj seat from Firozabad, the CEC note states, "Harishankar Yadav, an ex-SP organisational man, has recently joined the Congress. He is recommended by Raj Babbar... This is a Yadav-dominated seat." Harishankar ulimately came fifth. According to a CEC member, "We were just handed the prepared notes. Anyway, none of us wanted to disagree with Rahul's choice." It is telling that when Rahul met the media on March 6, he was all alone. A day later when Sonia met the media, a phalanx of party stalwarts hovered in the background--including Ahmed Patel, Janardan Dwivedi and Motilal Vohra. Rahul needs to first take his party with him, before reaching out to the rest of India.
with Santosh Kumar
PRABHJOT GILL/www.indiatodayimages.com

didate from Amethi, blame workers close to Rahul for her loss. CWC member R.K. Dhawan says the onus lies on Rahul's advisers. On March 7, Sonia told the media that "wrong ticket selection" in Uttar Pradesh was responsible for the poll debacle. According to a member of the Congress Central Election Commitee (CEC), Rahul's office finalised the candidates and circulated it to other CEC members before the meetings. INDIA TODAY has access to some of these documents that were prepared by the selectors. Two things stand out distinctly. One, that caste was a crucial factor in candidate selection. Two, defectors from other parties were favoured over Congressmen. Take the case of Bhongaon in Mainpuri. The ticket was given to Brijesh Singh Yadav who joined the Congress six years ago. According to the notes prepared by Team Rahul, Yadav was the best candidate because "he would be the single Yadav on this seat. He is a Ghosi Yadav... Fielding a Yadav would ensure that the Congress takes advantage of the 38,000 Yadav votes". The claims of another candidate, Parkash Pardhan, who had been with the party for 30 years, were rejected. "Though he has been active in the area and could have been a good candidate, the caste equation does not suit him," reads the note prepared by Rahul's office for the CEC. Yadav came fifth on this seat when results were announced. Publicly, Rahul may state that his politics is above caste but when it came to ticket selection, caste is what counted. For the Bithari Chainpur seat, the ticket was given to Alauddin Khan simply because he was a Muslim. In the note, the Congress selectors state that "though he is not very popular, he could do well because there are about 65-70,000 Muslim voters on this seat and both SP (Samajwadi Party), BSP (Bahujan Samaj Party) have fielded OBC candidates". To believe that a notso-popular candidate would win simply on the strength of his religion is shoddy politics. Khan came seventh. Sometimes, pure patronage was at play. The ticket for Kasganj in Etah

Sukhbir Badal says price rise and corruption have hit the Congress where it hurts: "It's a message from the people of our country to Congress."

PARKASH SINGH BADAL (FAR LEFT) BEING SWORN IN AS PUNJAB CHIEF MINISTER

AMARINDER

CAPTAIN IS DOWN BUT NOT OUT
Amarinder is still the Congress's best bet in Punjab
By Asit Jolly

Gurdaspur MP Pratap Bajwa has questioned Amarinder's wisdom of relying on "politically insensible" retired army generals who failed to recognise the "altered texture of constituencies" .

PTI

onia Gandhi has blamed the People's Party of Punjab (PPP) for the Congress defeat in Punjab. But state Congressmen are blaming their own party. And Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) leader Parkash Singh Badal seems to agree. The fifth-term Chief Minister attributes the SAD-BJP combine's momentous victory to UPA's failings in Delhi. "Price rise, corruption, unemployment and its inability to protect citizens cost the Congress dearly," he declared at the Hola Mohalla celebrations at Anandpur Sahib on March 9. Shortly after the results, Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari, too, ascribed the debacle to "a sullen antiCongress mood across urban India." Their words must sound entirely reasonable to Punjab Congress chief

S

Amarinder Singh, who spent much of the week in Chandigarh and Delhi, writing a report explaining the debacle for party President Sonia. His detractors, led by the Rajinder Kaur Bhattal camp, are already baying for his blood. Yet, ironically, the paralysis that continues to afflict UPA could help Amarinder survive his worst political crisis. Despite his public claims of resigning, he isn't prepared to hang up his boots just yet: "This has definitely been a setback but I will not quit after losing the battle." He says he fears persecution of Congress supporters in the wake of the SAD-BJP victory. "I intend to stand with them," he said. Sonia is yet to react to Amarinder's report which glosses over corruption as well as inflation and puts the blame on mismanagement at the polling booth level. The report talks of a marked shift in Dalit votes towards the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), unwise ticket distribution leading to rebels, and the neutralisation of the anti-incumbency votes by the Manpreet Badal-led PPP. Together, BSP, PPP and Congress rebels mopped up 23.47

lakh or 17.21 per cent of the votes cast in the January 30 polls. BSP doubled its votes from 1.88 lakh in the 2007 Assembly elections to 3.1 lakh, effectively destroying the Congress across the Doaba region--its acknowledged bastion. Amarinder's report lays stress on a significant drop in the urban vote share: "The upper and middle classes seem to have been affected by Anna Hazare's Jan Lokpal movement and the public outcry over various scams. The party trailed in urban pockets in seats like Bathinda Urban, Ajnala, Mansa and Samana." Amarinder's detractors, chiefly Gurdaspur MP Pratap Bajwa, former chief minister Bhattal, MLA Sukhpal Khaira and the late chief minister Beant Singh's family led by Rahul Gandhi confidant and Anandpur Sahib MP Ravneet Bittu, have criticised his leadership. They held out Amarinder's "continuing inaccessibility" to most party leaders and inability to "mollify the rebels" against him. Bajwa also questioned his wisdom of relying on "politically insensible" retired army generals who failed to

38

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

MARCH 26, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

39

NEW

The Big Story
Khanduri was so sure of winning from Kotdwar that he did not bother to campaign there initially. He camped with his wife Aruna Khanduri only 10 days before polling.
KHANDURI (LEFT) WITH NISHANK IN DELHI

POST-POLLPOLITICS

SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

recognise the "altered texture of constituencies" after delimitation. Amarinder loyalists, however, point out that both Bajwa and Bhattal failed to secure victories in constituencies where they had recommended nominees. "While only one of Bhattal's nine candidates won, Bajwa spent all his time in Qadian where his wife Charanjit Kaur was the candidate," said a senior partyman. Kaur won by a margin of 16,156 votes. Few dispute that Amarinder remains the party's only credible face in Punjab with the capacity to revive Congress's flagging morale ahead of the 2014 Lok Sabha polls. Initial signals from 10 Janpath, including a brief telephone call from Sonia two days after the Assembly election results, suggest that the party is unlikely to take any step that could impact its own survival beyond General Elections. But PPP chief Manpreet is waking up to his worst nightmare: Estranged cousin, SAD's Sukhbir Singh Badal, once again at the helm of things in Punjab. Even though it polled 5.17 per cent of the votes, PPP failed to record a victory in a single seat. Trusted supporters are already beginning to abandon it. And his rehabilitation in SAD is unlikely anytime soon.

DONE IN BYTHE ENEMYWITHIN
Khanduri's shock loss is a lesson in political sabotage
By Dilip Chandra Mandal

n January 30, the day Uttarakhand went to polls, the then BJP chief minister MajorGeneral B.C. Khanduri noticed something curious. There were few BJP workers in the polling booths while Congress workers showed up in large numbers. When he asked, he was told his workers were on a lunch break. It was only later that he realised that his own partymen had joined hands with the Congress to defeat him. The way BJP's 77-year-old chief ministerial candidate was conned into a shock defeat in Kotdwar is a riveting story of political sabotage. "I have fulfilled my responsibilities. It is up to the party to investigate the reasons for my defeat," was all Khanduri would tell INDIA TODAY. But BJP sources say the investigations will eaxmine the role of his rival Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank, another former chief minister. Khanduri had himself chosen

O

Kotdwar, which falls under his parliamentary constituency Garhwal, on January 8. Shailendra Singh Rawat, a Nishank follower who was the sitting BJP MLA, refused to campaign for him initially before coming around. "Rawat sabotaged Khanduri's campaign," says BJP's Shashi Nainwal, chairperson of Kotdwar municipality. Nainwal then points a finger at Nishank: "Everyone is saying that Nishank paid money to get Khanduri defeated." "Nishank realised that if Khanduri lost and the party won, he would get another shot at the job," says a BJP MLA. Nishank brushes off any talk of playing saboteur, suggesting that partymen conspired to almost defeat him in Doiwala constituency. "Leaflets were distributed and a damaging CDwas telecast on a local channel to malign me. The Election Commission took cognisance of both," he says. Khanduri was so sure of winning from Kotdwar that he did not bother to campaign initially. It was just 10 days before polling he camped in Kotdwar with his wife Aruna Khanduri, skipping at least 12 rallies in other parts of the state. The non-appearances damaged BJP's prospects elsewhere. His own loss made it a 32-31 scoreline in favour of the Congress. I

40

INDIA TODAY N MARCH 26, 2012

NEW

