BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

REVENGE OFTHE PROVINCES
ow did relations between Samajwadi Party and the only governments in a deeper hole are Congress governCongress descend, within the space of half a ments in Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh and Goa. The Congress has such a weak reputation in states that campaign, from flirtation barely disguised by a Lucknow burqa and hints of betrothal to the acrimony of it has been unable to exploit fractious splits in regional parties, which is akin to missing a penalty. Instead, such a rean imminent divorce? Invective is a jaded weapon: too dull to wound the gional split has delayed or even aborted a Congress revival. enemy, and terribly sharp when it inflicts self-injury, as it In Tamil Nadu, the Congress would have been elected when mostly does. But ridicule scores a flesh wound whenever people tired of DMK's mercurial ways. Instead, its splinter backed by reason. The Samajwadi heir apparent, Akhilesh Anna DMK became the successor, and remains so 25 years Yadav, has just discovered the pleasures of lampoon; signi- after founder M.G. Ramachandran's death. ficantly his first and only target is Rahul Gandhi. Congress In Bihar, Lalu Yadav and Nitish Kumar lived, albeit uncan, if it wants to, shrug off Yadav's jibe that Rahul began comfortably, within the same party. Lalu captured Bihar, his campaign by rolling up his sleeves, continued by tearing and had a wonderful run. When his ego-and-caste inflated up a simulated Samajwadi manifesto, and will possibly end bubble was finally punctured, it was Nitish who won Patna, by jumping off the podium in the last act of such faux not the Congress. Nitish promises to keep the Congress out dramatics. But it should worry about the fact that the audi- of office in Bihar for even longer than Lalu did. ence is laughing. Nothing disperses the claim of charisma In Bengal, the regional force, the Left, did not split, but more easily than laughter. Incidentally, whatever happened the Congress did. Once again, when the Left collapsed, the to the rolled sleeves? They seem to have disappeared. voter trusted Mamata Banerjee as the alternative, not the It takes time to recognise a political pattern, but Congress. Maharashtra has seen a further variation. 45 years is probably enough to shade out the exceptions Congress and its breakaway bit, Sharad Pawar's NCP, set that prove the rule. aside their internal bitterness to make successful common Precisely 45 years ago, in the elections of 1967, cause against the Shiv Sena-BJP combine. Now, when their Congress began to cede large sections of India to regional alliance is beginning to fray, it is the Congress which has parties. Its nadir came in 1967, 1977 and for much of the taken the greater drubbing as compared to NCP. Check the 1990s, when it teetered in Delhi and disappeared from latest local government results. Amritsar to Calcutta. The high points were 1971-72, when In Uttar Pradesh, Congress collapsed 22 years ago. Mrs Indira Gandhi injected the elixir of ideology, and 1984- Mulayam Singh Yadav and BJP took turns in office. When 85, when her martyrdom brought voters tired of these two, they did not SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com spectacular electoral rewards. But the seek out Congress but went to a fourth Congress never recovered the cerforce, Mayawati. It is an interesting tainty of office that had been its historthought: Would Congress have had a ical privilege between 1952 and 1967. chance in the current Punjab elections Mrs Gandhi's legacy is evident in if a second Akali Dal had emerged and those forgotten corners of the mind that consolidated itself? still shape voter behaviour. She believed Rahul Gandhi's advisers are in a strong Centre, and subservient state blessed with enthusiasm; maybe this governments that could be dismissed by is why a sober reading of the past a stroke of an imperious pen through eludes them. I have no idea whether the application of Article 356. Regional the Congress is going to do well or parties fought back, as they are doing badly, but it was risky to turn the UP now, under the banner of a federal poll into the springboard for a Rahul Constitution. The voter, who wants, logpole vault. It is embarrassing if ically, a strong Centre as well as a strong you huff and you puff and then go I have no idea whether the state, began to trust the Congress for Congress is going to do well through under the bar. Delhi, and other parties for the Bookies have a better feel for or badly, but it was risky to provinces. Even the success of Atal ground reality than astrologers or turn the UP poll into the Bihari Vajpayee's NDA coalition has not journalists. On February 21 they were fully erased the memory of that disaster springboard for a Rahul pole offering even bets on these figures: called Janata rule between 1977 and vault. It is embarrassing if you 120-130 seats for SP; 100-110 for BSP; 1980. The voter is rarely wrong, and 80-90 for BJP; and 50-60 for Congress. Congress continues to prove him right huff and you puff and then go If this is true, then the past still has through under the bar. in the provinces: UPA 2 is in tatters, but some claim on the present. 

H

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

50

