The Big Story BIRLAS

BATTLE FOR BILLIONS
Photo Montage by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

By Shafi Rahman

An ICAI report indicting the Lodhas has given fresh ammunition to Birlas. Both camps are bringing to the table new evidence in the final fight.

he battle for M.P. Birla's fortune has taken a sensational new twist. In 2004, Priyamvada Devi Birla bequeathed her entire estate worth Rs 5,000 crore to her chartered accountant R.S. Lodha, stunning the Birla family and India Inc. Eight years later, after millions spent in legal battles, a disciplinary committee of the regulator, Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), has held Harsh Vardhan Lodha, 45, legal heir of R.S. Lodha, guilty of professional misconduct. R.S. Lodha, who was a chartered accountant before taking over the M.P. Birla empire in 2004, passed away in October, 2008. ICAI's observations have a direct bearing on the battle for

T

the Birla estate being fought in the Calcutta High Court. At stake is ownership of the M.P. Birla Group. M.P. Birla was the nephew of G.D. Birla and cousin of K.K. Birla, B.K. Birla and G.P. Birla. M.P. Birla group's prized assets include Birla Corporation, the family's first business concern set up on the banks of river Bhagirathi by G.D. Birla in 1920. The Group also runs M.P. Birla Planetarium, Belle Vue Clinic, South Point School and M.P. Birla Foundation higher secondary schools in Kolkata, and prestigious medical institutions like Bombay Hospital, Birla Vikas Hospitals in Satna, Sidhi and Indore. The group also has a 25 per cent stake in Pilani Investments, one of the Birlas' key companies. That the Lodhas, the outsiders, hold such a major stake in Pilani Investments is

causing heartburn to the Birlas. The ICAI disciplinary committee was set up in the Lodha case in 2005 following a complaint from chartered accountants Om Prakash Aggarwal, Shashi Aggarwal and Suresh Kumar. "The Companies Act, 1956, prohibits acceptance of audit by a director of a company or shareholder of the company under audit. The respondents were fully aware of their interest and its effect on their independence while accepting or conducting the audits of Birla Ericsson Optical Limited (BEOL) and Birla Readymix Private Limited (BRPL). Yet they failed to report their interest in the promotee companies," the report said. The powerful ICAI looks into professional misconduct by an accountant. On February 13, ICAI banned Srinivas Talluri, former chief

HARSH VARDHAN LODHA

R.S. LODHA

PRIYAMVADA BIRLA

YASHOVARDHAN BIRLA

FIGHT FOR FORTUNE The tussle over a will began in 2004. Priyamvada Birla and R.S. Lodha, the inheritor of her Rs 5,000 crore fortune, have passed away but the war rages on.
July 30, 1990 M.P. Birla dies at the age of 73; his wife Priyamvada takes over the reins. September 15, 2001 R.S. Lodha appointed co-chairman of Birla Corporation, starts taking active interest in company's affairs. July 3, 2004 Priyamvada Birla dies; last rites performed by Yashovardhan Birla. July 12, 2004 R.S. Lodha goes to Priyamvada Birla's home, reads out her last will in which she bequeathed her wealth to Lodha. July 13, 2004 Birlas close ranks and decide to contest the will. Khaitan & Co files caveats on behalf of K.K. Birla and M.P. Birla's two sisters, Lakshmi Devi Newar and Radha Mohta, to prevent R.S. Lodha from processing the will in court. July 19, 2004 R.S. Lodha files an application seeking probate of Priyamvada Birla's will. July 20, 2004 Birla Corporation board meeting brings Lodha face to face with Nandini Nopany, daughter of K.K. Birla. July 21, 2004 Other versions of Priyamvada's will are published in newspapers. Birlas also seek probate of a mutual will between M.P. Birla and Priyamvada. July 23, 2004 Khaitan & Co inspects the will for the first time, raises objections about absence of some crucial documents. October 3, 2008 R.S. Lodha, 66, dies at B.K. Birla's home in London, amid rumours that both parties are seeking settlement. But instead, both parties harden their positions. 2012 Birlas and Lodhas will now flood the court with evidence, including Priyamvada's medical reports.

NEW

NEW

The Big Story BIRLAS
financial officer of Satyam, and former Pricewaterhouse auditor Vadlamani Srinivas, involved in a Rs 14,000-crore scam, from practice for life for "professional misconduct". ICAI President Jaydeep N. Shah did not comment on details of the confidential disciplinary report, but told INDIA TODAY, "The next monthly committee meeting will look into the report and initiate action if members are guilty." The Birla family has been united in their fight against the Lodhas over the will. But the effort of the family--brothers B.K. Birla and K.K. Birla (sons of G.D. Birla and first cousins of M.P. Birla), G.P. Birla (son of B.M. Birla and a first cousin of M.P. Birla), and Yashovardhan Birla (grandnephew of M.P. Birla)--to get directly involved in the legal matters suffered a setback after the Supreme Court held that only G.P. Birla, of the four, had caveatable interest, as he was one of the executers of Priyamvada Birla's will in 1982. Now cases against the Lodhas are being pursued by the legal heirs of Laxmi Devi Newar, sister of M.P. Birla. K.K. Birla and G.P. Birla have since passed away. The Lodhas question the validity of the disciplinary committee report while the Birlas think it will strengthen their argument. Arguing before the Calcutta High Court, S.P. Sarkar, appearing for heirs of late Laxmi Devi Newar, said R.S. Lodha had acted against the norms as laid down by ICAI. He argued that Lodha was actively involved in the control and management of BEOL and that Lodha and Company continued to be the auditors till July 20, 2004. When contacted by INDIA TODAY, both sides refused to give official statements on the court proceedings as well as the ICAI report. After a decade of procedural quagmire in various courts, which tested the might of the Birla Group and the tenacity of the Lodhas, both parties are set to put their cards on the table. Why did Priyamvada do what she did? Why was her chartered accountant and close confidant preferred over her family members? Was she trying to punish her family for personal differences? Was she safeguarding her husband's legacy? Or was she acting under pressure? Both sides will answer these questions, asked soon after the death of incredibly rich widow, with evidence in the Calcutta High Court.There are two wills queueing up for legal recognition. The Birlas have produced a will of July 13, 1982 bequeathing M.P. Birla and Priyamvada Birla's estates to charities, while according to the will with the Lodhas, Priyamvada bequeathed her property to R.S. Lodha on April 18, 1999. Both parties have brandished innumerable documents ranging from postcards from family vacations to minutes of board meetings. The court will first hear an application for the grant of probate based on the 1999 will. The Birlas are arguing that it was unnatural for Priyamvada to give away her property to Lodha who is not a close relative. The Birlas say that M.P. Birla and Priyamvada had emphasised their intent towards charity in their earlier will and it is unlikely that there was a change of mind later. To contest the argument that Priyamvada's will is unnatural, the Lodhas have produced documents that show her intention of bequeathing property to Lodha. They rely on the minutes of the September 15, 2001, Birla Corporation board meeting to discuss the resignation of R.M. Dalal and the appointment of R.S. Lodha as director and co-chairman. "The chairman (Priyamvada) mentioned how R.S. Lodha had, at the request of late M.P. Birla, been helping all these years in many of the Group's matters and how she keenly wanted him to succeed her. She also added how she had wanted Lodha to take over as chairman of the company but Lodha was keen that she continue as chairman as long as she could," the minutes state. The Lodhas will also pull out of their quiver a letter written on April 8, 1998, by Yashovardhan Birla to Priyamvada after a business newspaper reported that he was to be nominated as heir. Priyamvada later denied the media report. "Everybody close to us knows the reality that the newspaper article was not based on facts. People have reminded me that the article was incorrect, as you find me incapable of even contributing to a charitable organisation like Bombay Hospital. So

T R A C I N G
The empire has split into six groups. Of these, A.V. Birla's group has the largest turnover.

T H E

B I R L A
1838-1910

B U S I N E S S

Seth Shiv Narayan Birla He started cotton trading operations at Rajasthan in 1857 and later shifted to Bombay.

Raja Baldeo Das Birla
1864-1957

He was responsible for shifting the operations to Calcutta in 1901.

Jugal Kishore Birla
1883-1967

Rameshwar Das Birla
1892-1973

Ghanshyam Das Birla
1894-1983

Braj Mohan Birla
1905-1982

He was a reputed trader who worked closelywith B.M.Birla

He traded in jute.Later,he ran Centuryalong with G.D.Birla.

He set up the first Birla jute mill in 1919 in Calcutta.

He first dealt in sugar,paper and insurance.He later founded Hindustan Motors.

Gajanan Birla
1910-1961

Madhav Prasad Birla
1917-1990

Lakshmi Niwas Birla
1910-1994

Krishna Kumar Birla
1918-2008

Basant Kumar Birla
b 1921

Ganga Prasad Birla
1922-2010

Ashok Vardhan Birla
1939-1990

Birla Corporation Birla Ericsson Optical  Birla Precision Technologies  Universal Cables  Vindhya Telelinks
 

Sudarshan Kumar Birla
b 1934

Nandini Nopany Jyotsna Poddar Shobhana Bhartia
b 1949 b 1953 b 1957

Aditya Vikram Birla
1943-1995
 

Chandrakant Birla
b 1955

Combined turnover of listed companies

Rs 3,537.16 cr
Yashovardhan Birla
b 1967
 

Sidharth Birla
b 1957

Oudh Sugar Mills  SIL Investments  Sutlej Textiles  Upper Ganges Sugar


Chambal Fertilisers & Chemicals  Texmaco  Texmaco Rail & Engineering  Zuari


HT Media  Hindustan Media Ventures


Hindustan Motors Hyderabad Industries  Orient Paper

Kumar Mangalam Birla
b 1967
 Aditya Birla Chemicals (India)  Aditya Birla Money  Aditya Birla Nuvo  Grasim Industries  Hindalco Industries  Ideas Cellular  Tanfac Industries  UltraTech Cement  

Combined turnover of listed companies

Rs 4,037.67 cr
Century Enka Century Textiles & Inds.  ECE Industries  Hindustan Everest Tools  Jay Shree Tea  Kesoram Industries  Mangalam Cement  Mangalam Timber Products

Birla Machining & Toolings  Birla Power Solutions  Zenith Birla (India)


Cimmco Digjam  Xpro India Combined turnover of listed companies

Combined turnover of listed companies

Rs 16,469.6 cr

Rs 549.8 cr
All figures are for FY 2011 Source for listed entities: CMIE

Combined turnover of listed companies

Rs 864.04 cr

Combined turnover of listed companies Rs 83,412.04 cr
MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

44

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

NEW

45

NEW

The Big Story BIRLAS

BIRLAS UNITE FOR PILANI
Lodhas may stake claim to the Rs 1,440-crore Pilani Investments, which controls shares in companies across the Birla Group
he fight between the Birlas and Harsh Vardhan Lodha is for control of the assets of the M.P. Birla Group. But behind that very public war is a battle for Pilani Investments and Industries Corporation, a key holding company of the Birlas which started trading in October 2011 on the National Stock Exchange. Pilani has investments worth some Rs 650 crore at book value, or initial cost, mostly in shares of B.K. Birla and Aditya Birla Group companies such as Century Textiles and Industries (36.78 per cent), Hindalco Industries (1.52 per cent), Grasim Industries (4.69 per cent) and Kesoram Industries (5.28 per cent). The total value of Pilani's stake in nine listed companies is approximately Rs 2,441 crore. RAGHU RAI The M.P. Birla Group has a THE BIRLAS 25 per cent stake in Pilani Investments, which has a market capitalisation of Rs 1,440 crore (down from Rs 1,815 crore in October 2011 when it started trading). That stake, now controlled by Harsh Vardhan Lodha, is currently valued at about Rs 450 crore. In 2005, Lodha had used the holding in Pilani to force a board seat and vote on all key resolutions. Fear of a Lodha claim on Pilani Investments was the main reason why B.K. Birla and his grandson Kumar Mangalam Birla consolidated their hold by buying out S.K. Birla's 7 per cent and G.P. Birla's 20 per cent in Pilani in 2005. This brought the B.K. Birla and Aditya Birla groups' total holdings to 49 per cent. With K.K. Birla's 7 per cent being counted in the Birla camp, the only outstanding block is that of M.P. Birla's stake, which is now controlled by Lodha. Lodha Junior claims that minority shareholders have made recent offers to him to acquire shares of Pilani. The move by the shareholders, who control 19 per cent in the Group, is seen by Lodha as a backroom attempt to acquire his 25 per cent. "This is a ploy to ease me out through minority shareholders who have big chunks of cash without any definitive source of income," Lodha told INDIA TODAY. Lodha has lodged a complaint with the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), the market watchdog, about the intent of minority shareholders. When contacted, SEBI spokesperson G. Hariharan refused to comment. Market analysts don't believe there is any move to acquire Lodha's share. "There is no news in the market about anyone making a backdoor offer to silently acquire Pilani shares. For all practical purposes, Pilani's market estimate is just a figure on paper for Lodha because he cannot cash out in the market that has not seen any major movements in Pilani shares in recent times. Lodha has also not shown any indication that he is interested in acquiring more Pilani shares," said Rajesh Agarwal, head of research at Eastern Financiers, a brokering firm. by Shantanu Guha Ray

T

why would you give me the reins of your empire?" Yashovardhan wrote. The Lodhas argue that R.S. Lodha was elevated to top positions in the Birla Group during Priyamvada's time, paving the way for his inheriting the property. The Birlas play it down, saying it was with good business sense that she employed professionals. They point out that Priyamvada had made J.R. Birla (not from the family) managing director of the corporation till his death in 1994. Lodhas have produced CDs containing Priyamvada's speeches to counter the argument that she had limited language skills. Soon after signing the will, she went with the Lodha family on a vacation to China and in 2003 to the Antarctica. Both camps have sought opinion from her doctors in the UK. The Birlas argue she was not physically fit at the time. On the other hand, Lodha's counsel Fox & Mandal is in possession of a medical opinion from John Cunningham, professor of nephrology at Middlesex Hospital in London. "The medications she was taking comprised a complex cocktail of drugs designed to prevent rejection of transplanted kidney... None of these drugs would be expected to have a negative impact on mental function," states his letter. The Birlas filed an application in the high court in 2011 seeking appointment of an administrator till the court decided on who should be the rightful heir to the Group assets. The court is set to name three administrators in March. In November 2009, the Company Law Board (CLB) dismissed a petition of the Birlas which challenged the elevation of Harsh Lodha as chairman of Birla Corporation. In the judgment, CLB Chairman S. Balasubramanian noted that "it is apparent the petitioners are more concerned about the interest of Birlas than the company". The Birlas consider 12 to be an inauspicious number. The lifts in Birla Building don't have a button for the 12th floor; 13 follows 11. On July 12, 2003, the Lodhas went to Birla Park in Kolkata and brandished the will to a shocked family. The year 2012 is crucial in the legal battle of wills. The Birlas hope they can break the jinx. 

46

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

NEW

