Na tion GUJARAT
By Uday Mahurkar

AN APPEAL

he debate on whether the ban on liquor in Gujarat is in tune with the rapid strides the state has been making as an investment and tourist destination is raging once again. A series of police raids in the recent past has resulted in the arrest of people drinking at their farmhouses and even homes. In one case, a raid at a private company office saw NRIs being hauled up on New Year's Eve. The outdated law has started to have a negative impact on Gujarat's tourist-friendly image, recently bolstered by campaigns starring Amitabh Bachchan, who is the brand ambassador for Gujarat Tourism Corporation. Narendra Singh Rathore, CEO of Garha Tour and Travels, a travel agency which brings the largest number of foreign tourists to the state, says, "Gujarat has the potential to become another Goa. Some of the beaches along its 1,600-km-long coastline are beautiful. Lifting prohibition could work wonders for the state." According to him, most foreign tourists refuse to take the risk of even having their customary drink in a hush-hush manner. The state tourism department's efforts to convince the government to relax prohibition has had little response so far. Tourism is just one industry affected by Gujarat's prohibition policy. Promising investors are shying away from the state because of the ban. One example is of a leading NRI-owned hotel and real estate chain which has its head office in Gujarat but has invested in states other than Gujarat. Says an executive of the company, "In today's corporate culture, liquor prohibition is a real impediment to business." At present, Gujarat's prohibition law allows a permit to foreigners and outsiders but the process for obtaining it is cumbersome. The state also gives group liquor permits for conferences and meetings but again the process is

T

CYCLONE THANE REHABILITATION FUND
CARE TODAY
AN INDIA TODAY GROUP INITIATIVE

CARE TODAY appeals for support and donations

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

The state's outdated alcohol prohibition policy is at odds with its image as a tourist destination
not so simple. The only place where the government allows free flow of liquor is in special economic zones (SEZS) but that is not of much use. Gujarat has 60 sanctioned SEZS, out of which 22 are operational and rest are in the pipepline. Significantly, there is a vast section of businessmen in favour of lifting the ban but a few are willing to speak against the policy fearing government or police wrath. The most potent movement against the ban is being led by Dinesh Hinduja, a local businessman. He runs an NGO called the Malt March, which has made a conscious attempt to organise opinion against the Gandhian policy

TIME FOR AMALT MARCH IN GUJARAT
and a section of the RSS lobby in the state which strongly favours prohibition even though the policy breeds massive corruption in the police ranks. "Prohibition is a millstone around Gujarat's neck which is not just impeding its progress as a vibrant state but is also the single biggest source of corruption and hypocrisy in the name of Gandhism," says Hinduja. But of late, he has slowed down on his campaign after an odd incident that literally shook him. In a meeting with Gandhians he held a couple of years ago, some youths threatened to immolate themselves if he didn't withdraw his anti-prohibition campaign. As he puts it, "It was terrorism in the name of Gandhism." The Gandhians strongly disagree with him. According to eminent Gandhian Chunibhai Vaidya, there are many angles to this issue alcohol

SEIZED LIQUOR BOTTLES BEING DESTROYED BY PROHIBITION DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS

"Gujarat has the potential to become another Goa. Lifting prohibition could work wonders for the state."
NARENDRA SINGH RATHORE, Tour Operator

drinkers are blind to. "Women feel safer because no one can dare to create a scene in the open after getting drunk in Gujarat," says Vaidya. "The government should work towards curbing corruption in police and strengthening prohibition," he adds. Gujarat government spokesperson and state Health Minister Jai Narayan Vyas, who supports Vaidya, says, "There are many reasons that justify prohibition which we, as a government, cannot overlook. Unfortunately, the anti-prohibition activists are clearly unaware about them." Interestingly, Indian Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) is freely available in Gujarat, thanks to bootleggers. According to an estimate, Gujarat is losing Rs 4,000 crore in excise duty annually because of this anti-alcohol policy and a significant part of that amount goes in the pockets of the police personnel as well as liquor manufacturing companies across India, who sneak in their spirits into Gujarat. Chief Minister Narendra Modi is sceptical about lifting the ban because he feels it could anger the women voters who form the bulk of his supporters. With state Assembly elections due in December, there is little likelihood of Modi even relaxing the law partially. 

C

yclone Thane, a severe storm with wind speed of 140 kmph, hit the Indian coast on December 30, 2011, resulting in massive damage to villages in the coastal districts of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry. The fury of the cyclone resulted in loss of 48 lives, damage to more than 2 lakh houses and to standing crops in excess of 1 lakh acres. Damage caused to the SOS Children's Village, Puducherry, alone needs Rs 1.6 crore for restoration. Till February 17, 2012, we have received only Rs 92,677. We sincerely appeal to our readers to contribute generously and be a part of the process to make a difference to the lives of affected communities and give them renewed hope.

We thank the following donors who have contributed in excess of Rs 5,000:
B.R. Seth Kanhaiyalal V. Vignesh L.M.A. Foundation Arun Kumar Jain P.R. Achar Shivani Edu Charitable Trust Kanwal Krishan Malhotra Jai Chand Mahtab Banwari Lal Jhajharia Dr S.K. Gupta Rakesh Agarwal Dr Kirpa Ram Gayatri Devi Sud Trust Rs 5,100 Rs 6,666 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,100 Rs 5,100 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 10,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,011 Rs 5,000 Rs 5,100 Rs 15,000

MAKE A DIFFERENCE
Please draw cheques or demand drafts in favour of CARE TODAY A/c The Thane Rehabilitation Fund and send to:

CARE TODAY
9th Floor, Videocon Towers, E-1, Jhandewalan Extension, New Delhi-110 055
All contributions are eligible for tax exemption under Section 80(G) of the Income Tax Act. We do not accept cash or money orders.

For further queries, please contact C. Balaji Singh at 011-23314216/+91-9810088836 or email balaji.singh@intoday.com
MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

54

SOS CHILDREN `S VILLAGES OF INDIA

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

55

