Sp orts CRICKET
By Peter Lalor

DHONI on slow fielding

t began with a whisper. It began in Perth when Team India was suffering another humiliation at the hands of the born-again Australians and well on the way to losing another overseas series four-nil. As each day passed, the volume grew. By the tour's end, it had become a shout. It was Tolstoy who wrote that happy families are all the same, but every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way. In the epic tragedy that this tour was, M.S. Dhoni's family found unique ways to be miserable. On the field and in the dressing room. The signs were there early. Things had gone well enough in the first Test in Melbourne, the bowlers had managed 20 wickets, Sachin Tendulkar, Rahul Dravid and Virender Sehwag had managed 50s and the game had gone on for five days. But it was all

I

"

There are quite a few players who are also slow on the field. If you really add it up, you would have only two or three good fielders in the side then."

SEHWAG on fitness levels
"We didn't know what Dhoni talked about us (seniors being slow on the field). Myself, Gambhir and Tendulkar were told the team wants young players and we agreed."

GAMBHIR on rotation
"The amount of cricket we play, it is important to rotate. When we don't rotate, everyone has a problem, when we rotate, then it's an issue too with the players.

DHONI'S TEAM ARE CHAMPIONS OFSELF-PITY
Team India is at odds with itself. There is foment and fracture. There is also disinterest and ill-discipline.
downhill from there. In Sydney, Virat Kohli spoke of growing frustration when he flipped the bird to the Australian crowd and then whined about how unkind they were, but this was an outside distraction. The usually mild-mannered Ishant Sharma confirmed it when he did the same at the team's day out at a go-kart track. In Perth, things came to a head. Talk among the travelling press corps and former players hinted that all was not well in the dressing room. Veteran Australian cricket writer Robert Craddock wrote in Herald Sun that Virender Sehwag was leading a clique of players unhappy with Dhoni's leadership in the Test series. Those in Sehwag's camp, he claimed, thought Dhoni had let the team down with a string of lettucelimp performances. The story was pilloried by sections of the Indian commentariat, but as every day goes by, it becomes more apparent that all is not well in the dressing room. India played the Tests with a growing level of disinterest and ill-discipline. Ironically, when Dhoni was suspended from the fourth Test in Adelaide, Sehwag took the reins and proved his leadership was no better or worse than the absent captain's. India lost Adelaide and the series 4-0. Dhoni, who rose to fame after steering a band of youngsters to the inaugural ICC T20 World Cup, has never fitted the traditional mould of a captain. That win sparked a revolution and was achieved without seniors. From outside it appears that the captain is restricted when the veterans are about--as they are in the Test format. He has said as much too. When the Tests were over, when Dravid and V.V.S. Laxman were on the plane back home and the dressing room was teeming with energy of faster, sharper and younger 50-over practitioners, Dhoni seemed to be renewed. "Our one-day side looks very different from our Test side," he said on the eve of that series. "New boys who have come in are a lot more noisy, which really helps lift the dressingroom atmosphere. They love to pull each other's leg, which means it gets

(FROM LEFT) SEHWAG, DRAVID AND DHONI AFTER THE FOURTH TEST IN ADELAIDE
GETTY IMAGES

more and more lively. It's a completely different dressing room. From Kishore Kumar, we have gone to Sean Paul. That's the kind of difference. Noisy dressing room. Different generation of players." When you heard that you just prayed that Tendulkar had no Kishore tracks on his iPod. There were, however, more indignities awaiting the seniors. When a win was eventually summoned against the Australians, Man of the Match Gautam Gambhir announced that the side was better off without certain players. "You don't want names, you want people who can deliver," he told the journalists. "The best XI is if 11 players have the belief they can beat any opposition on the park and this playing XI had the belief that they could beat Australia in Australia and in this ODI. One or two individuals don't make a difference." Who, you wondered, were these "one or two individuals", these "names"?

I OPENER


Top Team India players are at loggerheads Down Under
January 13 Sehwag-Dhoni rift is out before the 3rd Test. India lose and Dhoni gets a one-match suspension. January 31 Dhoni says he prefers young blood for ODIs and rues he is saddled with seniors. February 12 India beat Lanka, Man of the Match Gambhir says team does not need stars to win, hinting at Sachin Tendulkar.

"





 February 19 India lose to Australia. Suspended again, Dhoni blames senior players for being slow on the field.  February 21 Captain for the match, Sehwag, fobs off fitness criticism. India loses to Lanka.

Were they Kishore fans? Do we really need or want to name them? Suffice to say Tendulkar did not play that game. This was, as the televisions would say, a "bombshell". Gambhir wasn't finished there. He announced that he wasn't happy with the captain leaving it until there were only two balls left to win the match, that he would have finished the job earlier. Even Dhoni had admitted that his habit of leaving things to the last had cost the side a win when he had only managed to conjure a draw in the earlier game against Sri Lanka. The gloves were really off after another loss in Brisbane--one that saw Dhoni suspended for the second time on tour for slow over rates. The captain conceded players like Gambhir, Sehwag and Tendulkar were costing India valuable runs with slow fielding. "Once the ball goes to them, the Australians or the Sri Lankans will try to exploit the doubles or three runs. It means it will put more pressure on their body because the throwing needs to be good, and the diving needs to be good so they will be under constant pressure. It will affect our fielding in a big way, which means there will be more pressure on the batsmen to score those extra 20 runs." When Sehwag again replaced Dhoni in the next match--another loss--this comment was put to him. "Have you seen my catch?" Sehwag snapped for he had snatched a `classic'. "We have been fielding the same way for the last 10 years." He, of course denied any rift. "We are one unit, happy. He (Dhoni) is the captain, he can say whatever he wants to say. He addresses the media, has been doing it for the last two years, and we are okay with it." Team India is hanging its dirty laundry out to air in Australia in a way rarely witnessed before. The length of the tour and the consistent poor performances are taking their toll. Watch this space, if you dare, for it will not end here and you can be sure it will not end happily for this family. The author is a cricket writer for The Australian

60

INDIA TODAY  MARCH 5, 2012

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

61

