Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

AFRAGILE PARADISE
Passionate love blossoms across forbidden racial lines in strife-torn Mauritius
boundary lines. It is a passionate but delicate mating game: one step forward, two steps back, over a love the word `miscegenation'. It is an archaic series of Jane Austen-esque social calls, picnics, and darkly racist word, but with the thrilling chaperoned walks, theatre evenings, soirees and whiff of illicit passions and forbidden lust, and chance meetings, the heat slowly building up to the it's the first word I spotted when I opened point where one of those devastating Indian Ocean Romesh Gunasekera's new novel at random. It also hurricanes finally comes crashing down on the happens to be one of the themes that runs through island, literally and metaphorically. Gunasekera is a Sri Lankan, with an islander's this book. The Prisoner of Paradise is set in 1825, in Mauritius, which was then not just a 747 flight innate feel for the rhythms and textures of Mauritius. He is also is an extremely lyrical and away but five weeks' sailing time from England. The beautiful island is going through various sensuous writer, as a result of which The Prisoner upheavals, all at once: the British have just wrested of Paradise is an intensely visual book. In fact, political control from the French; the slave trade reading it one can almost see the film playing that has long sustained its plantation economy is inside one's head: directed, perhaps, by in the process of being abolished; the Indian Joe Wright, of Pride and Prejudice fame, or maybe convict labour, imported to replace the African Mira Nair (who could pick up where she slaves, is seething on the brink of uprising. Into this left off with Vanity Fair). It would probably feature fragile paradise Gunasekera introduces Lucy Keira Knightley as Lucy, Bob Hoskins as the Gladwell, a young Englishwoman. Her head is filled boorish Uncle George and, oh yes, Amitabh with anachronistically liberal ideas, Keats's poetry Bachchan as the exiled prince of Ceylon. The music and a fascination for the Orient acquired from the would be by the Oscar-winning Alexandre Desplat, pages of Lalla Rookh, and "her heart like a drum with his eclectic African-Brazilian influences, and in a symphony of sensualities". She has come the cinematography would be by John Seale, to Mauritius to stay with the Huytons, her beefy, who filmed The English Patient so lushly. racist uncle and her kindly aunt, at Ambleside, The only question is, who will play the brooding their country estate. It is actually a long, long way Don Lambodar? If Irrfan Khan had been fifteen years younger, he would have from the cold, dismal skies SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com been ideal, but maybe one of her childhood. could look instead at Gunasekera then plots Nawazuddin Siddiqui, that to introduce Lucy to the wonderfully talented young exotic Don Lambodar, the actor from Patang, Peepli interpreter to the exiled (Live), Firaaq and New York. Prince of Ceylon, with his My guess is that discussions fluency in 12 languages, on the film are already underhis "large, long eyes" and way. Knowing how savvy the his silk costumes, like Mauritian economic affairs some "king of the corsairs, ministry is, their representasailing into his Mauritian tives are no doubt already at lair, with his ruffles all work, networking in Hollywood puffed, having plundered to catalyse the project with a the seas". The author then view to promoting and giving a sits back and lets biology boost to their tourism industry. take its course--which it But if you've read the book, it does, treading hesitantly will probably be unnecessary to through the intricacies of see the film. Which is a tribute 19th century social and to Gunasekera's rich, imsexual mores, not to menagery-laden prose. tion forbidden racial 
By Anvar Alikhan

I

THE PRISONER OF PARADISE
byRomesh Gunasekera Bloomsbury Price: RS 550 Pages: 389 BETWEEN THE COVERS Gunasekera is a Sri Lankan,with an islander's innate feel for the rhythms and textures of Mauritius.He is also an extremelylyrical and sensuous writer,as a result of which The Prisoner of Paradise is an intenselyvisual book.

MARCH 5, 2012  INDIA TODAY

71

