SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz RESTAURANT

IN THE CITY
GAMING

Healthy junk!

Mind over games
The newest offering for coffee lovers in Gurgaon, The Mind Café is a great place to unwind at with family or friends. A franchise of the popular Singapore-based chain, The Mind Café has around 300 board games, of which only a few are easily available in India. These games are neatly arranged on shelves stacked against vibrant, red walls. You will spot games like Slapagories which test your knowledge in everyday life, Pass the Bomb--a game for quick thinkers, strategy games like Blokus and Snorta, the party game where everyone is an animal or at least sounds like one! To make your gaming experience more comprehensive, the café has board game masters who help you pick a game and teach you how to play it. If you feel like grabbing a bite while playing, we suggest you try their pitawiches or signature items from the menu such as Spaghetti Bolognaise and Meat Monopoly Pizza. So unplug, order your favourite snack and let the games begin! Price Rs 75 per person per hour for playing board games Where GL-204, Cross Point DLF Phase 4, Gurgaon Tel 0124 4088830
 by

SUVASHIS MULLICK/www.indiatodayimages.com

Shilpa Mehta
CHANDERDEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

We think the recently opened Xes Café, at DLF's South Court Mall is going to be a crowd puller with their wholesome and delicious burger meals. All the sauces, breads, and dressings, are prepared in-house. The restaurant aims at bringing the international café, dining experience to India and the décor adheres to this idea with it being kept quite minimalist with dark wood interiors. Apart from the burgers, cherry tomato bruchettas and Wings on Fire, chicken wings served with barbeque sauce, sour cream and garlic mayonnaise win brownie points from us. Average meal for two Rs 1,800 plus taxes At DLF South Court Mall, Saket Tel 41036444
 by

Ekta Alreja

Shoot em up
Gear up and get gaming in true Barney Stinson style (of popular sitcom How I Met Your Mother) at the recently opened LASERGAME.IN. Located next to Janakpuri East's Metro station, it is Delhi's first laser tag arena. The game is an interesting, high tech combination of hide and seek, and paintball. It is played inside a large black light arena with neon lighting, fog and thumping music. Play as individuals or in teams. Each player is provided with a laser gun to "tag" their opponents and the one with the maximum hits wins. Each game lasts for twenty minutes, of which ten minutes are used for training. Enjoy! Price Rs 210 per person, per game At B1/7, 2nd Floor, JanakPuri East Metro Station (above Vijay Sales) Tel 40550704
 by

LOUNGE

Class apart
The recently revamped Polo Lounge at The Hyatt Regency has given Delhiites an elegant space for after-work socialising. Wooden floors, black and white pictures adorning the wall, a huge fireplace in the centre of the room and hardbound books stacked in the bookshelves recreate the charm of colonial times. The not-too-dimly lit lounge gets CHANDERDEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com grooving with live jazz performances every evening (except Sundays). The music is soft and does not disrupt conversations. On the menu are the finest and rarest of whiskeys, legendary cognacs like Remy Martin Louis XIII and vintage single malts aged up to 46 years including Glenfiddich Vintage 1961. There are a number of cocktails to choose from, and then there's the `mixologist' Mike who is willing to create a drink to suit your taste. We tried the Cat's Pajama, a cocktail made with bourbon. Not only was the drink well stirred and delicious, we loved the the presentation with a chunk of carved ice topped with orange peel. So, grab a drink, enjoy the performance, get comfy on the lounging sofas, and let the evening set in. Average bill for two Rs 3,000 plus taxes At The Polo Lounge, Hyatt  by Ekta Marwaha Regency, Bhikaiji Cama Place, Ring Road Tel 66771314

Ekta Marwaha

s-18

SIMPLY DELHI  APRIL 2012

SIMPLY DELHI
STUFF

Buzz

Hold on
Leather accessory brand Hidesign has introduced a new line of luxury designer bags. Different from their usual line of formal bags, these have been crafted by the Milanese designer Alberto Ciaschini. Price On request Available at Shop No 67, District Centre, Saket Tel 40548821; hidesign.com

In high spirits
Try the new Patron XO Café Liqueur--a rich blend of coffee and tequila. It has just the right balance of sweetness and dryness that gives it a unique taste. Price Rs 3,860 for 750 ml Available at High Times Liquor Shop, DLF Place, Saket Tel 41408267

In style
Check out AND's new spring collection which comprises knee length dresses in bold colours. The line extends to off-shoulder tops and tunics as well. Price Rs 1500 onwards Available at All AND outlets; andindia.com

Bling it on!
Show off the latest style with this handcuff bracelet made of ivory resin. The two sterling silver lion heads, tiny white cubic zirconia, and a glamorous faux pearl are sure to grab eyeballs. Price On request Available at UGF Shop No. 216A, The Gallery on MG, New Anglapuri Tel 46109708

Sandwiches and more
American sub brand Quiznos has finally opened their first outlet in North India. Take your pick from a host of submarine sandwiches, salads, soups, thin crust pizzas, frozen yogurt and more. Price Rs 120 onwards Available at Quiznos, GK 1, N Block Market Tel 29238142

s-20

SIMPLY DELHI  APRIL 2012

