UP FRONT

PAUL ZACHARIA

ver since I can remember, A.K. Antony has enjoyed not doing what they are doing? The Mr Clean image is an image of probity, culminating in media clichés a panacea for both being in the know and not. If there like `Mr Clean' and `Saint'. The problem with such is a bad odour, one can always wash. And wipe your clichés is that they make those who bestow them and the hands on the sheet of the clean image. Some people might wonder: Isn't letting corruption bestowed go to sleep. The Tatra truck scandal rudely wakes up the sleepers. As a long-standing witness to operate in your sphere of control an immoral act even Antony's rise as a politician, I will still stand by his per- if you are not in that league? Especially if your power sonal probity. But it also raises the question: What are can be wielded to check corruption? The difference bethe implications of such `personal' probity in the case of tween Antony and Pilate again is that Antony is not washing his hands in disgust with anything. He is a a power-politician like Antony? It would certainly mean that he is not a bribe taker faithful member of the Congress party and cohabits with at the personal level, unlike thousands of Indian politi- all its greed and opportunism. He will even help carry cians of every hue we know. In other words, he does not in the Big Honey-pot as a loyal soldier. But will not dip indulge in corruption in order to accumulate wealth for his hands in. Yes, for a Congressman he is amazing. And himself and his family. I know I am hanging out on a limb that is why he was hand-picked to be defence minister by saying this, but shall take the risk. Because the me- and perhaps is the longest-serving. I am chauvinistically proud that Antony is Defence dia, even while cranking up clichés, is not a fool and if Antony has single-mindedly devoted his attention to any Minister of India. It is the biggest national political job any cause other than power, it is to keeping his hands clean Malayali has held after V.K. Krishna Menon--who was a Malayali only in name. Antony came up the hard way, and ensuring that they are exhibited as clean. mastered Congress politics with a In a famous gesture 2,000 SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Machiavellian astuteness and got years ago, Pilate had washed his to wherever he reached by dint of hands before the Jewish bigots that mastery and the neoand declared that he was washGandhian image his media ing his hands of the blood of friends so assiduously manufacJesus Christ. And without doubt, tured. It was not governance that he had been more than fair to made his career. That is why I, Jesus. He was giving up in disfor one, would be immensely gust, both with the Jews and worried if he returns to Kerala, Jesus' own obduracy. In a way, after seeing how Chief Minister Antony has been a follower of Oommen Chandy has proved Pilate all his career, in that he has to be a shockingly different Congbeen washing his hands of a lot ressman simply by working hard of things. Antony's difference and harder 24 x 7 and being with the crusty Roman judge is firmly in charge. Antony will find that he had been fair only to himit hard to beat him at governance. self. Or rather, to his meticuAnd poor Malayalis need goverlously calibrated media image nance the most--after five disasbuilt on the clean hands formula. trous years of Achuthanandan. How come he is addicted to Some sort of a political lesson the hand-washing syndrome? seems to be on offer and Dr It's very simple. Like all politiManmohan Singh and A.K. cians, he cultivates power. In Antony are at the heart of it. Both Indian politics, power enjoins The difference between Antony are known to be personally certain special responsibilities. and Pilate again is that Antony is clean. But does that exonerate You may choose not to be cornot washing his hands in disgust you if corruption thrives in your rupt yourself but in order to decision-making sphere and stay in power you need to let with anything. He is a faithful your answer is inaction or others be corrupt. You may or member of the Congress and may not know what the corrupt cohabits with all its greed. He will choosing not to be in the know? guys are doing. But who says it even help carry in the Big Honeyis a mortal sin to know or not Paul Zacharia is a Malayalam writer pot. But will not dip his hands in. know that, as long as you are and political essayist

THE PRICE OFANTONY'S CLEAN HANDS E

10

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

