50

POWER PEOPLE
The tenth edition of INDIA TODAY Power List celebrates the enduring influence of the business class even as the Citizen Rearmed reaches the pinnacle for the first time in a year when the politician lost the argument
rickshaw rate of growth. The navigator of the rudderless UPA Government, the retired reformer, does not have a compass or the competence to regain the lost shores of growth and confidence. Still, why is it that the market mavens on our list keep smiling? It is the exercise of power. It also shows the limits of political power against the spirit of the entrepreneurial class. Less government is good for business, but bad government can ruin it. The audacious and the ambitious from the Indian business class are breaching boundaries and setting up shop in far-flung markets, even as the Government does nothing to restore the faith in India as the next miracle of Asia. That is why the mightiest in the marketplace are great survivors as well. It is the power of being alive--and kicking--in a space where the oxygen is being sucked out by the government. Strangely, it was being done by a government most noted for its powerlessness.

Hail the HELMSMEN P
By S. Prasannarajan

ower is as old as the history of species. It is all about domination, influence and inspiration, and rarely is it measured on a moral scale. When morality is the propulsion, Anna Hazare ascends. The mighty few, soaring above the rest, defy the laws of social and political gravity to reach the zenith. Wealth and wit, and a rare ability to turn every instance of adversity into an opportunity, set "them" apart from "us". There are many names for them: The power elite, the Establishment, the higher circle. They are not necessarily the desirables, and their ideas and attitudes are not always in conformity with the public good. Their power outweighs perception; their influence extends beyond their chosen domain, be it the boardroom or the newsroom, the playing field or the silver screen, the public square or the court of law. The world is at

their feet; the future is brighter in their eyes; and victory is an idea that concentrates their mind. The tenth edition of INDIA TODAY Power List is a vindication of their persistence, a celebration of their audacity, and also a reminder that power abhors permanency. Following the pattern of the last nine years, the power pyramid of 2012 is largely built on the ingenuity and imagination of India's grittiest wealth creators. In a country like India, their domination of the Higher Echelon does more than explain the collapse of the triad that defined the Establishment in a classical sense: The ruling class, the military and business. That order prevails intact only in autocracies, where the three are invariably inseparable. In a world where the indicator of national glory is not the size of the barracks but the freedom of the bazaar, and where political power is no longer absolute but subordinated to the mood swings of the people, it is the pin-

striped plutocrat who endures at the pinnacle. India is very much a part of that world. That India sustains the power parade of 2012 too: More than half of them are from business. No surprise here. The smartest in the marketplace continue to be at the top of the game in spite of the worst political and economic context. When the power list made its debut in 2003, the Indian economy had already broken the shackles of the licence raj and, leaving behind the ignominy of 6 per cent growth, entered the boom era, touching a magical 9 per cent. Between then and now, India witnessed two General Elections: The right wing government fell in 2004, and five years later, the Congress-led coalition retained power, with a man who still wears the jaded badge of the market reformer at the helm. But the cheer has vanished from the market, as it did from the face of Dr Manmohan Singh a long while ago. India is back to what The Economist calls the

THE BANKER Deepak Parekh
Has been a regular since inception. His highest rank was 5 in 2011 and lowest 24 in 2010.

THE GURU Baba Ramdev
Has been a regular since 2008. Highest position was 11 in 2011 and lowest 46 in 2008.

THE POWER WOMAN Parmeshwar Godrej
The only woman who has been on the list every year. Her highest rank was 38 in 2003 and lowest 45 in 2012.

THE TECH TITAN Azim Premji
The Wipro boss has always been on the list. His highest rank was 6 in 2005 and lowest 15 in 2010.

THE ENTERTAINER Amitabh Bachchan
He has featured on the list. In 2003, he was ranked third. His lowest position was 19 in 2009, 2010 and 2012.

THE TYCOON Ratan Tata
He has always featured on the list and was No. 1 between 2005 and 2010. His lowest rank was No. 3 in 2003 and 2011.

THE SPORTSTAR Sachin Tendulkar
He has been a regular, except in 2005 when he did not find a place in the top 50. In 2011, he rose to the second spot.

THE MEDIA MOGULS Samir Jain and Vineet Jain
Always on the list. Highest rank was 4 in 2011 and lowest 21 in 2003.

THE LEGAL EAGLE Harish Salve
He has been a regular since 2005. His highest rank was 18 in 2009 and lowest 49 in 2006.

THE ACTIVIST Javed Akhtar
Was a regular between 2004 and 2008. His highest position was 18 in 2007 and lowest 43 in 2008.

HALLOF

FAME
2003-2012

Meet the fabulous 10 who outpaced time for a permanent place in the top echelon

18

Photo Imaging: SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

19

POWER PEOPLE

50
That said, what makes the tenth anniversary list exceptional is not the perpetual supremacy of the moneymakers. For the first time, the Citizen has become the Helmsman. Anna Hazare at Number One tells the story of an India Awakened. When the street erupted to his call of truth, the state lost its last fig leaf to hide the shame of lies--and more lies. The picaresque of a portly Gandhian from the rustic remoteness of Maharashtra, armed with nothing but his conscience, and assisted by his Sancho Panzas, a motley band of civil society fundamentalists, put fear into the mind of the ruling class that turned corruption into state religion. It took a 74-year-old satyagrahi to bring the young and the idealistic, the great demographic dividend of India, to the mean streets of politics. Hazare is power of dissent, and his rage against a rotten system has made Indian democracy richer. Increasingly, it is not the predictability of political power that makes India such an interesting place, maybe one of the most entertaining one as well. In the hierarchy of influentials, tastemakers from showbiz are second only to the business class, and this says something about the rise of India's soft power. The sweep and saleability of dreams manufactured in The power march Bollywood make it one of brings out the world's most formithe shifting dable industries in enhierarchy of an tertainment. Media India let down by moguls and thought its Government leaders are not far behind. While the possibilbut still kept alive by a few who dared ities of India as a news story continue to be exand won. ploited by a select few who defy the global trend of slump in the media market, the rise of the savant shows that even as money rules, the sovereignty of mind matters. Still, in a society as argumentative as India, the power of the opinion maker should be more than what it is today, particularly so at a time when the political class is losing the argument. In the end, it is the unequal distribution of power that sustains the Establishment. The members of this elite club can no longer take their privilege for granted. The longest surviving ones are those who have made better use of ideas, and in India of the twenty-first century, the best ideas of change are found increasingly outside politics. The power march across the following pages brings out the shifting hierarchy of an India let down by its government but still kept alive by a few who dared and won. For the first time, it is not led by any pinstriped pachyderm. In the vanguard is a street-fighting Gandhian in crumpled kurta. The citizen has for the first time bought the ticket to the front row of the Establishment.

POWER MOMENT
On August 16, 2011, he was arrested by Delhi Police and taken to Tihar Jail, in what he called the "second freedom struggle" .
REUTERS

1

ANNA HAZARE
74, Social Activist (New)
Film fare He watched a Tamil movie Mudhalvar
Mahatma in Chennai in December 2011, his first film in 41 years. Mahatma Gandhi is shown as the chief minister of a state in the movie.

Gandhian's slip Hazare abandoned his belief in nonviolence for a brief moment on being told that Union Minister for Agriculture Sharad Pawar had been slapped in Delhi. He quipped: "Just one slap?"

Citizen Hope
Because his 17-day fast in 2011 aroused the
nation's conscience, voiced its anger against corruption, and brought Parliament to a standstill. Because he forced the Government to revive the 44-year-old Lokpal Bill. Because his movement had an impact on voting behaviour in regional elections. Because the Gandhian has been the driving force behind other civil movements, most prominently the RTI.

Always a natural After he fell ill following the Mumbai
fast, he spent 10 days at the Jindal Nature Care Institute in Bangalore where he underwent naturopathy.

Brief occupation He sold flowers at the Dadar railway
station in Mumbai before joining the army.

Modified viewpoint In April 2011, Hazare praised
Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi saying other chief ministers should emulate him. A month later, during his visit to Gujarat, he changed his view and criticised Modi, alleging rampant corruption.

Second chance In 1965, Hazare contemplated suicide
after failing to find the meaning of life. Then he chanced upon a biography of Swami Vivekananda at the New Delhi railway station and resolved to serve people.

Food for thought Badambai Bhalekar, 55, has been
preparing food for Hazare every day for 32 years. The activist eats once a day. His meal includes one bhakri (Maharashtrian bread loaf) of jowar, vegetables and a bowl of dal.

Did you know? Hazare has become part of the CBSE
school curriculum, with general knowledge textbooks giving him the title of `India's second Gandhi'.

Screen tribute Prakash Jha has announced that he will
make a film Satyagrah based on Hazare's life. Amitabh Bachchan will play him in the movie.

20

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

21

POWER PEOPLE

50
2
RATAN TATA
74, Industrialist (3)
ter is married to Noel Tata, Ratan's half-brother.

Stainless Steel
Because the Tata Group's total revenues
are expected to increase from Rs 3,80,000 crore in 2010-11 to Rs 5,00,000 crore in 2011-12 as it continues to expand its position as India's premier multinational corporation. Because after spending a year looking for a candidate to succeed him, a committee of professionals zeroed in on his first choice, Cyrus Mistry, also a member of the panel. Mistry's sis-

Because he is an adviser on industry to David
Cameron, prime minister of UK, where he is the largest employer in the manufacturing sector. Because despite the Niira Radia tapes, the chairman of the Tata Group remains an icon of industry.

You can find him at his flat in Colaba. After retiring in December 2012, he will move into a 13,350 sq ft sea-facing bungalow in Colaba. Walk the talk Ratan Tata broke a 140-year-old tradition in the UK of no work on a bank holiday when he forced managers of Jaguar Land Rover to attend office on Monday, May 30, 2011, just a week after he had publicly slammed the English for lacking a "work ethic". Loves to drive Ferrari California. POWER POINT
He met Manmohan Singh in Parliament House on February 23 ahead of the Budget session.

AP

24

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

POWER PEOPLE

50

NITA AND MUKESH AMBANI

SIPA VIA AP IMAGES

MUKESH AND NITA AMBANI

4

ANAND MAHINDRA
55, Industrialist (7)

The Big Wheel
Because under his leadership, the Rs 75,000crore Mahindra Group with core competence in automobiles has also become a leader in IT with the merger of Satyam and Tech Mahindra in 2012 and is making a strong foray into defence after signing joint ventures with an Israeli and an American company at the March 2012 Defexpo. Because he created Mahindra Rise, a social entrepreneurship initiative where people vote and the best ideas win. Because Mahindra Racing, the only Indian team to venture into MotoGP, has finished third in the Constructors' Championship in its debut season.

POWER MOMENT
Mukesh Ambani surpassed Lakshmi Mittal as the richest Indian in the world in the Forbes list of March 2012.

Wheel to reel He has joined hands with Hollywood
legend Robert Redford to promote Indian talent by establishing the annual Sundance Institute Mahindra Global Filmmaking Award.

3

MUKESH AND NITA AMBANI
54, Industrialist, 48, Educationist (1)

First Couple
Because Mukesh and
wife Nita form the first couple of Mumbai, running its popular IPL cricket team, supervising its most soughtafter school, and hosting its must-attend parties. Because in a year when foreign investment to India dried up, the chairman of Reliance Industries, worth $50 billion (Rs 2,50,000 crore), sold a 30 per cent stake in 21 blocks to British Petroleum for $7.2 billion (Rs 3,500 crore). Because Mukesh has easy access to the country's power corridors irrespective of party lines, be it Rahul Gandhi, Nitin Gadkari or senior bureaucrats in various ministries. Because the couple has friends across the political spectrum like Praful Patel and Prithviraj Chavan, both of whom attended a party at Antilla for Sachin Tendulkar's 100th ton. Because he acquired a stake in the media space through the Raghav Bahlpromoted Network18 and TV18, which run, among others, CNBC India, CNNIBN, IBN 7 and Colors.

Power roadblock Antilla,
his 27-storey Mumbai home, has been ready since October 2010 but the couple is yet to move in.

POWER STATEMENT
Has nearly five lakh followers on Twitter who regularly respond to his comments on everything from the Army controversy to names for a new car.
AP

After hours He goes on
drives with wife Nita from their Altamount Road home to Worli Sea Face and back.

Pit stop They often stop for
ice-cream at Natural.

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

25

POWER PEOPLE
5

50
KUMAR MANGALAM BIRLA
44, Industrialist (6)

Rock Solid
Because the Aditya Birla Group's revenue jumped
from Rs 1,75,000 crore in 2010-11 to Rs 2,00,000 crore in 2011-12, despite tough global conditions. Because the group has a presence in 36 countries. Because Birla will invest Rs 400 crore in the next two years to set up hypermarkets that sell everything, from pasta to detergents, under one roof. Because in 2011, the group took over US-based carbon black specialist Columbian Chemicals for $875 million (Rs 4,350 crore), making it the world's largest producer of carbon black. Because within a span of two days in April 2011, the group bought Sweden-based speciality pulp and bio-refinery company Domsjo Fabriker for $340 million (Rs 1,700 crore) and the chloro chemicals division of Kanoria Chemicals and Industries for Rs 830 crore.

POWER AMBITION
He is targeting an annual turnover of Rs 3,25,000 crore ($65 billion) by 2015, having started with Rs 10,000 crore ($2 billion) when he took over in 1996.

Food for thought Italian restaurant Trattoria at Taj
President, his wife's favourite.

Tech toys He is an avid Apple user. He has
the iPhone, the iPad and the iPod.

VIVAN MEHRA/www.indiatodayimages.com

6

SAMIR & VINEET JAIN
57 and 45, Media Barons (4)

Twin Towers
questions of those in power.

Because they often set the
nation's news agenda, whether through the launch of the online campaign `Against Corruption Together' which drew support of more than 2.5 million for the Lokpal Bill, or their `Coalgate' expose. Because the group's English news channel, Times Now, asks tough
NARENDRA BHIST/www.indiatodayimages.com

Because their newspaper,
The Times of India, is the largest circulated English daily in the world with an average readership of 7.61 million. Because even in these trying times, the group's turnover exceeds Rs 5,000 crore and it has expanded
AMIT KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

its multimedia bouquet with new print editions, a new TV movie channel and an overseas station for Radio Mirchi. Because they are a publishing giant with 13 newspapers, 18 magazines, 11 publishing centres and 26 printing centres.

SAMIR JAIN

VINEET JAIN

Next generation Samir's daughter Trishala, an artist, showcased her work at a second solo exhibition titled Tangerine Trees and Marmalade Skies at Gallery BMB in Mumbai in March. She also looks after Crest and Speaking Tree at The Times of India. POLES APART
Reclusive Samir divides his time between Haridwar and Goa while Vineet is active on the social front.

Food for thought Vineet
loves sushi and dimsums. Samir likes home-cooked vegetarian food.

POWER PEOPLE
7

50
ANIL AMBANI
51, Industrialist (10)

The Die Hard
Because his influence in Delhi's power circles
saw him lead a harassed telecom industry in negotiations with the Government; neither he nor Ratan Tata was named in the 2G cases. Because when no Indian banks offered him finance in January 2012, he arranged a Rs 6,000crore loan from a consortium of Chinese banks. Because his ventures also received low-interest financing from Japan and Europe. Because three films produced by Reliance DreamWorks, his JV with Steven Spielberg, were nominated for 11 Academy Awards. Because his truce with elder brother Mukesh, confirmed at a family reunion in Chorwad, Gujarat, in December 2011 to mark father Dhirubhai Ambani's 80th birth anniversary, boosted their stock prices.

POWER STATEMENT

Birthday gift He
visited the Mahakal Temple in Ujjain on his 51st birthday in June 2011, with elder son Jai Anmol.

Chief aide Amitabh Jhunjhunwala's son's wedding in January 2012 attracted A-listers from politics, business and movies.
REUTERS

AP

8

SUNIL BHARTI MITTAL
54, Industrialist (8)

Global Networker
Because Bharti Airtel,
which he is chairman of, has been the only major telecom player unscathed by the 2G scam even as the Supreme Court cancelled 122 2G licences, including those of Tata Teleservices and Idea Cellular. Because Bharti has emerged as the third largest telecom network in Africa, behind UK-based Vodafone and Spanish Telefónica, with a subscriber base of 227 million. Because the Prime Minister has appointed him co-chair of the India-Africa Business Council, a platform to enhance ties between the two sides.

POWER POINT
Beginning next year, he will be paid an annual salary of Rs 70 crore, highest for any CEO in India.

Power move He inducted his twin sons Kavin and Shravin into the business. Shravin works in the Africa operations while Kavin works in a joint venture with Japan's SoftBank. Next move Bharti Walmart,
Mittal's joint venture with the world's largest retailer, Walmart, plans to raise Rs 500 crore to fund its expansion plans.

POWER PEOPLE
9

50
UMESH GOSWAMI

ANIL AGARWAL
58, Industrialist (28)

11

GAUTAM ADANI
49, Industrialist (12)

Oil's Well
Because after 15 months of tackling regulatory hurdles,
Vedanta completed its acquisition of Cairn India, touted as the biggest M&A deal in the energy sector, for $8.67 billion (Rs 44,000 crore). Because Vedanta's offer to buy the Government's remaining stake in Hindustan Zinc and Bharat Aluminium for Rs 17,000 crore shows the company intends to continue with its big-ticket acquisitions. Because Vedanta's proposed merger of Sesa Goa and Sterlite Industries into a single entity called Sesa Sterlite with a market cap of Rs 1,00,000 crore will make it one of the top 15 companies in India by market cap.

The Voyager
Because his group is becoming a global
infrastructure major, with a turnover of Rs 30,000 crore and interests in ports, power generation, coal mining and logistics. Because he is the largest corporate player in the country to operate from outside the traditional business centres of Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and Chennai. Because he became the first Indian in 2011 to own a port outside India at Abbot Point in Australia and has become the largest private port player in India. Because by generating 4,600 MW in 2011, he became the biggest private thermal power producer in India, and is poised to become one of the largest coal mine owners in the world.

POWER POINT
Has promised India energy security with the recent discovery of a second oil and gas block in the KrishnaGodavari basin.

in 2011 backfired when its Rs 20-crore `Creating Happiness' campaign, spearheaded by Agarwal's daughter Priya, drew widespread protests from activists and forced Gul Panag as well as Shyam Benegal to back out as judges for the campaign's filmmaking competition.

Big buy Challenger 605, his third aircraft, after a Bombardier Hawker and a Beechcraft. Loves Watching movies in cinema halls, most recently Kahaani and Agent Vinod.
T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

``
12

Politicians who are short on vision and want to only make money don't attract me. I like those who have vision.

VIKRAM SHARMA/www.indiatodayimages.com

''

10

SUBRATA ROY
64, Businessman (24)

SHIV NADAR
66, Industrialist (New)

Treasure Hunter
Because his close friend
Mulayam Singh Yadav's Samajwadi Party is back in power in his business hub Uttar Pradesh. Because when SEBI demanded, he immediately signed a cheque for Rs 11,500 crore to Sahara's investors. Because after snapping up London's iconic Grosvenor House Hotel for Rs 3,250 crore in 2010, he is now close to buying The Plaza hotel in New York. Because he brought BCCI, the world's richest cricket board, to the negotiating table by pulling the plug on his investment in the sport--Sahara India spends Rs 560 crore on Team India's sponsorship and Rs 1,720 crore on the Pune Warriors. Because he came to debt-ridden Vijay Mallya's rescue by buying a majority share for Rs 500 crore in India's only Formula1 team, Force India, and renamed it Sahara Force India.

Social Capitalist
Because the Rs 31,000crore HCL Group has moved beyond low valueadded outsourcing to high valued-added software services like designing the Boeing Dreamliner's airborne systems. Because he is focusing his philanthropic endeavour in education, with the setting up of a VidyaGyaan boarding
POWER MOMENT
Met Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav on April 2 to discuss how information technology can help the state. school for the underprivileged in Bulandshahar, Uttar Pradesh, a multi-disciplinary University in Greater Noida, and pledging to set up 25 Shiv Nadar schools across 10 cities to take quality education outside major metros. Because he is opening the world of Indian art, usually an elite preoccupation, to the common man with the inauguration of the Kiran Nadar Museum of Art in Saket, New Delhi.

Loves to drive Customised
open Honda CRV. Owns a fleet of Rolls-Royce, Bentleys and BMWs.

POWER POINT
The new cricket stadium in Pune, with a capacity of 35,000, is named after him.

Next move He is launching
an audacious direct-tohome consumer product business.

Power move Inducted daughter Roshni into the business as executive director and CEO of HCL Corporation.

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Power roadblock Vedanta's attempt at an image makeover

POWERSPEAK

POWER PEOPLE

50
14
AZIM PREMJI
66, Industrialist (14)

Doyen of Donors
Because he oversaw a turnaround
last year as the number of Wipro's active clients increased from 880 to 953 and high-value clients (contracts of minimum Rs 500 crore) from one to six. Because when he led a group of eminent citizens in writing an open letter to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in October 2011 expressing concern about governance deficit, Manmohan responded immediately by saying that internal dissension must not hijack economic progress. Because he donated Rs 8,846 crore to the Azim Premji Foundation to improve school education in India.

16

G.M. RAO
61, Industrialist (9)

High Flier
Because the expert
airport builder has bagged the contract to modernise Male International Airport for Rs 2,555 crore, established a Rs 300-crore state-of-the-art maintenance and overhaul facility at Hyderabad airport and won the Airports Council International's second best award for service quality in the world for Delhi airport. Because the GMR Group has acquired a 30 per cent strategic stake for Rs 2,475 crore in PT Golden Energy Mines Tbk, forged a relationship with Sinarmas Group in Indonesia for one billion tonne coal reserves and is developing an 800 MW power project at Jurong Island, one of the single largest Indian investments in Singapore. Because the group has emerged as India's largest player in the NHAI projects, winning India's first mega road project for four-to-six laning conversion of the 555 km Kishangarh-UdaipurAhmedabad stretch on the Delhi-Mumbai corridor.

POWER MOVE
Inducted son Rishad Premji as chief strategy officer of Wipro's IT business.
VIVAN MEHRA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Cool buddies Kamal Nath, K.V. Kamath and Ashok Ganguly. Brand loyalty Uses Wipro-manufactured soap Chandrika as shaving cream.
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Food for thought
Enjoys homemade South Indian food. Does business lunches at The Oberoi in Gurgaon and breakfast at MTR, Bangalore.

13

SACHIN TENDULKAR
38, Cricketer (2)
POWER MOMENT
call from mother-in-law Annabel Mehta who runs Apnalaya, an NGO that helps slum children. Being Human's co-production Chillar Party won National Awards in 2011 for best children's film, original screenplay and best child artist award.

Gift for wife A family
vacation in Africa for 15 days, after three years.

Golden Bat
Because the nation
held its collective breath as he struggled for 369 days to score his 100th century. Because he became the first batsman to score 15,000 runs in Test cricket. Because he is the world's only cricketer who has the right to decide when to play and when to rest. Because when India won the World Cup in 2011, each member of the cricket team dedicated it to him.

15

SALMAN KHAN
46, Actor (13)

Little known fact Plans
to step down on turning 65 to work for the GMR Varalakshmi Foundation.

The Hit Man
Because he has delivered two of 2011's biggest hits, Ready that brought in Rs 136 crore and Bodyguard that made Rs 230 crore globally, while battling a nerve disorder. Because his dialogue and dance moves, however cheesy or inane, go on to become national phenomena. Because even at 46, he still has one of the most enviable physiques in Bollywood. Because never mind his muscles, his heart is in the right place, whether it is feeding 1,500 homeless people recently or expanding his line of Being Human merchandise to raise money for charity.
Food for thought His
mother's biryani and kebabs.

Latest acquisition
A new hairstyle from celebrity stylist Aalim Hakim.

Idea of fun Threw a shirtless party for his gang of boys and tweeted the pictures. Power icons His father Salim Khan, Dharmendra and the late Sunil Dutt. Home sweet home He hates
travelling especially to cold countries. It aggravates his nerve condition. Prefers his Galaxy Apartment flat or Karjat farmhouse.

HEALTH MANTRA
Some simple ayurvedic medicines to keep his immunity level high.

Next move A pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar later this year. Latest buy Red Nissan
GT-R Supercar for Rs 2.5 crore.

POWER MOMENT
In 2011, he moved into his five-storey Bandra home with a Rs 100 crore insurance cover.
HAIDER KHAN

Occasional buddy Rahul
Gandhi, introduced to him by common pal, Mumbai MP Milind Deora.

Never says no to a dinner invitation from Nita Ambani or a fund-raiser

VIVAN MEHRA/www.indiatodayimages.com

32

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

33

POWER PEOPLE
17

50
T.NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

DEEPAK PAREKH
67, Banker (5)

19

AMITABH BACHCHAN
69, Actor (17)

Market Savant
Because he and other corporate hotshots
wrote an open letter to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh about the strong nexus between some businessmen, bureaucrats and power-brokers, which Manmohan took note of. Because he is the first port of call for the Government when it seeks expert advice, be it on restructuring Hindustan Aeronautics or modernising Indian Railways. Because the HDFC group's market cap of Rs 2.2 lakh crore is the highest by far for any banking or financial services group in the country.

Ever Grey Hero
Because season 5 of his popular quiz show Kaun Banega Crorepati rocketed Sony Entertainment Television to No. 2 in the general entertainment channel sweepstakes. Because at 69, he maintains one of India's most read blogs and with 24 lakh followers on Twitter, he is one of the most followed Bollywood celebrities on the social networking site. Because in 2011, Gujarat saw a 400 per cent increase in tourist inflow into the Kutch region after it made Bachchan the state's brand ambassador. Because no national celebration is complete unless it has him. Even after an abdominal surgery, the superstar headed to Chennai for the opening ceremony of IPL 5. Because when he asked the media to refrain from speculating about his granddaughter's birth, they fell in line without questioning.

Fashion favourite Wears suits
only by Mumbai tailor Gabbana, with fabric from Italy, buttons from England and threads from France.

POWER FIRST
He signed up for his first Hollywood role in 2011 as Meyer Wolfsheim in the Leonardo DiCapriostarrer The Great Gatsby.
AFP

Brand Loyalty Kebab Corner and Golden
Dragon, both in Mumbai.

Time out Parekh, who sits
on the boards of companies like Siemens, GlaxoSmithkline and Castrol, resigned as director from Hindustan Unilever and Hindustan Oil within two weeks in December 2011.

POWER POINT
His annual Christmas brunch is attended by power buddies such as Mukesh and Nita Ambani, Adi Godrej and Naresh Goyal.

Power friends Mulayam Singh
Yadav, Bal Thackeray and Narendra Modi.

18

BABA RAMDEV
47, Yoga Guru (11)

20

KUSHAL PAL SINGH
80, Industrialist (32)

India's Landlord
Because his birthday celebrations in Udaipur in 2011 created a logjam of private jets at the airport, with guests including Sunil Bharti Mittal, Pawan Munjal, U2's Bono, David and Victoria Beckham, and Shakira. Because the release of his autobiography Whatever the Odds, by long-time friend and GE's former chairman Jack Welch via satellite in 2011, was one of the grandest book launches Delhi ever has seen.

Action Guru
Because he has
played an important role in making black money a national issue in the past one year. Because he has taken yoga to the farthest shores of the world by inspiring a Patanjali Yog Vidyapeeth branch next to the NASA headquarters in Houston, US. Because from Yuvraj Singh to Akhilesh Yadav to septuagenarian Parkash Singh Badal, he has powerful admirers and also titanic enemies like Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi.

Embarrassing moment
When Rakhi Sawant said she would like him as her dream life partner.

Because DLF's monopoly as India's largest real estate behemoth with a land bank of 240 million sq ft of developed area is unchallenged despite a debt burden of Rs 27,000 crore.

Because the DLF chairman and
ambitious aim of realising over Rs 7,000 crore from the sale of non-core businesses by 2013 could be the silver bullet to end his company's debt woes.
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

CEO'S

Fashion statement
High-heeled khadau (wooden sandals).

Morning routine
300 dandbaithaks (sit-ups).

Food for thought Vegetarian by
choice but loves sea food.

Food for thought A glass
of milk and fruits.

His gadgets iPhone and iPad. THE NEXT MOVE
DLF Foundation, the corporate social responsibility arm of DLF, will invest Rs 200 crore to establish 250 centres for skill training.

POWERSPEAK

``

34

REUTERS

Had God been in favour of homosexuality, he would not have created two sexes.

''

Did you know? He has two birth dates, November, 19, 1929, in his horoscope and August 15, 1931, in municipal records. He suspects the earlier one to be true but has retained the 1931 date.

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

POWER PEOPLE
21

50
HIGH POINT

SUBRAMANIAN SWAMY
72, Politician (30)

The Lone Ranger
Because he led the
charge that exposed the 2G spectrum scam. Because he appeared before the 2G spectrum trial court and gave evidence to establish that Home Minister P. Chidambaram was prima facie guilty of allowing the scam. Because with almost 60,000 followers on Twitter, the Janata Party president has carved out a virtual electorate. person he has bowed his head to is Shankaracharya of Kanchi, Chandrasekharendra Saraswathi.

Sold the theatrical rights for his forthcoming film Talaash to Reliance for Rs 90 crore.

Court king Has fought 40 serious cases in the last four decades. If he wins a case, he celebrates by cleaning up his basement office. POWER SPEAK

After office address
Home. Never attends cocktail parties.

``

Power guru The only

I'm not afraid of losing anything. My life was not given to me by crooks but by God. When he decides, it will go. But that doesn't mean I'll go out and say,`Shoot me.'

''
22

CORBIS

AAMIR KHAN
46, Actor (18)

The Pathfinder
Because he is India's most innovative actorproducer, powering tiny films like the Rs 10-crore Dhobi Ghat and Rs 25-crore Delhi Belly to a cumulative box office gross of Rs 112 crore. Because he is going to anchor India's most ambitious and expensive talk show titled Satyameva Jayate, to be aired on Star TV in June 2012. Because when it comes to pushing causes, no one does it better, whether as national brand ambassador of UNICEF for child nutrition or even being a catalyst in spreading awareness on IVF surrogacy in India after the birth of his son, Azad Rao Khan, through the same procedure.

Reference point He is a follower of spiritual
leader J.P. Vaswani.
T.NARAYAN/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Loves to drive His Rolls-Royce Ghost Phantom, Bentley Continental, BMW 6 Series and a Range Rover. Food for thought He is fond of the egg-white masala
omelette and orders it every time he is at Frangipani at Trident. Also likes to eat at India Jones, Mumbai.

POWER PEOPLE
23

50
PAWAN MUNJAL
58, Industrialist (39)

Hero No. 1
Because he
indigenised the twowheeler market by severing ties with Honda and taking motorcycles to rural India. Because he proved naysayers wrong by notching up a record six million-plus unit sales despite an economic slowdown. Because he increased his share in the domestic motorcycle market to 60 per cent from 55 per cent in 2010-11 and retained his number one position, even without Honda's technological backing. Because his was the first
CORBIS

Indian brand to debut at the highly competitive AMA SuperBike racing championship this year.

Operates from his
Greater Kailash I home or Vasant Vihar office in Delhi.

Loves to drive his Jaguar. Has a Range Rover and an Alpha Romeo in his garage. Time out Usually goes on cruises to Alaska and Scandinavia. Often visits golfing destinations. Power icon Tiger Woods.
When Woods won his first major in over two years in March, his BBM status read: "Tiger's Back."

POWER STATEMENT
Launched the new Hero logo in London in 2011, in a Rs 35-crore rebranding exercise with Shah Rukh and Akon in attendance.
AFP

24

SHAH RUKH KHAN
46, Actor (22)

The Shah of Blah
Usually to be found at his Bandstand home Mannat
in Mumbai, Park Lane in central London or Palm Jumeirah in Dubai.

Because he set out to break records with the
Rs 150-crore Ra.One and did just that with every conceivable marketing gimmick, ensuring 25 brand tie-ups and 3,500 visual effect shots, fetching the movie Rs 240 crore worldwide. Because even after the excessive promotion of Ra.One, everything he does is still news, be it assaulting former friends, his absence at power parties or the absence of others at his star soirees. Because he struck box office gold again two months after Ra.One in Don 2 that collected Rs 210 crore worldwide.

Food for thought Royal China in Mumbai, Buddha
Bar in New York, Nobu in London.

Reference point The Hitchhiker's Guide To The
Galaxy by Douglas Adams.

POWER STATEMENT
Has been chosen as Chubb Fellow for 2011-12, one of the highest honours at Yale University, US.

POWER PEOPLE
25

50
RAHUL BHATIA
49, Entrepreneur (43)

Budget Bonanza
Because in a year that the Indian airline industry bled and asked the Government for a tourniquet, IndiGo stood on its feet and made money (Rs 650 crore in 2011). Because after beating back domestic competition, IndiGo is now giving international airlines a run for their money, commencing operations to Singapore, Bangkok, Dubai, Kathmandu and Muscat in 2011. Because he is making a big splash in the mid-price range hotel industry with the launch of seven hotels under the Ibis brand in 2011.

Power friends Rakesh Gangwal, former
CEO and chairman of US Airways Group, a

HIGH POINT
Won the Ernst and Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award in February 2012.

50 per cent partner in IndiGo.

Early start His first business idea was in
1984, to make digital telephone switches.
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

26

N. SRINIVASAN
67, Industrialist (37)

Master of the Game
Because he is the big
boss of BCCI and helped double the earnings of the world's richest cricket board from Rs 1,000 crore to Rs 2,000 crore in 2011. Because he had the power to stymie International Cricket Council, cricket's controlling body, that tried hard to push the Umpire Decision Review System as demanded by other major cricketing nations. Because he convinced the market there's nothing beyond cricket in India and garnered a record Rs 3,851 crore from Star TV for a six-year broadcast deal for domestic matches.

Chill out zone Vacations
are a must at Kodaikanal, where he has a bungalow. Once a week, he loves a game at the TNGF Golf Course or a coffee at Madras Boat Club, Chennai.

In his garage Volkswagen Beetle, BMW, Mercedes Benz, Rolls-Royce, Range Rover and Land Cruiser. Brand loyalty Rolex watch, Mont Blanc pen and Bally shoes. Food for thought Masala
dosa from Woodlands or Saravana Bhavan in Chennai.

POWER POINT
India Cements made a 17-fold increase in profit to Rs 228 crore; the industry average was 5 per cent.
HK RAJASHEKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Inspirational bestseller
The Godfather by Mario Puzo.

40

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

POWER PEOPLE

50
28
SHASHIKANT & RAVI RUIA
68 and 62, Industrialists (16)

Cruise Control
Because despite
being embroiled in the 2G scam, they have kept their kith and kin out of jail. Because in a year when growth took a backseat, the brothers increased their steel production capacity from 4.6 million tonnes per annum (MPTA) to 10 MPTA to become the world's fourth largest flat steel producer. Because the group's port capacity was enhanced from 76 to 88 MPTA in Hazira, making them India's second largest port operator after Gautam Adani. Because the brothers increased crude refining capacity from 14 to 18 MPTA to become
SHASHIKANT (LEFT) AND RAVI RUIA

India's second largest private crude refiner after Reliance Industries.

Operate from Shashi
Ruia from Mumbai's Mahalaxmi headquarters, while Ravi Ruia shuttles between Essar's Emaar Business Park office in Dubai and the Berkeley Square office in London.

REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Food for thought Ravi
frequents eateries such as Berkeley and Zetter in London. For Shashi, it's quality south Indian food.

MALVINDER (LEFT) AND SHIVINDER

27

MALVINDER MOHAN & SHIVINDER MOHAN SINGH 39 and 36, Industrialists (38)

POWER POINT
They acquired four ships, giving Essar Shipping India's largest cargo fleet of 27 vessels.

Health is Wealth
Because in the last one year, the brothers have
bought seven overseas healthcare entities for more than Rs 2,100 crore. Because in 2011 they created Fortis Healthcare, a Rs 5,000-crore behemoth with 78 hospitals in 10 countries including Australia, New Zealand, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. Because they have 200 day care speciality clinics, 200 pathology laboratories, 600 primary health care centres, 23,000 employees, 4,000 doctors and 12,000 beds. Because they have built the tiny brokerage Religare into a Rs 2,700-crore financial company with a footprint across 10 countries. Because more than half of their $1 billion (Rs 5,000 crore) revenue now comes TECH SHIFT from the global market. Malvinder switched to a Reference point Both are BlackBerry after using devoted followers of the an iPhone. Shivinder Radhasoami Satsang now uses an iPhone Beas, vegetarians and after suffering from a teetotallers. `BlackBerry thumb' .

UMESH GOSWAMI/www.indiatodayimages.com

POWER PEOPLE

50
29
SAJJAN JINDAL
52, Industrialist (21)

31
tial voice of Indian industry having only recently completed his term as president of apex industry chamber ASSOCHAM.

MAHENDRA MOHAN 72 & SANJAY GUPTA 49,
Media Barons (31)

Iron Will
Because despite
the setback to his steel business after the Supreme Court ban on iron ore mining in Karnataka, his company Jindal South West remains the third biggest steel producer in India. Because the chairman and MD of JSW Steel consolidated his control over steel company Ispat in which he bought a 49 per cent share in December 2010, after Vinod Mittal, former promoter of Ispat and brother of steel czar Lakshmi Mittal, stepped down as vice-chairman in March 2012. Because he is an influenAP

Heartland Beat
Because their flagship Hindi
daily Dainik Jagran is the No. 1 newspaper in India with 16.4 million readers, according to Indian Readership Survey Q2 2011. Because the Guptas have acquired Indore-based Hindi daily Nai Duniya, making them number 1 across 11 states. Because i-next, their youthoriented daily, now has a readership of 22 lakh.

Power acquisition His three-storeyed bungalow on Napean Sea Road, Mumbai, that he reportedly bought for Rs 400 crore in July 2011. Family Wife Sangita Jindal chairs the JSW Foundation, which manages the group's social development initiatives. Adventure seeker He goes
skiing in France or to the base camp of Mount Everest annually.

MAHENDRA MOHAN (LEFT) WITH SANJAY GUPTA

POWER HIGH
Was appointed to World Steel Association's 15member executive committee in 2011, along with L.N. Mittal.

POWER STATEMENT
Their annual chaat parties have become so big that they have to be housed now in Delhi's Constitution Club.

Operate from Sanjay operates
from Noida. Uncle Mahendra Mohan is based out of Kanpur but frequents Delhi.

Time out Mahendra Mohan likes a game of cards with friends. Sanjay enjoys dancing at parties.
RAVI S SAHANI/www.indiatodayimages.com

30

MANOJ & SAMEER GAUR
47 and 40, Industrialists (New)

MANOJ GAUR

GVK & SANJAY REDDY

32

75 and 47, Industrialists (23)

Builder Barons
POWER MOMENT
Bollywood A-listers and political heavyweights put in an appearance at the wedding of Sanjay's daughter Mallika in Hyderabad.

Fast and Furious
Because the brothers
spent $400 million (Rs 2,000 crore) to host India's first Formula1 Grand Prix and proved that India can organise a glitch-free, glitzy, mega sporting event. Because the Paddock Club parties and LAP lounge bashes became the high point of Delhi's social calendar over the Formula 1 weekend. Because though they were perceived to be close to former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Mayawati, they are building bridges with Akhilesh Yadav, typical of how sensibly they run their projects across 11 states. Because none of their many projects, including the five townships being built along the Yamuna Expressway over 450 million sq ft, is dogged by land acquisition issues like elsewhere in India.

Because they acquired Tech toys BlackBerry and
another 13.5 per cent stake to become the majority owner of Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai. Because their GVK group acquired Hancock Coal Mines and Infrastructure in Australia for Rs 6,300 crore. Because they can produce at least 30 million tonnes of coal a year over the next 30 years. iPad 2 for both.

Food for thought Chinese
for GVK and all cuisines for Sanjay.

Operate from GVK from
Mumbai, Hyderabad and Gurgaon; Mumbai, Brisbane and Hyderabad for Sanjay.

GVK REDDY (RIGHT) WITH SANJAY REDDY
A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

You can find them at home in Greater Noida,
where they shifted in 2011 from Delhi to be closer to their projects.
SAMEER GAUR

ALL IN THE FAMILY
Eighteen members of the extended Gaur family work in the Jaypee business.

Love to drive GVK likes his Rolls-Royce. Sanjay prefers his BMW. Brand loyalty Canali for GVK; Zegna for Sanjay.

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR; VIVAN MEHRA/www.indiatodayimages.com

42

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

POWER PEOPLE
33

50
NARESH TREHAN
65, Doctor (New)

POWER POINT
The legion of Rajini jokes. A sample: When Rajinikanth does push-ups, he isn't lifting himself up. He is pushing the earth down.
AFP

Cut Above
Because he set up the
Rs 1,000-crore Medanta-The Medicity in Gurgaon, India's newest and largest medical facility built across 43 acres with 1,500 beds, 45 operation theatres, over 1,000 doctors, 68 specialities and Rs 300 crore worth of technology. Because he is one of the most prominent heart surgeons in the country with almost all major leaders of politics and business among his patients. Because he has the credibility to reassure the nation. During the Lokpal movement in 2011, when a fasting Anna Hazare lay supine at the Ramlila Maidan in Delhi, Trehan and his team of 36 doctors kept the nation's hope alive.

34

RAJINIKANTH
61, Actor (26)

Sultan of South
Because the success of Endhiran
inspired Apple to launch an iPad application on the superstar.

Because when Bollywood
wants to anoint the next superstar, like Salman Khan, it calls him the Rajinikanth of the North. Because when Rajinikanth fell ill and was hospitalised in Singapore in May 2011, the heartbeat of Tamil Nadu seemed to stop. Because he will star in India's first motion capture technology movie, Kochadaiyaan. Because the age of his heroines decreases as his increases--his Kochadaiyaan co-star Deepika Padukone is 26 to his 61.

Back in the game He recently visited a recording studio after 20 years to sing a track for Kochadaiyaan.

Next move The definitive biography
of the actor to be launched on 12.12.12, coinciding with his 62nd birthday, by Naman Ramachandran.

Big sale The theatrical rights of the
Telugu version of Kochadaiyaan went for a record Rs 30 crore.
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

Gadget guru He religiously
installs latest medical applications on his BlackBerry phone and iPad.

35

SUBHASH CHANDRA
61, Industrialist (36)

Wellspring of Success
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Because his Zee group is buying out Dainik Bhaskar Corp's stake in the Mumbai-based newspaper DNA. Because Zee Entertainment Enterprises has obtained landing rights in the difficult China market, where he already runs a profitable syndication and sales business. Because he has announced an additional $250 million (Rs 1,200 crore) investment in Veria Living, the health-and-wellness channel he launched in the US in 2007. POWER MOVE

Brand loyalty WATERING HOLE
On the Waterfront at the Aman hotel, Delhi. He likes Mediterranean cuisine. Apple products.

Early start
He dropped out of school in Class XII.

In June 2011, Zee launched a Rs 100-crore rebranding exercise and came back with an aqua blue logo.

POWER PEOPLE

50
36
HARISH SALVE
56, Lawyer (40)

Devil's Advocate
Mukesh Ambani versus the Government in KG Basin case.

Because he ensured a landmark victory for Vodafone against CBDT, saving it $3 billion (Rs 15,000 crore) in tax and forcing the Government into unpopular retrospective legislation. Because whichever litigation is making headlines, Salve plays a central role, from the 2G case representing the Tatas and Etisalat to the Talwars in the Aarushi murder case. Because he is currently counsel to

Tech toys Has two Apple phones and
the iPad3. Must own a new Apple product within 48 hours.

The big win His most cherished legal
victory was out of court in 2010 when he settled a six-year-old property dispute with the Maharishi Trust over his house in Golf Links, Delhi.

Power loss Shed 37 kg in
three years.

POWER DRIVE
From home to office in his Bentley and then to the courts in his new Range Rover.
REUBEN SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

37

VENU & MALLIKA SRINIVASAN
59 and 52, Industrialists (New)

Power Alliance
Power statement For her, being
voted into the Forbes list of 50 Power Businesswomen in Asia 2012. For him, a reported Rs 1,800 crore investment in wind energy farms over the next three years.

Because together they are a
manufacturing powerhouse, with Venu Srinivasan heading the $4 billion (Rs 20,000 crore) TVS group, India's second largest twowheeler maker, and Mallika heading the $1.3 billion (Rs 6,500 crore) tractor major TAFE, India's second largest tractor manufacturer. Because the TVS group's new entity, TVS Europe Distribution Limited, has acquired Universal Components UK, the second acquisition there in three years, taking the group's turnover in UK to more than Rs 1,000 crore. Because TAFE is all set to break into the sub-20 hp segment post a strategic alliance with POWER GUIDES Captain Tractors, Rajkot. For Mallika, Aditya Birla and Power moment her father. For When their Venu, it's Japanese daughter management guru Lakshmi married Yoshikazu Tsuda.
46
INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

Rohan Murthy, son of the Infosys founder N.R. Narayana Murthy, at her maternal grandfather A. Sivasailam's home in Chennai--where Venu and Mallika got married in 1982.

Did you know? Mallika can drive a tractor apart from being able to sell one.
GETTY IMAGES

Common mantra They are staunch
devotees of Puttaparthi Sai Baba.
H K RAJASHEKHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

VENU SRINIVASAN

MALLIKA SRINIVASAN

POWER PEOPLE
38

50
UDAY KOTAK
52, Industrialist (45)

39

RAM JETHMALANI
88, MP and Lawyer (44)
YOGEN SHAH

Star Investor
Because he was the most vocal industry advocate
of an increase in import duty on gold to discourage `unproductive' saving, a suggestion accepted by the finance minister in his March 16 Budget speech. Because in 2011, at the end of a tough year for Indian banking, Kotak Mahindra Bank reported a net interest margin of 4.7 per cent, highest in the Indian banking industry and well above the 3.3 per cent industry average. Because he owns a newspaper, Business Standard, which is closely read by India's economic policy elite and is reported to be Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's favourite daily.

Storm Trooper
Because he is the
attorney of any VIP, from Kanimozhi in the 2G spectrum case to B.S. Yeddyurappa in the illegal mining scam, from Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy in the illegal money laundering case to Baba Ramdev on the use of force on his followers by Delhi Police at Delhi's Ramlila Maidan on June 4. Because at 88, although a highly paid and sought-after lawyer, he does successful pro bono work for activists such as Binayak Sen and was instrumental in getting him bail. Because of his crusade against black money stashed abroad.

Tech toys BlackBerry
and iPad 2. His sons are pushing him to use an iPhone.

POWER CAMPAIGN
The `It's grt 2b 25' and `Money Ka Matlab' ad campaigns to celebrate 25 years of the Kotak Group.
RACHIT GOSWAMI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

Stalled move He put up a
signboard outside his house seven years ago saying he had stopped taking fresh cases. But his clients said he was too young to retire.

POWERSPEAK
He said in Rajya Sabha that the double taxation avoidance treaty between India and Switzerland was "bullshit" .

MANDAR DEODHAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

40
TV

EKTA KAPOOR
36, TV and Film Producer (New)

Perfect Picture
Balaji shows, and Mushtaq Sheikh, writer of the film Om Shanti Om.

Because through her
serials and films, she's put women at the centre of entertainment, from the independent 30-year-old girl romancing a middleaged man on TV's Bade Acche Lagte Hai to the item girl in 2011's blockbuster The Dirty Picture. Because she is a game-

changer, whether it is transforming the battered beti discourse on general entertainment channels or bringing sexy back to mainstream movies through her hit movies LSD, Ragini MMS and The Dirty Picture. Because she has over a 100 shows across 20 channels in six languages.

Obsessed about Her
weight. The first thing she does when she lands anywhere is ask for a weighing machine.

Star tribute A chapter is
devoted to her in Meenal Baghel's Death in Mumbai where she's called "TV's most famous backroom girl".

POWERSPEAK

Loves to drive Jaguar XJR.

``

Life is about smaller pleasures and larger ambitions.

''

Cool buddies Tanu Dasgupta, creative head of

POWER PEOPLE
41

50
GETTY IMAGES

A.R. RAHMAN
46, Composer (19)

Music Maestro
Orchestra Babelsberg. Because he has formed India's first cross-cultural band, SuperHeavy, with musical greats like Mick Jagger of the Rolling Stones, Eurythmics founder Dave Stewart as well as singers Joss Stone and Damien Marley.

Because he has become
India's first music star invited to the Oscars even when he's not nominated. Because he is India's best known music ambassador, collaborating with Dido, Florence and the Machine and German Film

POWER RIDE
Loves to ride his Triumph Bonneville and the Ducati Monster 900 motorbikes.
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

43

RAJIV BAJAJ
45, Industrialist (New)

Brand loyalty His suits are
stitched by Syed Bawkher, who runs a 90-year-old tailoring house in Chennai.

In the Driver's Seat
Because he spearheaded a turnaround
at Bajaj Auto, making it the most profitable two-wheeler manufacturer in India with operating margins of almost 20 per cent. Because he has a bike for every market category: Pulsar, a sports motorcycle, Discover, for the sporty commuter, and Boxer, a utility bike. Because he forged an entry into Africa and plans to enter Brazil.

Operates from Chennai but
has studios in Mumbai, London and Los Angeles.

TECH TOYS
He loves Apple products and currently uses a MacBook Pro and an iPhone 4S.

Reference point He was so inspired by the
book Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind written by strategists Al Reese and Jack Trout that in 2010 he convinced Trout to be a consultant to Bajaj Auto and spend quality time with the teams every quarter.
SPICYWALLPAPERS.NET

42

VIDYA BALAN
34, Actor (New)
POWER POINT
Winning the best actress National Award this year for her role in The Dirty Picture.

Dirty Queen
Because when she's in a movie, the men
are wallflowers for a change.

Because her last three movies No One Killed
Jessica, The Dirty Picture and Kahaani, with a cumulative budget of Rs 38 crore, have grossed Rs 228 crore worldwide at the box office. Because as the world clamours for her attention, she's gone on a three-month break to avoid becoming a "mad woman".

Price of power Had health complications after
gaining 12 kg for The Dirty Picture.

Food for thought Paranthas at home and
cracked wheat ragu at Basilico in Mumbai.

Powerspeak "Being powerful means
being who you are."
50
INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

POWER PEOPLE

50

HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

TECH TOYS
A basic Nokia phone for voice calls, a BlackBerry for instant mailing and an iPad for everything else.

45

PARMESHWAR GODREJ
66, Social Arbiter (42)

Maximum Hostess
Because she hosts the
best and brightest stars who visit Mumbai, from talk show hostess Oprah Winfrey to English actress-model Elizabeth Hurley to Pakistani cricketer-turnedpolitician Imran Khan. Because at 66, she can still pull off a body-hugging Herve Leger.

Food for thought Sarson da
saag, street food, caviar with champagne.

Next move Raising awareness about the lung disorder Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis, which she suffers from. POWER READ
Say You Are One of Them by Nigerian writer Uwem Akpan, Steve Jobs' biography by Walter Isaacson.
YOGEN SHAH

46

ARNAB GOSWAMI
39, Journalist (New)

Middle Class Voice

Because he articulates what the angry middle class Indian feels RAGHAV BAHL
52, Media Baron (25)
about corruption, misgovernance and terror, five nights a week in Newshour, one of most watched shows on English news channels. Because even though he is the only TV news editor to be based in Mumbai, away from the nerve centre of news, he has his finger on the pulse of the people. Because he has kept Times Now one among the top news channels in a competitive news environment consistently for over four years now. Because he is loved as much as he is loathed, but never ignored.

44

Colour of Money
Because one of the biggest media
deals in recent times with Mukesh Ambani's RIL will help him settle the company's debts and expand in the important southern market. Because Network18, with channels like CNN-IBN and Colors, is one of India's biggest media companies with a market capitalisation under Rs 2,000 crore. Because the group's Viacom18 Motion Pictures has got the superhit formula worked out. After the success of Tanu Weds Manu in early 2011, Shaitan and more recently Kahaani have been runaway successes.

He avoids Twitter. "I get enough
feedback, negative and positive, on my show,'' he says.

Did you know? He is usually mistaken for a Bengali though he is from Guwahati, Assam. POWER POINT
Doesn't attend parties. Visits Delhi once a fortnight to catch up on news.
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Loves to drive Toyota Camry.

POWER PEOPLE
47

50
ARVIND KEJRIWAL
43, Social Activist (New)

The Conscience Keeper
Because he is the man Anna Hazare listens to when
the nation stops to listen to Hazare.

Because the social activist decides the length of
Hazare's campaign, the venues of his fasts, when he breaks them and what he says when doing so. Because even as the Government reels from the Jan Lokpal onslaught, he is planning his next big campaign, Swaraj, which envisages giving direct control of funds, functions and functionaries to people's assemblies.

POWER SPEAK
The dialogue echoing the movie, Paan Singh Tomar, is his favourite,"545 mein se 163 dakait aur beimaan, phir bhi mera Bharat mahaan?"
AFP PHOTO

Simple living Travels by Delhi Metro. Uses his wife's Maruti Alto only if there is an emergency. Off the record Kejriwal's NGO Parivartan has never
been officially registered.

48

ARUNA ROY
65, Social Activist (New)

49

KALANIDHI MARAN
46, Media Baron (20)
AFP

Inhouse Critic
Because she speaks her mind despite being a
member of the powerful National Advisory Council. Because she slammed the Government's decision to peg NREGA wages lower than minimum wages. Because of her initiative, the Government approved the Whistleblowers' Bill.

Sun Survivor
Because despite allegations that his
brother, former telecom minister Dayanidhi Maran, may have favoured Aircel for a quid pro quo in family enterprise Sun Network, and despite DMK's loss of power in Tamil Nadu, he remains a major presence in the media space. Because at a DID YOU KNOW? time when airWife Kaveri, JMD lines are struggling of Sun Network, is for money, he infuthe highest paid sed Rs 100 crore woman executive into SpiceJet, in in India with an which he now owns annual package a 48 per cent stake, of Rs 65 crore. in March 2012.
K. ASIF

POWER FRIEND
Sonia Gandhi, who seeks her advice routinely whether on the judicial accountability legislation or the Citizen's Charter.
GETTY IMAGES

50

VIJAY MALLYA
56, Industrialist (27)

King of Past Times
Because he used all his
powers of persuasion and political networking to nudge a consortium of 13 banks led by SBI and ICICI to take the most unusual step of converting a sinking Kingfisher Airlines' debt into equity. Because he is hanging on to his airline investment by the

skin of his teeth, having sold 42.5 per cent stake in his under-performing Formula 1 team to Sahara Group.

by Aditi Pai, Amarnath K. Menon, Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Damayanti Datta, Dhiraj Nayyar, Goutam Das, Kaushik Deka, Kiran Tare, Lakshmi Kumaraswami, Nishat Bari, Prachi Bhuchar, Prachi Rege, Priya Sahgal, Sandeep Unnithan, Shravya Jain, Shantanu Guha Ray, Shafi Rahman and Uday Mahurkar

Best buy Chris Gayle for his IPL
team, Royal Challengers Bangalore. He took them to the semi-finals in 2011.

HIGH POINT
Mallya's United Breweries saw a 34 per cent rise in the stock price in just two trading sessions in March.

POWER PEOPLE

50 A Guide to the High and Mighty
Anna Hazare makes a big entry right at the top, but Kalanidhi Maran slips the most in the rankings of 2012

Anna Hazare
Social activist, led the massive Jan Lokpal movement
RANK 2012

Anil Ambani
Chairman, Reliance Anil Dhirubhai Ambani Group
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

Sachin Tendulkar
Cricketer
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

Kushal Pal Singh 13
2

RANK

Chairman and CEO, DLF Limited
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 10 in 2008 LOWEST 35 in 2010

20
32

Malvinder Mohan Singh & Shivinder Mohan Singh
Chairman, Fortis and Religare and MD, Fortis Healthcare
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 25 in 2009 LOWEST 38 in 2011

1
RANK

7
RANK

10

LOSS -11
HIGHEST 2 in 2011 LOWEST 35 in 2006

NEW
RANK HIGHEST 1 in 2012

GAIN +3 
HIGHEST 1 in 2003 & 2004 LOWEST 10 in 2011

GAIN +12 

27
38

Chairman, Tata Group
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

Chairman, Wipro Limited

2
3

Sunil Bharti Mittal
RANK

+1  HIGHEST 1 from 2005 to 2010 LOWEST 3 in 2003 & 2011
GAIN

Chairman and Group CEO, Bharti Enterprises
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

14
14
 

President, Janata Party
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 21 in 2012 LOWEST 37 in 2003

21
30

SAME
HIGHEST 6 in 2005 LOWEST 15 in 2010

Shashi Ruia & Ravi Ruia
Chairman and Vicechairman, Essar Group
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

GAIN +9 
RANK

RANK

8
8
 

RANK

Ratan Tata

Azim Premji

GAIN +11 

Subramanian Swamy

28
16


SAME

Film Star

Anil Agarwal
Chairman, Vedanta Resources Corporation
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 9 in 2012 LOWEST 28 in 2011 RANK RANK

LOSS -2
HIGHEST 13 in 2011 LOWEST 15 in 2012

LOSS -4
HIGHEST 4 in 2010 LOWEST 38 in 2008 RANK

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

3
1


RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 4 in 2012 LOWEST 25 in 2005

4
7

Subrata Roy
Chairman, Sahara India Pariwar
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

RANK

Vice-chairman and Managing Director, Mahindra Group

LOSS -7
HIGHEST 9 in 2011 LOWEST 17 in 2008

GAIN +3 
RANK

10
24

Deepak Parekh
Chairman, Housing Development Finance Corporation
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

GAIN +14 
HIGHEST 5 in 2004, 2005 LOWEST 31 in 2007 RANK

17
5
RANK

RANK

Chairman, Aditya Birla Group
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

LOSS -12

5
6


Gautam Adani
Chairman, Adani Group
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 11 in 2012 LOWEST 18 in 2010

HIGHEST 5 in 2011 LOWEST 24 in 2010

GAIN +1
RANK

HIGHEST 5 in 2006, 2007,

11
12

Baba Ramdev
Yoga Guru
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

RANK

Samir Jain & Vineet Jain
Vice-chairman and Managing Director, Bennett, Coleman & Co.
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

HIGHEST 11 in 2011 LOWEST 46 in 2008

RANK

HIGHEST 25 in 2012 LOWEST 43 in 2011

RANK

ShivNadar
Chairman, Hindustan Computers Limited
RANK 2012

Amitabh Bachchan
Film Star
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

N.Srinivasan
President, BCCI and Vice-chairman and MD, India Cements
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 26 in 2012 LOWEST 37 in 2011

GVKrishna Reddy& GV SanjayReddy
Chairman, GVK Group, Vice-chairman, GVK Group
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

6
4
RANK

12
RANK

19
17


26
37
RANK

RANK

LOSS -7

LOSS -2
HIGHEST 4 in 2011 LOWEST 21 in 2003 RANK

NEW
HIGHEST 12 in 2012 LOWEST 35 in 2005

& 2012

56

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

RANK

HIGHEST 3 in 2003 LOWEST 19 in 2009, 2010

GAIN +11 

LOSS -9 

HIGHEST 21 in 2009 & 2010 LOWEST 32 in 2012



LOSS -2



GAIN +1 

GAIN +18

SAME
HIGHEST 24 in 2007 LOWEST 45 in 2008

 

2008 & 2012 LOWEST 19 in 2003 & 2004



Kumar Mangalam Birla

18
11



Anand Mahindra

RANK

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

16
9

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

23
39

GAIN +16 
HIGHEST 23 in 2010 & 2012 LOWEST 39 in 2011

Manoj Gaur & Sameer Gaur
CEO, Jaypee Group, MD, Jaypee Group

Shah Rukh Khan
Film Star
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 5 in 2009 LOWEST 31 in 2003

RANK

HIGHEST 1 in 2003 & 2004 LOWEST 3 in 2012

RANK

28

GAIN +19 

Chairman, GMR Group

MD

and CEO, Hero MotoCorp Limited

LOSS -8
HIGHEST 21 in 2011 LOWEST 29 in 2012

RANK 2012

30

24
22

NEW
RANK HIGHEST 30 in 2012

LOSS -2 

Mahendra Mohan Gupta & SanjayGupta
Chairman and MD, Jagran Prakashan, CEO & Whole Time Director, Jagran Prakashan
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

Rahul Bhatia
Group MD, InterGlobe Enterprises
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

25
43

31
31


32
23



LOSS -2

9

G.M.Rao

Pawan Munjal





CMD, Reliance Industries and Chairperson of the Dhirubhai Ambani International School

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

15
13

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

22
18

Sajjan Jindal
Chairman, Managing Director, JSW Steel
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

RANK

Mukesh and Nita Ambani

HIGHEST 1 in 2012 LOWEST 2 in 2011 & 2003

RANK

Salman Khan
Film Star

Aamir Khan

LOSS -12

HIGHEST 7 in 2009 & 2010 LOWEST 28 in 2012

29
21



POWER PEOPLE

50
Naresh Trehan
Chairman and MD, Medanta-The Medicity
RANK 2012

Venu Srinivasan & Mallika Srinivasan
Chairman, TVS Group, Chairman, Tractors and Farm Equipment (TAFE)
RANK 2012

Ekta Kapoor
Film and TV Producer
RANK 2012

RaghavBahl
Founding shareholder and MD, Network18
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

Aruna Roy
Social activist, Member, National Advisory Council
RANK 2012

33

44
25


40
RANK

LOSS -19

48

NEW
HIGHEST 24 in 2003 LOWEST 33 in 2012 RANK

37

NEW
RANK HIGHEST 40 in 2012

HIGHEST 15 in 2007 & 2009 LOWEST 44 in 2012 RANK

NEW
HIGHEST 34 in 2005 LOWEST 48 in 2010 &

NEW

Rajinikanth
Film Star
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

HIGHEST 32 in 2005 LOWEST 37 in 2012

RANK

A.R.Rahman
Music Composer
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

Parmeshwar Godrej
Social Arbiter

2012

34
26
RANK

41
19
RANK

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

45
42


LOSS -8
RANK

UdayKotak
Vice-chairman and Managing Director, Kotak Mahindra Bank
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 38 in 2012 LOWEST 45 in 2011

LOSS -22
HIGHEST 11 in 2009 LOWEST 47 in 2008

LOSS -3
HIGHEST 38 in 2003 LOWEST 45 in 2012

Kalanidhi Maran
Chairman and Managing Director, Sun Group
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

HIGHEST 23 in 2007 LOWEST 34 in 2003 & 2011

Subhash Chandra
Chairman, Essel Group
RANK 2012 RANK 2011

45

RANK

36

RANK 2012

42

GAIN +1 
HIGHEST 8 in 2004 & 2005 LOWEST 36 in 2011 RANK

NEW
RANK HIGHEST 42 in 2012

NEW
RANK HIGHEST 46 in 2012

VijayMallya Ram Jethmalani
Lawyer

Harish Salve
Lawyer
RANK 2012 RANK 2011 HIGHEST 18 in 2009 LOWEST 49 in 2006

RajivBajaj 39
44

MD & CEO of Bajaj Auto

Arvind Kejriwal
Social Activist
RANK 2012

Chairman, United Breweries Group and Kingfisher Airlines

36
40
RANK

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

47

RANK

35

LOSS -29

GAIN +7 

RANK 2012

46

HIGHEST 16 in 2010 LOWEST 49 in 2012

GAIN +4 
RANK

GAIN +5

NEW
HIGHEST 44 in 2007 LOWEST 47 in 2012 RANK RANK

LOSS -23
HIGHEST 8 in 2008 LOWEST 50 in 2012

HIGHEST 39 in 2010 & 2012 LOWEST 44 in 2011

NEW
RANK HIGHEST 43 in 2012

THE DISPLACED
People who didn't make it to the Power List
BUSINESSMEN 15* Mahendra Singh Dhoni
Captain,Indian Cricket Team

T O TA L R E C A L L
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
16 6 4 3 3 5 3 7 3 16 10 6 3 1 6 ­ 4 4 19 6 7 2 1 2 ­ 11 2 20 10 6 2 1 3 ­ 6 2 24 9 7 3 1 1 ­ 3 2 25 7 8 2 1 ­ 1 5 1 21 7 4 3 1 3 2 9 ­ 23 5 5 2 1 2 2 9 1 ­ 24 4 7 3 1 1 2 8 28 4 7 1 1 1 1 4 3 MEDIA BARONS FILMMAKERS SPORTSTARS SOCIAL ARBITERS POLITICIANS GODMEN INTELLECTUALS SOCIAL ACTIVISTS

41* Chanda D.Kocchar
CEO

of ICICI Bank

29* J.P.Gaur
Chairman, Jaypee Group

46* Jaggi Vasudev
Spiritual Guru

33* Prashant Bhushan
Lawyer

47* K.Srinath Reddy
Doctor

34* RajeevChandrasekhar
Rajya Sabha MP and Entrepreneur

48* Saina Nehwal
Badminton Star

49* Jean Dreze 35* Venugopal Dhoot
Chairman and MD, Videocon Industries Limited
*Last year's ranking

Economist

50* Katrina Kaif
Film Star

WOMEN DROPPED AVERAGE AGE

SIGNIFICANT FIGURES 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 5 5 7 8 7 4 2 3 3 6 ­ 21 20 19 16 16 9 10 12 11 58 53 55 54 51 56 54 54 57 55

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY



RANK 2012

43

RANK 2012 RANK 2011

50
27



38

Vidya Balan
Film Star





Arnab Goswami
Editor-in-chief, Times Now

49
20

57

