The Big Story

LALITMODI

DEFIANT IN EXILE
Even as the law in England catches up with former Indian Premier League commissioner Lalit Modi, Indian cases against him languish in limbo
By Dhiraj Nayyar

THE

CASE FILE
happen." He minces no words, however, about how after his suspension from the League, his successors have presided over a decline in IPL's popularity with general audiences by failing to constantly innovate. "After all, if your favourite meal is served in exactly the same style every night, you'll soon tire of its splendour," he wrote on his blog. Modi continues to be as outspoken in exile in England as he was while in India. Only his medium has changed. He has substituted direct interaction with journalists from the mainstream media with the World Wide Web. INDIA TODAY's exclusive interview with Modi (see box) was done partly on the phone and partly over email. Modi does not wish to be misquoted. He is active on Twitter and is followed by 4.4 lakh people. He writes a blog regularly. He is on Facebook. His new website Lalitmodi.com, which replaced the older Lalitmodi.org, is a single window into the world of the former IPL

n the evening of April 3, from his exile in London, former Indian Premier League (IPL) commissioner Lalit Modi watched live on YouTube the opening ceremony of the fifth edition of an event he masterminded in 2008. He had suffered a wretched month of March with two serious legal setbacks in London. The ceremony lifted his spirits: He finally had the chance to gloat, and he did. He mocked the tamasha on Twitter. "The truth is I am in complete shock--that a show like this can be staged. What was the BCCI thinking when it decided on this format?" tweeted Modi. He was disappointed that the show was held at the YMCA ground in Chennai and not in a stadium that would have befitted a sporting event. He dismissed it as a non-event. "Off to meet friends as ceremony is a non-starter for me," he tweeted midway. Modi is careful not to disown IPL. Writing on his blog on April 2, he said, "I for one, shall be glued to the screen... I'll be as proud as I've been at the outset of the four previous editions, of the part I played in making it

O

Several agencies want to question Modi on a series of violations and irregularities
BCCI
Irregularities in auctions for franchises and no declaration of conflict of interest. Irregularities in sale of IPL broadcast rights to World Sports Group.
MODI LEAVES A LONDON COURT AFTER A HEARING IN A LIBEL CASE

AFP

ENFORCEMENT DIRECTORATE
commissioner. Says a friend who did not wished to be identified, "Why do you want me to tell you anything about Lalit? Just see his website, it has everything you want to know." There is an entire section in his website devoted to his legal troubles with authorities in India. He has uploaded scanned copies of all the summons and notices sent to him by BCCI, Enforcement Directorate (ED), Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI), Income Tax and Passport Office, mostly between May and December 2010, along with his replies to each. His official reason for not returning to India is a perceived threat to his life from the Mumbai underworld, in particular from Dawood Ibrahim and associates. That is his standard response to each investigating agency. That is why he does not make public his exact location in London. His critics, who include current BCCI President N. Srinivasan, believe he is on the run from Indian law. In the most serious of the charges, ED is investigating Modi for violations of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA). According to Modi's website, ED first issued summons to him on August 2, 2010, shortly before he was officially sacked from all his positions in IPL and BCCI in September. The summons demanded that Modi personally appear before ED with his passport, bank account details in India and abroad, all agreements executed by BCCI concerning the League, all tenders relating to IPL, and details of the auctions of franchises in 2008 and 2010 as well as the sale of media and broadcast rights of IPL. His reply to the summons stated that he was unable to appear personally before ED because he had been advised to stay out of India because of a threat to his life. Unimpressed, ED sent another set of summons to him on August 24, 2010, which asked for copies of all agreements signed by him with Cricket South Africa and on behalf of IPL South Africa. IPL's second edition in 2009 was moved to South
Investigation into transfer of foreign exchange overseas during IPL 2, held in South Africa.

DIRECTORATE OF REVENUE INTELLIGENCE
Investigation into the import of an aircraft by Ms Golden Wings Private Limited, a firm associated with Modi.

INCOME TAX DEPARTMENT
Investigation into purchase of high-value items without declaration of PAN number.

PASSPORT OFFICE
Revocation of Modi's passport following his refusal to attend ED hearings in person in India.

HE IS ACTIVE ON TWITTER AND IS FOLLOWED BY 4.4 LAKH PEOPLE. HE IS ON FACEBOOK. HIS NEW WEBSITE IS A SINGLE WINDOW INTO HIS WORLD.

76

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

NEW

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

77

NEW

The Big Story LALITMODI
Africa after Home Minister P. Chidambaram refused to provide the event sufficient security forces because it clashed with the General Elections. Modi again expressed his inability to appear in person but offered to answer all questions by videolink or to depose before ED officials in London. He also provided a letter from Additional Commissioner of Mumbai Police Deven Bharti dated September 16, 2009, saying that the police had provided him security because of a perceived threat to his life. Modi faces a series of cases from the IT Department and DRI. Those cases remain unresolved because he has refused to appear in person and the agencies have refused to question him by videolink or in London. One-and-a-half years on, ED and other agencies are still investigating the cases. No charges have been filed. In the meanwhile, the Passport Office revoked Modi's passport on March 3, 2011, on ED'S advice. He cannot travel outside the UK using that passport. Modi's appeal against the order is being heard in the Delhi High Court. After a hearing on January 18, 2012, the court has scheduled another hearing for April 25. It has asked the Ministry of External Affairs, the Regional Passport Office, Mumbai, and the chief passport officer to file their replies to Modi's appeal by then. Modi urgently needs a passport to apply for an extension of his UK visa. ED has also issued a light blue corner notice against Modi which makes it mandatory for the directorate to be informed of his arrival in India. Modi has been more forthcoming about the charges BCCI has levelled against him. In an interview to former BBC sports editor Mihir Bose in London in October 2010, he rebutted BCCI's charge that he had not declared conflict of interest when his friends and relatives bought stakes in IPL teams. "When I conceived IPL, at that point in time, you know, everybody thought it was a hare-brained scheme, none of the existing traditional financiers for the sport or the game actually wanted to be part of the scheme... The only way we could take

IPL impresario Lalit Kumar Modi now lives in virtual anonymity in London. The man who gave the world cricentertainment recently lost a celebrated case against former Kiwi star Chris Cairns. In an extensive and rare interview with SANDEEP BAMZAI, Modi, scion of the K.K. Modi business empire, says that he is a "patriotic Indian who misses his country". But a string of cases and look-out notices prevent him from returning to India. Excerpts from a conversation where Modi covers the ground from his battle royale with BCCI President N. Srinivasan to how vested interests got him out. Q. When the BCCI had its back to the wall with the threat from Subhash Chandra's ICL, they roped you in to create a counter product which was bigger, better and had their official backing; then they dropped you like a hot potato.

``

I'LL BE WATCHING IPL ON TV
What changed within the Board? Was it the entry of N. Srinivasan and the departure of Sharad Pawar? A. There seems to be a wide misconception that the IPL was the direct result of the ICL's launch. This is completely untrue. I had begun my own work on a League way back in 1996 and actually announced and launched a 50/50 format. Initially, we had the approval of the BCCI but they then had a change of heart, so for over 11 years I worked behind the scenes to fine-tune the idea. So when I and my colleagues

I simply did what was right for the IPL. But a few people who were feeling left out ganged up together.
moved onto the Board late in 2005, we already had a decent plan. But our first task was to get the BCCI finances and marketing in order and then I followed with the league concept. Zee and other broadcasters had heard about the idea and they wanted us to work with them but we decided that we would work alone on the set-up and then invite them to contest the media rights tender when we were ready. As vice-president of BCCI and head of the marketing cell, I presented it to the BCCI members and suggested we should launch. There were a few who believed in it and there were many who didn't. But as I had by that time already helped raise over $1 billion (Rs 500 crore) for the organisation, they decided to approve it. And that led to the creation of the IPL. It had nothing to do with the presence of the ICL. As for what changed, well, the plan I put together and the way we executed it became the talk of the world and I guess some people wanted to embrace it as their own.

``

''

Q. You nursed the IPL as a product, even took on the Government and relocated the tournament in South Africa. Why is it that the franchise owners did not support you when push came to shove? A. I simply did what was right for the IPL. The success of the tournament in South Africa was the result of relentless work from a world-class team of people. We had to keep the IPL afloat after the first year and all the owners supported me. But they only have so much say and like most sporting federations, a few people who were feeling left out ganged up together and they found a natural ally within the Government. But we kept the IPL alive under near impossible circumstances. Q. Do you miss the million dollar baby? You cannot be unaffected by all the accompanying acrimony. Your thoughts on the whole ball of wax as it unfolded? A. The IPL was, and is, a tremendous tournament and there is an immense sense of pride at what I was a part of. So of course I miss the event, but the accompanying issues are something anyone in my position could have done without--and I'm no different. Q. What happened in those last few days and hours with Srinivasan? Why did things get so out of hand that he had to sack you as IPL commissioner over email? A. That's pretty much a question you would need to ask others. Since my departure, the BCCI, largely through the

SUBIR HALDER/ www.indiatodayimages.com

``

I am a patriotic Indian and I miss my country very much. I look forward to the day I can return.

78

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

''

activities of Mr Srinivasan, has thrown countless, false and unsubstantiated allegations in my direction, without any level of accountability. All of them have been strenuously refuted by me with support from substantiated and irrefutable evidence to qualify my position. But although it all came to an abrupt and totally unjustified end, I would rather focus on what I achieved by bringing the tournament to life in the first place. Q. Losing the Rajasthan Cricket Association elections was probably the catalyst that compounded your problems. Did you open too many fronts in the cricket world, from Sanjay Dixit to N. Srinivasan? A. I suppose that was an issue, yes. The IPL was successful and I was in the public eye, which some people didn't seem to like. We had created a successful product and they wanted a piece of the front-line action. There were definitely certain people using their status within the Indian game to make life difficult when, instead, they should have been enjoying the moment. Q. What is N. Srinivasan's supposed animus against you? Where did the problem with him start? A. Again, you would need to ask him that, but he certainly wanted things done his own way. I pushed back on some important issues because Mr Srinivasan was, and still is, the owner of the Chennai Super Kings and I considered that certain demands such as trying to handpick the umpires list in 2010 was a conflict of interest and not in the interests of the League as a whole. Q. Do you miss India, do you miss the fact that you cannot return? A. I am a patriotic Indian and I miss my country very much. I look forward to the day I can return and hopefully that moment won't be too far away. Q. What happened in the Chris Cairns case which you lost recently? A. We have lodged an appeal

``

The Big Story LALITMODI
against the judgment in this case, so it is not appropriate for me to comment. Q. What do you make of IPL now? Season 4 was a whitewash, this year too sponsors, advertisers are fleeing, spectator and viewer fatigue seems to have set in. What has gone wrong? A. I can only comment on how we approached the format and one of the strongest elements of the whole IPL concept was to make it innovative and therefore appealing to the fans, broadcasters and sponsors on an ongoing basis. But you can only be innovative if you innovate! So we set out to constantly monitor our product, and analyse how we could improve and move things along. We weren't trying to re-invent the wheel with every move, but we did try to keep things

AFP

FORMER NEW ZEALAND CRICKETER CHRIS CAIRNS (LEFT) WITH WIFE MELANIE

ON MARCH 20, 2012, MODI WAS DECLARED BANKRUPT BYA LONDON COURT FOR FAILING TO PAY £65,000 (RS 53 LAKH) TO A SECURITYAGENCY.
this forward was to bring friends and family," he said. He added that the bidding process was transparent and that all BCCI officials and IPL Governing Council members were present when it took place. He also defended himself against the charge that he undersold broadcasting rights to the World Sports Group, which immediately sold the rights for a $80million (Rs 400 crore) premium to Sony. "You'd be surprised sitting here today, there was one bidder, and that one bidder was World Sports Group. Sony actually bid and withdrew their bid prior to the bids even opening. ESPN bid, but they'd put zero number on the table so that their bid was disqualified," said Modi. He then went on to elaborate how he had actually made billions for BCCI. Modi may have temporarily escaped the law in India but in England it caught up with him. On March 20, 2012, he was declared bankrupt by a London court for failing to pay £65,000 (Rs 53 lakh) to Page Group, an agency that had provided him and his family protection in London in 2010. While he is declared bankrupt, Modi cannot be appointed as a director of any registered company and cannot borrow money from financial institutions without first declaring his bankrupt status. On March 26, another London court held Modi guilty for libel. Modi had, in 2008, tweeted that New Zealand all-rounder Chris Cairns had been left out of the IPL auction list because he was involved in match-fixing in the rebel Indian Cricket League. The court held that Modi's allegations had no basis and he was asked to pay £90,000 (Rs 73 lakh) to Cairns in damages and £400,000 (Rs 3.25 crore) to cover the costs of Cairns' legal team. The court refused to stay the damages citing Modi as a man of means. Modi tweeted that he is appealing both the verdicts. He refused to comment on them in his interview with INDIA TODAY. It has been almost two years since Modi left India for London in May 2010. In his interview to INDIA TODAY, Modi said that he is a "patriotic Indian who misses his country". He misses IPL too. "There will be some sadness that I'm not there personally to see it all unfold," he wrote on his blog on April 2. The reality is that he will have to remain sad a little longer.
with Shantanu Guha Ray, Bhavna Vij-Aurora and Aditi Khanna in London

``

Vested interest sometimes took precedence over the good of the product and I was simply not ready to accept that.

fresh. We made sure we worked with all of our franchisees and partners and I'm sure the recent issues with Kochi and Sahara teams haven't helped the preparation process. Q. If there was one learning that emerged from your IPL/BCCI experience, what would that be? A. It would be that we live in a society where performance and success doesn't always work for you. And neither does it guarantee you the chance to continue performing or succeeding. Vested interest sometimes took precedence over the good of the product and I was simply not ready to accept that. Q. Are you in touch with the franchise owners who you were once the toast of? Or do they give you a wide berth? A. I am in touch with all of them. They were, and have always been, good friends and I shall be glued to the TV to see how their teams fare.

''

80

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

