POWER PEOPLE

50
1
VINOD RAI
63, Comptroller and Auditor General of India (3)

The Official

Number Cruncher
Because every time
he exposes financial irregularities in state spending, whether on CWG, 2G auctions, Air India mismanagement or `Coalgate', his credibility increases and that of the Government ebbs. Because in four years, he has made the once moribund Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) a force to reckon with. Because he is not afraid of taking on anyone, not even the Prime Minister, who accused him of exceeding his brief, and to whom he wrote a rejoinder. Because from the AntrixDevas deal to the farmer suicides relief package, he is working on many more explosive reports. manicured garden and grows organic vegetables at his 2, Kushak Road home in the heart of Lutyens' Delhi.

TOP10
S

Aiming high Rai is a mountaineering enthusiast and leads the young probationers of Indian Audit and Accounts Service on climbing trips; his last being the mountains of Chamba in September 2011.

ometimes you can be in office but not in power. Yes, that is you, Mr Prime Minister. Sometimes, though, you can lend power to the office. Consider Vinod Rai, who has turned the Comptroller and Auditor General's office into an active accountability task force. Or Amar Pratap Singh, who has tried to make the Central Bureau of Investigation an independent investigator into criminal wrongdoing, ranging from the suspicious death of an activist in Madhya Pradesh to the allocation of coal blocks. At a time when the political class has seen it fit to do nothing, these officials have kept the nation afloat, conducting peaceful elections, revising monetary policy, even questioning legislation. A chief secretary who will determine the future of Uttar Pradesh, a former sub-inspector who will decide the prison terms of corporate captains and former ministers, and a soft-spoken bureaucrat who wields power with a firm hand. These are officials who run the nation.

Different strokes He has an excellent first serve, and plays tennis at least five days a week in the parking lot-turned-tennis court at the old CAG office.

POWER MOMENT
In December 2011, he was elected chairman of the panel of external auditors of the United Nations.
HEMANT CHAWLA/www.indiatodayimages.com

Green thumb He maintains a

YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

POWER POINT
He got the stateof-the-art, 11storey CBI building completed at a cost of Rs 186 crore in May 2011.

2

AMAR PRATAP SINGH
59, CBI Director (2)

Chief Invigilator

3

PULOK CHATTERJEE
60, Principal Secretary in PMO (New)

On the Hotline
to 60s music at the Gymkhana Club or driving cross-country with a few close friends and wife Jaya. The hills of Uttarakhand or the southern and eastern coast of India are his favourite destinations.

Because he has managed to
keep an independent profile while handling some of the most highprofile cases, including 2G, CWG, Adarsh housing scam, and the recent Tatra trucks case. Because he came up with the first authoritative estimate of illegal money stashed abroad, giving a figure of $500 billion (Rs 25,00,000 crore).

Harshad Mehta stock market scam, in which he acquired the acumen to tackle financial frauds.

Because he has revitalised the PMO
as the centre of Government, as evident in the manner in which he took charge of the coal and power crises. Because as a close confidant of Sonia Gandhi, he is the bridge between the Government and the lady who has the final word. Because he has displaced the Kerala coterie, which had dominated Indian bureaucracy during UPA 1 and the first two years of UPA 2, and brought the Uttar Pradesh cadre back to the forefront.

Alma mater A postgraduate in
history, Singh is one of the four top bureaucrats from St Stephen's College currently running the country, the others being Principal Secretary Pulok Chatterjee, Cabinet Secretary Ajit Kumar Seth and IB Director Nehchal Sandhu.

Family affair His brother-in-law is
Shekhar Dutt, the governor of Chhattisgarh and a former Union defence secretary.

Shoot at sight He is a fine photographer and likes to click birds with his prized Nikon DSLR.

Tee-time The 1974-batch IPS
officer is passionate about golf and looks forward to weekends to hit the course.

Big move He got home ministry approval on March 16 to post police liaison officers from the CBI to US, UK and UAE--countries the agency deals with most in criminal matters--to enable the agency to get real-time information. This will also expedite CBI's judicial requests.

You can find him at home in the
plush new government-built colony for senior civil servants in New Moti Bagh, Delhi.

POWER POINT
Sonia Gandhi and Manmohan Singh came to his daughter Shahana's wedding in Delhi in November 2011.

Playtime Loves spending time with
his two-month-old granddaughter.

Bull by the horns He handled the

After office hours He is either jiving

YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

POWER PEOPLE

50
SIPRA DAS/www.indiatodayimages.com YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

5

TKA NAIR
71, Adviser to Prime Minister (4)

7
POWER MOVE
Nair may get a gubernatorial appointment later this year.

S.Y. QURAISHI
64, Chief Election Commissioner (New)

Party Pooper

Prime Adviser
Because he is strategic adviser to the Prime Minister on economic and infrastructure affairs. Because though he stepped down as principal secretary to the Prime Minister, he now enjoys the status of minister of state, on a par with National Security Adviser Shivshankar Menon. Because the retired 1961batch Punjab cadre IAS officer will become the only bureaucrat to stay with Manmohan from UPA 1 through UPA 2 when his tenure ends in May 2014.

Because he conducted
five important Assembly elections without a glitch, reducing the influence of black money in elections.

POWER POINT
Inspired by son Mustafa, he "surrendered" to the Twitter bug in February and now has almost 10,000 followers.

Because his decision to cancel Jharkhand Rajya Sabha polls sets a precedent against sale of seats. Because he pushed for greater voter participation. Because he put in place a procedure for audit of political parties.

Tuned in Plays the guitar
and tries to emulate Hank Marvin of The Shadows.
INDIAN EXPRESS

PARVEEN NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

8

AJIT KUMAR SETH
60, Cabinet Secretary (New)

POWERSPEAK
His booming voice, which resonates in the courtroom. The joke is that lawyers and judges run for cover as soon as he is heard.

The Peacemaker
Because he enhanced coordination among various
departments of the Government which had previously been at loggerheads. Because he helped the Prime Minister SPOTLIGHT MOMENT prepare a "working arrangement for disbursal of business"whenever When he accompanied he is away. four Cabinet ministers to Because he played a major role in the the airport to negotiate effort to enhance performance of buwith Baba Ramdev to call reaucrats and ministries by preparing an off his stir in June 2011. annual appraisal plan for all ministries.
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

War on error Once pulled
up a bureaucrat for a small mistake in his leave application.

4

S.H. KAPADIA
64, Chief Justice of India (1)

6

DUVVURRI SUBBARAO
62, RBI Governor (New)

The Crusader
Because he has restored lustre to
the Supreme Court, making it an effective influence on national life, whether in telecom licensing or in tracking disproportionate assets. Because he has kept his promise of clearing the Supreme Court backlog, with 2011 seeing the highest number of cases disposed of in a single year.

Mr Scissorhands
Because as the central bank
governor, he will determine how soon and how quickly industry and consumers will get relief from high interest rates. Because despite the cloud of the 2G scam hanging over him, he got a two-year extension in tenure as RBI governor in September 2011. Because he has preserved RBI'S autonomy on setting of interest rates. Because he is the regulator of all banks operating in India and will decide who will get new banking licenses in the coming year.

9

JAWED USMANI
56, Chief Secretary of Uttar Pradesh (New)

10

O.P. SAINI
57, Special CBI Judge (New)

POWER MOMENT
When the office of chief secretary, which had been abolished by Mayawati, was revived for him.

Power Bridge
Because he has been given responsibility for good governance in India's largest state, with implications that could shape the political landscape of next year. Because he has moved fast to ensure that promises made by Samajwadi Party are fulfiled-- he's already met with HCL to discuss free tablets for Class X and laptops for Class XII students.
Area of specialisation Development projects. His recent stint at World Bank is an added asset.

Hammer & Tongs

Power mantra Lawyers often compare
him to Hercules, given the task of cleaning the Augean stables that the country's legal system has become.

Because in his hands lies the fate of the powerful politicians, former bureaucrats and corporate titans accused in the 2G spectrum scam. Because from Ram Jethmalani to Mukul Rohatgi, every lawyer has to adhere to his inflexible limits of time and clarity.
POWER RULING

Work comes first Cancelled his summer
vacation in 2011 and stayed put in Delhi to clean up the functioning of the registry, ridding it of touts.

POWER COUPLE
His wife Urmila Subbarao is the chief vigilance officer of Air India.

You can find him at home in RBI
governor's house on Altamount Road, Mumbai, a few yards away from Mukesh Ambani's Antilla.

Swift justice He disposes off 30-40 cases in the first hour of the court's sitting, having read the briefs in advance.
NISHIKANT GAMRE/www.indiatodayimages.com

When he denied bail to 2G-accused Kanimozhi, saying she had the power to intimidate witnesses.
SAURABH SINGH/ www.indiatodayimages.com

by Bhavna Vij-Aurora, Priya Sahgal, Dhiraj Nayyar, Sandeep Unnithan, Shafi Rahman
APRIL 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

66

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 16, 2012

67

