Na tion

GUJARAT

ENCOUNTER PRISONER TURNS POET
IPS officer Vanzara, arrested for staged killings, is now a born-again preacher-poet
bad. The state government's lawyer later admitted before the Supreme Court that the "gun battle" in which Sohrabuddin had died had been staged. Ishrat was killed, allegedly in an encounter, by a police team led by Vanzara in June 2004 in Ahmedabad. Judicial inquiries by the Ahmedabad Metropolitan Court and a special investigative team set up by the Gujarat High Court concluded that the encounter was fake, and the victims were killed in police custody. The police claimed that Ishrat was a Lashkar-e-Toiba operative. Vanzara was known for controlling crime in the state. After the 2002 Akshardham temple attack, in which 32 people were killed, the first terror strike in the state occurred only in 2008, a year after he was arrested. From 2003 to 2007, Vanzara was directly connected to national security in the Ahmedabad police commissionerate and later as head of the state's anti-terrorist squad, and DIG of the Kutch border range. Vanzara's discourses bring comfort to other prisoners. "I draw solace from his spiritual teachings. His spiritual discourses have freed me from despair," says Mubarak Ali Dadu, who has been in jail for five of his 10year prison term for rape. Lodged in the jail's Sardar cell, Vanzara follows a strict schedule. His day begins at 6 a.m. with yoga and a walk. After lunch, he goes to the jail's community hall to give his daily speech, along with jail Superintendent R.J. Parghi, who also speaks on the Gita--a part of the prisoners' reform programme. After a few hours of reading in his 12x10 ft room, he takes a 30-minute walk and reads some more. He carries a pen and diary in his pocket at all times so that he can write whenever he feels the urge. As he puts it, "I was not born a poet. This jail term has made me one." by Uday Mahurkar

VANZARA (LEFT); HIS BOOK

VANZARA HAS BEEN IN JAIL SINCE 2007. ACCUSED OF FIVE ENCOUNTER KILLINGS, HE FACES MURDER AND CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY CHARGES.
SHAILESH RAWAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

A

fter five years of incarceration in Ahmedabad's Sabarmati jail, Gujarat IPS officer Dahyaji Vanzara, an encounter specialist, has become a poet and spiritual preacher. He now gives discourses on the Bhagavad Gita. Vanzara was DIG when he was arrested for fake encounters in June 2007. His second collection of poems was released in March by former Gujarat director-general of police S.H. Khandvawala. Titled Sinhgarjana (Roar of the Lion) and Rantankar (Battle Cry), it has poems on chivalry, patriotism and spiritualism. His first collection was released in 2010. The one name associated with key encounter killings in Gujarat since 2003, Vanzara has been in jail without bail since he was arrested. He is accused in as many as five encounter

killings, including the Sohrabuddin Sheikh and Ishrat Jahan cases, and faces murder and criminal conspiracy charges. Three of these cases are being heard by the Supreme Court. Vanzara and 13 other police officers accused in the Sohrabuddin case have been denied bail for five years now even though the trial is yet to begin. The two other senior officers accused in the case are IPS officers R.K. Pandian of the Gujarat cadre and Dinesh M.N. of the Rajasthan cadre. Another officer, M.L. Parmar, has been in jail for almost five years without trial, though the maximum punishment for the charges levelled against him is seven years. Sohrabuddin, a criminal with alleged terror links, was killed on November 26, 2005, near Ahmeda-

56

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

