Special Report

BUDGET
MUKHERJEE (LEFT); MANMOHAN SINGH

BACK TO DINOSAURS
A tax amendment with retrospective effect. Out-of-control subsidies. No policy reform.
By Dhiraj Nayyar

The Union Budget is a throwback to the 1980s, out of sync with 21st century India.
nment expenditure, particularly subsidies. The UPA Government has been living well beyond its means, just like the Congress governments had done in the 1980s. The country went nearly bankrupt in 1991. The situation in 2012 is dire if not at crisis point. According to the March 16 Budget, the fiscal deficit, a measure of the excess of the Government's expenditure over its revenues, was 5.9 per cent of GDP in 2011-12, against the Budget 2011 target of 4.8 per cent. A high fiscal deficit means that by cornering more of the resources available in the economy, the Government is effectively growing at the expense of the more efficient private sector. That is bad for economic growth. A little over third of that deficit (about 2 per cent of GDP) is accounted for by subsidies for food, fertiliser and fuel. The finance ministry believes it has done enough in the Budget to signal credible reform on expenditure and subsidies. Says an official, "We have committed to bring the fiscal deficit down to 5.1 per cent in 2012-13. The finance minister has made a bold move by announcing a cap on subsidies at a maximum of 2 per cent of GDP." Subsidies are currently around 2.2 per cent of GDP. Not everyone is convinced that the Government's forecast on expenditure and subsidies is credible. Said the Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, Arun Jaitley, at the India Today Conclave on March 16, "I am not sure that the 2 per cent cap is a

T
28

he fate of the Union Budget for 2012-13 was sealed on the afternoon of March 6, once it became clear that the Samajwadi Party (SP) would not need the support of the Congress to form a government in Uttar Pradesh. From then on, the reality of politics took precedence over the necessity of economics at the Ministry of Finance in North Block. Says a finance ministry official,"Pranab Mukherjee knew on that day that the Congress would not

have the numbers in Parliament to pass a bold, reformist Budget." He adds, "The minister is a cautious, conservative person. He has decided to wait until he can evolve a consensus." Consensus may be impossible in a deeply fractured polity. More realistically, mandarins in the finance ministry are hopeful that the UPA Government will be able to elicit the firm support of Mulayam Singh Yadav's SP in the next two months. "There wasn't enough time between March 6 and March 16 to strike any deals on major reforms with SP," says an official. Potentially, SP's

MPs could compensate in for Mamata Banerjee's 19 MPs who will not support any reformist legislation under any circumstances. So far, SP has sent mixed signals to UPA. It bailed the Government out on the controversial National Counter Terrorism Centre (NCTC). However, Mulayam ruled out joining the UPA Government "so close to elections". "Close" seems to indicate a timeframe much closer than the two years UPA is actually left with. The one reform the Congress could have done without hindrance was the rationalisation of GoverUPA

23

The UPA Government has been living well beyond its means, just like the Congress governments had done in the 1980s.

NAVEEN JORA/www.indiatodayimages.com

T NARAYAN/www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

29

Special Report BUDGET
AFP

GUEST COLUMN

I

AJIT RANADE

CAPITAL LOSS
Vodafone DEAL Vodafone buys majority stake in Hutchison Essar for $11.1 billion in 2007. STATUS On January 20, the Supreme Court exempts the deal from tax. On March 20, it dismisses review petition. Once Finance Bill is passed in April, tax will have to be paid. TAX DUES $2 bn

Vodafone is just one of eight major corporations which may have to pay a hefty capital gains tax with retrospective effect once the Finance Bill is passed
Vedanta DEAL Japanese firm Mitsui sells stake in Sesa Goa to Vedanta for $981 million in 2007, routed through UK-based Finsider International. STATUS Mitsui, Vedanta move court against I-T Department notice. The matter is pending in the Bombay High Court. TAX DUES Up to $200 mn* Ingram Micro DEAL Ingram acquires Bermuda-based Tech Pacific Group for $127 million in 2010. STATUS The I-T Department asks for capital gains tax on Tech Pacific India. The Bombay High Court directs the company to settle the case with the I-T Department. TAX DUES $25 mn Kraft DEAL US-based Kraft buys all the assets of Cadbury for $19 billion in 2010, including its Indian arm Cadbury India. STATUS A PIL is filed against Kraft for non-payment of tax. Following this, I-T Department serves notice to Cadbury India. TAX DUES Nil**

TARGET PRACTICE
Don't give subsidies to the rich. Just distribute cash among the poor.
ubsidies can be explicit or implicit. The latter does not show up as a cash flow in a Budget statement, but is foregone revenue from the exchequer anyway. Since 2007, the Union Budget reports this `implicit' giveaway, which is the sum total of all tax concessions availed. That number last year was a whopping Rs 5.2 trillion, larger than the fiscal deficit, larger than interest on national debt, larger than defence outlay, and certainly much larger than all explicit subsidies put together. This number alone could fund three years for the proposed Food Security Bill. It is, however, unfair and misleading to compare this big number with the explicit cash outflow on subsidies. That's because the revenue foregone on account of these `implicit' tax-concession subsidies results in vastly enhanced investment and economic activity, which in turn contributes much more to the tax kitty. Explicit subsidy, on the other hand, is meant to address poverty. The current debate is on how to reduce this. That's because there is strong evidence of large amount of leakage. Farmers get subsidised power and water (often free), cheap credit and fertiliser. But much of this actually benefits large (and nonpoor) farmers. The poor get a very small share. The same is true for subsidy on diesel, kerosene and LPG. It is cornered mostly by the non-poor. There is also a strong urban bias in the petro-products subsidies. To remove an anti-poor or anti-rural bias, any subsidy reform cannot escape a discussion of targeting efficacy. For most activists, targeting is anathema. Others have also opposed targeting on the grounds that costs exceed benefits. If almost 400 million people are either below or near the poverty line, why bother identifying them for subsidies? The finance minister has promised to keep subsidy below 2 per cent of GDP next year, which roughly is Rs 2 trillion. The fact is that if Rs 2 trillion is simply distributed to 400 million people as cash, that would lift most of them out of poverty. Even this cash distribution would need an identifying mechanism. Hence, reduction of subsidies needs targeting. Targeting needs to be coupled with direct cash transfers or use of vouchers. Aadhaar, smart Kisan credit cards, no-frills bank accounts, NREGA job cards are all making targeting easier, and less costly. Most states have computerised land records. Hence fertiliser subsidy can now be given per acre, rather than per bag. Even free electricity is being capped with the use of prepaid meter cards. Any quantity consumed above the entitlement should be sold at prevailing market price. Food subsidy can be capped by ensuring that minimum support price escalation automatically includes an increase in the ration shop price. Food subsidy is qualitatively different from all other subsidies (invariably linked to oil and energy prices). The former can be kept universal, whereas the latter need not be. Ajit Ranade heads the Corporate Economics Cell, Aditya Birla Group

Tata & Aditya Birla Group DEAL AT&T sells stake in Idea Cellular to Tata Industries and Aditya Birla Nuvo through its Mauritius arm for $150 million in 2005. STATUS The Bombay High Court said the companies are liable to pay tax. The matter is now in Supreme Court. TAX DUES Up to $30 mn*

S

General Electric (GE) DEAL GE sells its majority stake in Genpact to two US-based private equity firms for $500 million in 2004. STATUS The Bombay High Court disposes in GE's favour on I-T notice. The ruling is likely to stay unchallenged since the deal is more than six years old. TAX DUES Up to $100 mn*

SABMiller DEAL SABMiller's Indian subsidiary buys Indian assets of Australia-based Foster's for $120 million in 2006. STATUS Though the deal happened overseas, the I-T department issues notice. The companies' appeal in the Bombay High Court is pending. TAX DUES $40 mn

Sanofi Aventis DEAL Sanofi Aventis buys Shantha Biotech in 2009 for $770 million, through Merieux Alliance that held 90 per cent stake in Shantha. STATUS The I-T Department asks Sanofi Aventis to pay a withholding tax, which the company has not appealed against. TAX DUES $145 mn

ON MARCH 20, THE SUPREME COURT DISMISSED THE REVIEW PETITION IN VODAFONE CASE

Source: Taxsutra.com *Estimates **Substantial value of assets is not located in India

realistic move. Last year, the Government announced subsidies of Rs 1.43 lakh crore. What has actually been spent is Rs 2.16 lakh crore. That's a good Rs 70,000 crore more than they budgeted." Jaitley has a point. If the Government exceeded its targeted subsidy level by 50 per cent just last year, the 2 per cent cap for the coming year begins to sound like a fig leaf, a mathematical juggle rather than real reform. The Government's deficit arithmetic is based on a number of assumptions which may not all work out. On the revenue side, it expects to earn Rs 40,000 crore from the auction of the cancelled 2G licences. That may not happen given the fragile financial state of many telecom companies. The Government has calculated that disinvestment in PSUs will yield Rs 30,000 crore in 2012-13. If ONGC's recent flop auction--LIC had to mop

up Rs 11,000 crore worth of shares out of a total Rs 13,000 crore worth of shares up for divestment--is a sign of things to come, that number may be ambitious. On the expenditure side, the Government's deficit calculations will only work if oil subsidies do not exceed the budgeted Rs 40,000 crore. The Government's past record is not encouraging. In 2011-12, it had budgeted Rs 20,000 crore for oil subsidies and actually spent over Rs 60,000 crore. Says an official, "If global oil prices go above $115 (Rs 5,750) per barrel, the arithmetic will be compromised." Off the record, finance ministry officials admit that the oil subsidies number will be accurate only if the Government deregulates diesel prices. For that, it will need the support of SP. Given the extensive use of diesel by farmers, a core constituency of SP, a full deregulation re-

mains unlikely. The subsidy cap and the fiscal deficit target could easily unravel. On foreign investment, an area for potentially major reform, the Government did little other than pay lip service. The finance minister squeezed in one paragraph on Foreign Direct

The Government's deficit arithmetic is based on a number of assumptions which may not all work out. The mandarins of the finance ministry are seeking solace in the fact that FDI was mentioned in the minister's speech.

Investment (FDI) in multi-brand retail but substantively there was no movement forward from the stalemate of 2011. FDI in aviation was given a one sentence mention as being under discussion, when the Budget could have easily announced it as policy. FDI in aviation is not an emotive political issue like FDI in multi-brand retail. The mandarins of the finance ministry are seeking solace in the fact that FDI was mentioned in the minister's speech. "We could have dropped it altogether from the speech if we were not keen on pushing it," says an official. In any case, the finance minister's meek attempts to speak in favour of FDI in his speech were completely nullified by an extremely retrograde section in the Finance Bill, which sought to amend the country's tax laws retrospectively by explicitly permitting the Government to tax cross-border transactions between

30

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

APRIL 2, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

31

Special Report BUDGET
AFP

two firms registered outside India, as long as the underlying asset which changed hands was in India. On March 20, just four days after the Budget, the Supreme Court reaffirmed its view of January 20, which had exempted the Vodafone-Hutch deal from paying tax in India, by dismissing the Government's petition seeking a review of the earlier order. The court, however, may be forced to change its view once the Finance Bill is passed into law. The amendment, once passed, will allow the Government to claim Rs 11,000 crore in capital gains taxes from British telecom company Vodafone, even though both Vodafone and Hutch were registered outside India at the time of the transaction. The amended tax law will also earn the Government around $540 million (Rs 2,700 crore) from other such cross-border deals (see box).

he Government's move has rightly met with harsh criticism. Says Dinesh Kanabar, deputy CEO and chairman of KPMG's Tax Practice, "All the deals which are liable to be taxed are in court already. Government says it will get around Rs 30,000 crore from all the deals. How does the finance minister arrive at that number?" He adds, "There is a high chance it will be challenged in the court of law. But in the past, there haven't been too many occasions when the courts have struck down such amendments." Says Ketan Dalal, joint tax leader of PricewaterhouseCoopers, "Any retrospective amendments create serious uncertainty and can badly damage credibility of a government, especially in the eyes of the investors. This will certainly impact foreign direct investment." Dalal believes the amendment will be challenged but is unsure of the outcome. He adds, "The confidence of our foreign clients is badly shaken. They are beginning to wonder what else the Government can suddenly change." Officially, the finance ministry is defending its move. "We are all Indian. If a foreign company sells

T

A TELUGU DESAM PARTYACTIVIST PROTESTS AGAINST FUEL PRICE HIKE, IN HYDERABAD

RAW DEAL
Government targets poor and middle class in pre-1991 style to shore up revenue
I Income tax concessions

worth Rs 4,500 crore only to be followed by indirect tax increases worth Rs 45,000 crore, dealing a body blow to middle class and poor.
I Import duties on bicycles in-

creased from 10 per cent to 30 per cent as prices go up for low income buyers.
I Import duties on gold

doubled, price goes up for all consumers.
I Excise duty to be imposed

on non-branded jewellery, hits smaller artisans.

Indian business to another foreign company and then says I do not have to pay tax, I don't think it is an acceptable thing. We also want certainty in tax matters," said Finance Secretary R.S. Gujral, in a postBudget interaction at the Confederation of Indian Industry. Off the record, officials admit that the insertion of the amendment by stealth was clumsy and that, at least, the wording of the amendment could have been better. "It should not have referred explicitly to recent judicial pronouncements," says a bureaucrat. That made it seem like a direct affront to the Supreme Court. Says a senior bureaucrat, "On balance, the Budget would have been well received but for this retrospective amendment of the tax law." UPA's problem is that it continues to struggle to deliver a coherent, credible, forward-looking message to investors and consumers. Backwardlooking, populist policies will ensure that the economy continues to grow at a rate well below its real potential.
with Shravya Jain

32

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

