Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

TRANS FAT TALE
33% of India's youth take calorie-dense food three times a week. FAST FOOD

FRIED FOOD
Studies in the journal Nutrition show that 5.3 per cent of Indian youth gorge on samosas and pakoras at least six times a week,gaining about 215 g of trans fat a week.

About 4.25 per cent of young Indians in the metros dig into pizzas and burgers daily and end up consuming 80 g of trans fat a week.

SLEEP TIGHT
FIZZY DRINKS
4.8 per cent guzzle aerated drinks (colas) at least four times a week. This pushes up the calorie count in their daily diet by about 280.

SWEET TOOTH
6.3 per cent tuck into burfis,gulab jamuns and rasgullas five times a week,without realising that they are collecting 75 g of trans fat a week.

O

CUTTING EDGE
It's not just safe, but recommended, to sip water between sets of a long workout. Crunches increase abdominal strength but do not really help increase definition. For that, overall weight loss remains the key. Dense and constantly used muscles like those in your forearms and calves can be safely exercised daily without rest days. I ND I A NS S U F F E R F R OM M E N T A L D I S O R D E R S , BU T O V E R HA L F D O N ' T S E E K H E L P .

SEVEN CRORE

besity may just be linked to sleep deprivation, report researchers from Mayo hospital's clinical research unit this month. The researchers studied 17 healthy young men and women for eight nights, with half of the participants sleeping normally and half sleeping only two-thirds their normal time. Participants also ate as much as they wanted. It was found that the sleep-deprived group consumed an average 549 additional calories each day, although the amount of energy used for activity didn't significantly change between the two groups. This suggested that those who slept less didn't burn additional calories.

WHATHAPPENS AFTER SEX

According to a recent study by evolutionary psychologists, people who tend to fall asleep first after sex show greater desire for bonding and affection.The study, published in the Journal of Social, Evolutionary, and Cultural Psychology on 456 participants reported that partners who nodded off immediately after sex had stronger desire for post-coital cuddling.The study also looked at who were more likely, men or women, to fall asleep first. Despite the common stereotype, researchers did not find it more common for men to fall asleep first after sex. Perhaps men stay awake longer as an artifact of mate guarding, making sure the woman doesn't leave them for another partner, going by evolution. Men may also stay awake longer in an attempt to entice their partner into having sex. Mating strategies definitely don't end with intercourse.
I

Compiled by Damayanti Datta

72

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 2, 2012

