Nation

GOA
stays at his private home in Mapusa, 20 km away from his official quarters located in Panaji. "I do not need official accommodation since I already have a private one," says the IIT Bombay alumnus. Parrikar moves around without police security. "I have not done anything wrong to anybody. I do not need security," he says. He himself turns on the lights and fans in his chamber and unties the knots of cloth in which files are kept. On being asked why, he says, "My assistants do their work, I do mine. Is there a rule which states the Chief Minister should not do these things?" survived over 250 snake bites and has had to be put on the ventilator at least five times. In 2011, his index finger was cut off after a cobra bite while his right wrist lost its movement from another bite. "No matter who calls for help, I reach as fast as I can. It's my life's calling," he says, adding that he will never kill a snake. "I love them." Except for Forest minister offers a job to travel expenses, he does not charge money for catching them. "I think Kerala's most sought-after I have been sent by God to do this," snake-catcher Vava Suresh. he says, sitting in his tiny, thatched hut near Thiruvananthapuram But he turns it down. where he lives with his family and pets, including 20-25 VAVA SURESH snakes. The master snakecatcher says he will not accept the minister's offer because he would be unable to help society the way he wants to if he is employed. "All the snakes I catch are documented and handed over to the forest department," he says. But his job doesn't get over with that. Officials, who would be terrified at the sight of these creatures, take Suresh's help again to let them into the wild. Every two months, he lets around 500 snakes into the wild. Suresh started when he was just 15 and that too out of curiosity. "I used to throw stones at them or try to kill them in the beginning. But soon I realised I was in love with the `beautiful people'," he says. He claims he C SHANKAR has developed immunity to eldom do governments make a snake venom due to repeated bites. plea on the floor of the But R. Dileep Kumar, a post doctoral Legislative Assembly to a poor researcher on snakes at Kerala and unemployed high school dropout University's Biology and Bioinformto join them. On March 12, Kerala atics who has closely monitored Forest Minister K.B. Ganesh Kumar Suresh's passion, says it is impossible invited Vava Suresh, 38, to join his to acquire complete immunity. department. The reason for the offer: "Maybe he has developed immunity to Suresh is the state's most sought- some of the proteins in snake venom. But, it is impossible to be immune to after snake-catcher. Suresh gets 300 calls everyday all. What protects Suresh is his selffrom across the state to entrap the confidence. This confidence triggers slithery creatures. He has caught metabolic activities in his body to re30,000 snakes, including 300 king sist the damage," says Kumar. cobras, in the past 25 years. He has by M. G. Radhakrishnan

From reducing oil prices to banning illegal mining, Parrikar has hit the ground running
By Kiran Tare

KERALA

Spurned by Snake Man

oa's month-old workaholic Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar's series of policy decisions has put the state on the path of growth. On April 2, he reduced the Value Added Tax (VAT) on petrol from 20 per cent to 0.1 per cent, making it cheaper by Rs 11. Director of the Mining Department Arvind Lolayekar was suspended and the licenses of at least 144 mining traders were suspended on April 9 for irregularities. The entry fee in off-shore casinos has been cut from Rs 2,000 to Rs 500. On the other hand liquor, cigarettes and dining out will be more expensive. Goa's 2012-13 budget is Rs 9,549 crore. It will lose Rs 145 crore per year because of reduction in VAT on petrol and Rs 200 crore due to the cap on mining but the Chief Minister is unmoved. "I do not do anything without much thinking and planning. I have already made provisions to recover the lost revenue," he told INDIA TODAY. Parrikar is also hopeful of cutting down the state's dependency on mining for revenue generation by half in the next five years. The Aam Aurat Aadmi Against Gambling (AAAAG), a group of activists opposing casino culture in the state, has criticised Parrikar's decision to reduce entry fee in casinos. "People hoped that the Chief Minister would shut down the casinos to honour the commitment he had made when he was in the Opposition. Instead, Parrikar has honoured the wishes of the casinos," says Sabina Martins, convener of the group. The Chief Minister refutes the allegations. "The entry fee in casinos is always evaded. Casino owners voluntarily pay their customers' fees. With an entry fee of Rs 2,000, the state got revenue of Rs 9.41 crore last year. I

G

PARRIKAR

PARRIKAR SAYS HIS IMMEDIATE GOAL IS TO ESTABLISH A LOKAYUKTA IN THE STATE. THE STATE'S PROPOSAL IS AWAITING THE UNION HOME MINISTRY'S CLEARANCE.
Parrikar's face falls at the mention of former chief minister Digambar Kamat. But on being asked about the loyalist-turned-foe, he is dismissive. "Kamat stabbed me and my party in the back. It was a khunnas (rivalry), not revenge, but I have nothing personal against him. He is too minor," he says. Kamat, then mining minister in his government, had defected in 2005 from BJP to join the Congress, leading to the toppling of his government. The Goa Chief Minister's immediate goal is to establish a lokayukta in the state. "Our proposal is with the Central Government. We have got clearance from two ministries. Only the home ministry needs to give the nod." Since he took charge, government officials have been on a tight leash and are seen in their offices on weekends too. The workaholic is having a ripple effect. I

GOAGETS GOOD GOVERNANCE
have enhanced the licence fee for offshore casinos to Rs 6.5 crore from Rs 5 crore and on-shore casinos to Rs 2.5 crore from Rs 15 lakh. This will collectively give us a revenue of Rs 30 crore," he says. He is also planning to restrict the entry of locals to the casinos. "All over the world locals are banned from entry to casinos," he says in defence. Parrikar wants more rights for sons of the soil, including 50 per cent reservation in jobs for locals in the Central projects in Goa. "There is no land left in the state. The Central agencies do not treat Goans with care," the Chief Minister claims. Analysts say BJP came to power this time because the Catholics voted for it for the first time. Parrikar, a hardcore swayamsevak, says he would strike a fine balance between Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh and the Church. "There is a need to bring the two communities together," says Parrikar, the neighbour of Goa's Archbishop Filipe Neri Ferrao. The new Chief Minister's mantra is austerity and uprightness. He

S

42

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

43

