Mail

General Singh's War on India
APRIL 9, 2012

Vindictive army chief seeks to damage country's honour out of personal pique.

General Trouble
The cover story carried by INDIA TODAY is in bad taste ("General Singh's War on Terror", April 9). And terming an upright and honest Chief of Army Staff as vindictive is abhorrent. It is a known fact that ever since General Singh ordered an enquiry into the Sukna land scam, which led to the court martial of two Lt-Generals, there began a covert but vicious campaign to assassinate his character time and again. For me, General Singh is a leader because he espouses a vision of a clean army amid what is perceived as corrupt and weak governance.
PIYUSH OHRIE, Delhi

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

No Fear of Law
The revelations regarding contract killing are eerie and astounding as they depict how criminals are desperate for money and are operating in a brazen manner ("Price of Murder Rs 3 Lakh", April 9). It also shows their excessive confidence in their ability to dodge the law and order system.
RUPA BISWAS, Kolkata

Looking at the current vicious factional feud and the spate of controversies in the army, I feel A.K.

Increasing incidents of such acts of crime in broad daylight are because of non-implementation of capital sentences in the cases of premeditated cold-blooded murders; and the long time involved in the process of conviction and appeals in the court of law. Therefore, the judicial system requires the setting up of special courts to decide such heinous cases, or we will have to be ready for the worst.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

``

``

It is unbecoming of General V.K. Singh to act irresponsibly. If the army is not fighting fit at the moment, he is also to share the blame for the lapse. He has a lot of explanation to give to win back his goodwill.
V. K . T A N G R I ,
Dehradun

Antony does a thankless job. Known for his established credentials as far as honesty and integrity goes, Antony seems to be struggling to handle the delicate equation between the political leadership and the army. The fact remains that under Antony, our armed forces have fared much better thanks to the full use of the budgetary allocations.
V.V. NARAYAN, Mumbai

The article seems a little off track, specially when our country is being run by people who have little to do with national interest. I feel that the only slip-up of General V.K. Singh has been in openly challenging the sloth in the system. The chief is an integral part of democratic India and has every right to voice his opinion and fight for his

Mail
privileges. He might have called for a war, but it is definitely not against India.
SANCHITA MUKHERJEE, Pune

35
benefit the most if its internal bickerings and mutual mistrust come to an end. Gadkari's unification efforts won't yield any result till Advani, Modi and Sushma toe his line of action. If the party depicts unity in diversity in major areas of import, the party can not only regain its past glory but also spread its base far ahead.
AARAV JAIN, Jaipur

A Better Future
Christine Lagarde is being realistic ("We Are Not Out of the Danger Zone Yet", April 9). Distributive justice through fiscal measures requires cooperation of the well-to-do citizens to be taxed. The power equation in the world is quite different now. The world is faced with a leadership deficit. The G-20 leadership should rise to the occasion.
K.U. MADA, www.intoday.com

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
M AY 1 5 - 3 1 , 1 9 7 7

Being a veteran defence journalist, I am sure that the correspondent is privy to a lot of genuine and planted information that revolves around the defence establishment in Delhi. However, I am unable to understand your contention as to why a decorated and distinguished soldier like V. K. Singh would intend to plan/take revenge against the Government or system simply because the latter denied him justice.
GEORGE S., Pune

Optimism Among the Exiles
How have the exiled Tibetans reacted to the installation of a Janata government at the Centre? Tibetologists and political analysts are at the moment engaged in debating these questions. Recently in New Delhi, seven Tibetans undertook a fast unto death outside the India International Centre to press for a United Nations implementation of the three resolutions adopted in 1960, 1962 and 1965. Unfortunately, the Tibetans began their fast on the morning that vote counting started in the March general elections. Consequently, their protest generally went ignored until 10 days after the fast started, when Janata Party representatives headed by Acharya Kripalani, and members of the World Council for Religion and Peace, persuaded the Tibetans to end their fast. The sudden upsurge of political restlessness among the Tibetans in India was triggered when over 600 Tibetans took out a procession on March 10 in New Delhi in defiance of the curfew order imposed in Chanakyapuri, where the Chinese embassy is situated. China has added fuel to the fire by publicly inviting the Dalai Lama to return to Tibet whenever he wishes. The Chinese invitation followed recent reports that the Dalai Lama wishes to return to his homeland and spend his life in meditation.
THE DALAI LAMA--A NEW HOPE

Going Soft on Terror
There is no point in hanging Balwant Singh Rajoana, the killer of Beant Singh, since peace is prevailing in Punjab for a long time now ("Hawks Hang Up On Execution", April 9). Rajoana is a changed person now and has suffered enough for the crime committed by him due to his own ideology at that time. At the most, his punishment may be converted into life imprisonment.
IMRAN SINGH, Chandigarh

Clarification
The write-up is great for a whole bunch of women who are planning to lead the single life, either by choice or not ("The Joys of Being Single", April 9). I am, however, disappointed at how my quotes in your magazine turned out. I did not say that I dread relationships, I only stated that any relationship that is oppressive is best avoided. Where schools are concerned, I mentioned that a friend in Delhi had got a great deal of support and maternal leave from her school when she adopted a baby. I did mention that this was a welcome change in a usually conservative society, and that if schools and other work spaces could support it, it would be a great deal of support for a single woman. I do feel that your article was forcing some quotes.
DEEPTHY CHANDRASHEKHAR, Bangalore

Man on a Mission
Nitin Gadkari, the BJP president, has been grossly undervalued and underrated ("Why The Lotus Does Not Bloom", April 9). The firm and straight-talking BJP president could well be the man who effectively synergises all the known positive energies and potential talent that undoubtedly are already in existence within the BJP but presently in disarray. Indeed, he is the dark horse who could well win the derby for BJP and offer a welcome alternative to the political rot that governance has got into today.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

With Congress losing space, it is BJP that can

Our country is going soft on terrorists, murderers and Naxalites. This dangerous policy of the UPA Government will result in anarchy. These people should be dealt with severely and swiftly and no mercy should be shown. UPA is soft-pedalling these issues which will destroy the country. Religion, caste, region and politics should not be allowed to creep into administration, security and the judiciary.
M.M. KALE, www.intoday.com

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

