Living
WILDLIFE ENVIRONMENT PERSONAL FINANCE H E A LT H SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

MR U HITS 100
How can a man about to start his second century be so full of vim, vigour and vitality? Ask India's first Mr Universe.
SUBIR HALDER/www.indiatodayimages.com

EATSIMPLE,EAT SMALL,EATOFTEN
Old-fashioned? But that has kept Aich ticking
BREAKFAST Acup of flattened rice (chire) with milk and a cup of coffee. LUNCH Rice,dal and vegetables or fish curry. LATE AFTERNOON Acup of coffee. DINNER Same as lunch. OCCASIONALLY Aglass of fruit juice. TRADE SECRET Took panta bhaat four times a day almost all his life. Panta means `with water' . It's and bhaat means `boiled rice' an old-fashioned east Indian staple,where rice is cooked and left to ferment slightly in water.The water gives one the strength of three strong men,Aich claims.

B

DOS AND DON'TS
I I

Give up tobacco in any form. Avoid junk food.Home food is the best.Eat simple food and always in small amounts.

WORKOUTS
Squats, sit-ups,lunges and push-ups form the core of his regimen.He stopped exercising with weights due to a mild cardiac problem.

odybuilder Manohar Aich packs a neat surprise in his 4'11" frame. The winner of the Mr Universe title in 1952, India's first, Aich has turned 100. Aptly called Pocket Hercules, the legendary bodybuilding champion leads an active lifestyle. "Longevity is not in my genes," says Aich. "None of my forefathers actually lived to see a 100." But unlike them, Aich has spent almost all his waking hours worshipping the human body, at his old-style gymnasium or akhara. Squats, situps, lunges and push-ups have been at the core of his workout regimen. In the last couple of years, following a mild cardiac problem, he has given up exercises with free weights. Meditation was never his forte, but he strongly believes that bodybuilding is not just about physical training but involves the mind as well, especially concentration and self-control. His dedication to his `art' and his extreme discipline are at the core of his prolonged lifespan. "I never set out to be Mr Universe. Things just kept happening one after the other," he smiles. In his younger years, Aich had tried, and successfully kicked within short periods habits like smoking, chewing betel and inhaling snuff. Even at this age, he does not take any medicines for any ailments or lifestyle disorders. "No high blood pressure, no elevated blood sugar levels, nothing," he says proudly. Maintaining a simple diet and small portions are characteristic of his daily food intake. In the mornings, he eats a cup of flattened rice (chire), with milk and a cup of

AICH NOW AND (BELOW) AS MR UNIVERSE IN 1952

coffee. Lunch is usually rice, dal and some vegetables or fish curry. Late in the afternoon, he has another cup of coffee and has rice for dinner once again. Occasionally, he has a glass of fruit juice as well. However, the secret to his prolonged lifespan essentially lies in panta bhaat (rice cooked the day before and left to ferment by adding water), he says. "Earlier I used to have panta bhaat four times a day. Panta bhaater jol, tin jowaner bol (the water of fermented rice can give power to three strong men)," he adds, with a glint in his eyes.
by Tithi Sarkar

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

65

