Na tion ODISHA
AFP PHOTO

RUMBLE IN THE JUNGLE
By Amitabh Srivastava

KARNATAKA

GOWDAFOLLOWS NITISH
Imitating the Bihar model, Karnataka launches a programme that will deliver services on time
scam- and scandal-hit government in Karnataka is taking a leaf out of NDA allies. They are opting for the "governance" models of Nitish Kumar in Bihar and Sukhbir Badal in Punjab in the hope of electoral benefits in Assembly polls scheduled for 2013. Former chief minister B.S. Yeddyurappa had said that Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi was his role model when he

Maoists strike once again in Odisha by kidnapping two Italians and an MLA

he eyes of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) sub-inspector from Bihar, manning a makeshift check post at Gajalbadi forest in Odisha's Kandhamal district, light up only when he talks about his MBA son having added company secretary degree to his profile. Maoists abducted two Italians Claudio Colangelo, 61, and Paulo Bosusco, 54, from the area on March 14. "I can hang my boots now. Who wants to stay in this god-forsaken country?" he laments. An intelligence officer stands at the CRPF post to collect inputs from visiting journalists but does not venture out to see the Maoists' graffiti painted on the road, 20 km away. The paramilitary personnel at the post are inspecting vehicles but don't stop anyone as anti-Naxal operations have been put on hold due to the hostage situation. The check post, 25 km away from where the Italians were abducted, is the solitary symbol of the state's law and order between Bhubaneswar and Kandhamal, which are 250 km apart. Around 130 km from Bhubaneswar, after leaving the National Highway 5 at Keshpur, you enter the world of the ultra Left. Odisha faces extraordinary times following the abduction of the Italians and MLA Jhina Hikaka by rival Maoist groups. Police operations have been put on hold. Secretary of CPI(Maoist) Orissa State Organising Committee (OSOC) Sabyasachi Panda led the operation to abduct Colangelo, a tourist, and Bosusco, who runs a travel agency in Puri, from Rasingjodi in Kandhamal district while they were trekking in the forest. "Security forces were snap-

T

ping at Panda's heels. After the government stopped operations, he has some breathing space now," says a senior IPS officer. On March 24, a separate group of Maoist guerrillas abducted Hikaka, 37, a tribal MLA of the ruling Biju Janata Dal (BJD), from Toyaput village on the Laxmipur-Koraput road--300 km away from where the Italians were picked up--while he was returning to his village in Koraput district. Just before his abduction, Hikaka had won the support of Maoist-backed Chasi Mulia Adivasi Sangh (CMAS) to secure a majority for BJD in the Koraput Zila Parishad. The first-time MLA probably promised more than what he or his government could deliver, thus enraging the Maoists. Odisha is not new to abductions. In February 2011, Maoists abducted Malkangiri District Collector R. Vineel Krishna. The officer was set free only after the Naveen Patnaik government promised to release rebels. This time too, the government has promised to release 27 Maoist prisoners. But the Maoists want more and the deadlock continues. At Daringbadi, young Block Development Officer Manoj Kumar Swain says the Maoists don't trouble him. It is because he "gives one month

B

JP's

each day of delay is to be deducted from the concerned official's salary. Gowda's man Friday, Law and Parliamentary Affairs Minister S. Suresh Kumar, has drawn inspiration from similar laws in Bihar, Punjab and Madhya Pradesh. "Top officials told Sukhbir Badal that his drive to ensure timely delivery of government services would find no resonance in the elections. But look at

ITALIANS CLAUDIO COLANGELO (LEFT) AND PAULO BOSUSCO IN KANDHAMAL

OSOC.

CPI(Maoist)

THE GLOBALATTENTION ON PANDA HAS TRANSFORMED HIM INTO A MEDIA STAR. HE ALSO NURSES POLITICAL AMBITIONS FOR HIS WIFE.

prior information to the villages before visiting them". The irony with development initiatives in extremist-infested pockets in Odisha is that the more the funds, the higher is the levy that the Maoists collect. There are five Naxal groups in Odisha and most of them operate along the interstate borders with Jharkhand, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh. While OSOC picked up the Italians, Andhra-Odisha Border Special Zonal Committee (AOBSZC), another Maoist organisation which was behind Krishna's abduction, kidnapped Hikaka. Five top Naxals-- Ghanti Prasadam, Padma (wife of Maoist leader Akkiraju Hargopal), Analuri Eshwari (wife of Maoist leader Kandula), Roja Munda alias Sarita and Gokul Keldepia--were all booked for sedition and for waging a war against the state. They were set free to secure Collector Krishna's release. Ironically, Sarita was directly involved in Hikaka's abduction. Krishna's abduction had deepened fissures between AOBSZC and

Panda fell out with Hargopal, Central Committee member who controls AOBSZC, because the latter did nothing for the release of Panda's wife Subashree aka Milli, 40, who is also in jail. With Bosusco in captivity, the first thing Panda demanded was his wife's release. Prior to the abduction, the security personnel had been closing in on him. In November 2011, he escaped from his hideout in the nick of time. The global attention on Panda after the Italian hostage situation has transformed him into a media star. He also nurses political ambitions for his wife. "Milli may contest the 2014 Assembly election in the state," says a senior IPS officer. Panda knows his future hinges on the concessions he manages to extract from the government. In a calculated move, he released Colangelo a day after Hikaka was abducted by the group controlled by Hargopal to ward off a possible police offensive. With the Odisha government playing according to the Maoist leader's script, the next abduction seems just round the corner. I

GOWDA (FOURTH FROM RIGHT) INAUGURATES SAKAALA IN BANGALORE

took over in 2009, but his successor D.V. Sadananda Gowda had to look elsewhere for his governance initiative, since `model' Gujarat has no such provisions. Sakaala (meaning timely) was launched on April 2 under the Karnataka Guarantee of Services to Citizens Act 2011. It promises 151 services directly benefiting the public, like issuance of birth and death certificates and ration cards connected with 11 government departments, within a specified time-frame which varies across services. If the service is not provided before the deadline expires, a penalty of up to Rs 500 for

the results the Shiromani Akali Dal achieved in Punjab recently," Suresh told INDIA TODAY. Another state minister says, "Corruption scandals and ministers viewing porn has hit our middle class base very hard. We saw their support base shift from us to the Congress." A pilot project was launched in five taluks on March 2. Till March 24, 1,02,935 cases had been taken up under Sakaala, and over 86,000 disposed of. Just two of the over 1 lakh cases taken up under Sakaala have so far overshot the deadline. The concerned officials are set to be penalised. by Sowmya Aji

40

INDIA TODAY N APRIL 23, 2012

APRIL 23, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

41

