BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE GHALIB GUIDE TO POLITICS
ho would you consider a better guide to contempo- UP was absence of party infrastructure. But it was at the very rary politics: Chaudhry Birender Singh, general least the same infrastructure in 2009, when the Congress secretary of the Indian National Congress with won 21 Lok Sabha seats in UP, the rough equivalent of a huncharge of Delhi, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh, or dred Assembly constituencies. The network that brought out Mirza Asadullah Ghalib, Urdu-Persian poet-philosopher the vote in 2009 could not have collapsed by 2012, since during the dusk of the Mughal Empire? The choice may Rahul Gandhi worked for three years on nourishing and not seem quite as obvious, on second glance. If you prefer spreading fertiliser on these grassroots. In these three years, the Chaudhry, you are clearly reasonable. The Mirza, the Congress vote dropped by over six percentage points. however, might be a more illuminating guide during The party imploded because it had lost credibility. Voters judge claims against performance if you are in office. periods of great existential strain. Rahul Gandhi monopolised the campaign in UP. Blame Let us examine the available evidence. On April 17, the day Congress confirmed its general decline by losing the must therefore go where worship would have gone had the Delhi municipal elections, Chaudhry Birender Singh breezily results been different. But the blame is not his alone. He explained, on television, that it was actually the voter's fault; was handicapped by the stench of corruption wafting the voter didn't know what he was doing. There were no around the Congress-led coalition in Delhi, and the rattling elections in Ghalib's era, more than a century and a half ago, skeletons of broken promises. He was slapped in UP only and he probably would not have voted if there had been, but because he offered himself as the face of his party. he understood the craving for comfort in illusion. Witness his Congress would have got the same results, with or without verse: Hum ko maloom hai jannat ki haqiqat lekin/ Dil to ba- his campaign. The story is not that Rahul Gandhi did not halane ko Ghalib yeh khayal achcha hai. A rough transla- make a difference, but that he could not make a difference. tion: `I know the truth about heaven, but/ As amusement for This is a dangerous admission for an organisation that places a premium on dynasty; hence the need for alibis. the heart, the thought is pleasant, Ghalib.' There is a secondary need as well. Survival is not The Chaudhry knows the truth, but an alibi eases burdens in his soul. This is temporary relief. Politics is a prac- merely a physical fact. It requires a psychological tical art. It tends to punish illusion. It permits only a very bed. While half the Union Cabinet has the fixed grin of thin margin between self-consolation and self-immolation. someone who has won a lottery, because it has, the ministers of state in their Forties Any politician who believes that he SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com and Fifties have acquired a frown lost an election because the voter that is deepening into anxiety and was wrong has also lost the plot. depression. Eight years of plenty No election is minor, for the have slipped by without promotion; voter's will is never insignificant, and the prospect of wilderness is whether it shapes the micro or bad for the morale of those who macro level of authority. The first thought, in 2009, that they had signal from north India after Mrs been given a licence to rule for Indira Gandhi's devastating defeat 20 years. If this group of energisers in 1977 that the mood had begun to begins to look defeated even before change, came when her Congress the turmoil of the next General won a local bodies election. Her Election, the body count will be high Janata Party opponents loftily during battle. It is important to reasdismissed the result as a pimple. sure them that the problem lies They forgot that a pimple is often in circumstance, which can be the only manifestation of an internal The link between a corporation altered over time, and not in the cancer. The link between a corporaleadership, which cannot. tion in Delhi and the sprawl of in Delhi and the sprawl of Uttar Victory is an intoxicant. Victory Uttar Pradesh is an epidemic of Pradesh is an epidemic of disleads to a hangover, which best disaffection, caused by the double affection, caused by the double describes the state of the UPA 2 jeopardy of poor governance and jeopardy of poor governance political mismanagement. It is pushGovernment. Defeat is a teacher. ing Congress out of the only perch on But, to be an effective guide, it needs and political mismanagement. which it is comfortable, power. the prod of honesty. A Chaudhry may It is pushing Congress out of Alibis were impotent in UP, and mollify the pain of defeat during a the only perch on which it is they will not be productive in Delhi eitelevision stampede. But for the long ther. The much-promoted excuse for run, trust Ghalib.  comfortable, power.

W

APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

