Cover Story

BREASTIMPLANTS

WHAT'S
ON THE

MENU
Who's going under the knife and why
MIDDLE CLASS MANIA
The market for cosmetic surgery on breasts has expanded from socialites and film stars to anyone with money.

BOOBY
Women want them perfect. Men want less flab. Breast surgery is the new rage.
By Damayanti Datta

WOMEN WANT MORE
Women are increasingly opting for larger breasts. From the standard 275-325 cubic cm implants, they now demand 350-400 cubic cm.

TRAP

MEN WITH MOOBS
Men are opting for breast surgery to remove `moobs' , or abnormal accumulation of fat on their chests.

WEDDING TROUSSEAU
It's the favourite surgery among 20-something unmarried young women, seen as an investment that would give them a competitive edge in the marriage market.

SIZE ZERO TEENS
Many teenagers go through massive weight loss and end up with empty breast sacs. They often need breast implants to get back a normal figure.

W
51,000

MOMMY MAKEOVER
Over a quarter of breast jobs is being driven by 30-plus women who have lost breast volume due to pregnancy and breast feeding.

CORPORATE CLIMBERS
Ambitious professionals are changing their breast size to suit the image they want to portray to move up the corporate ladder.

oo hoo! It's Happy Cleavage Day. How should I celebrate?" tweeted Poonam Pandey on March 30. She did not get explicit about what she actually did on the "happy" day coined by a lingerie brand. But the self-proclaimed 21year-old, who shot to fame during the Cricket World Cup in 2011 by offering to run naked around Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai to motivate Team India, celebrates her cleavage every day. She posts pictures of her formidable bust line on Twitter and flaunts her assets in YouTube videos. Although she trashes the rumours, social-networking busybodies are busy figuring out the mystery of her breasts: "Did Poonam Pandey get a boob job done or not?" Breast-watchers have found a new hobby: Tell real breasts from fake. On the 50th anniversary of breast implants, an Indian surgery secret is bursting out of the lingerie closet. The popularity of aesthetic surgery to enhance and reshape breasts is exploding in metro India, making it one of the top 10 countries globally. Cleavage is the new self-esteem. The market has expanded from socialites and film stars to upper and middle classes: Size-zero girls, wannabe brides, ambitious professionals to 40-something mothers. Despite a health scare over cancerous breast implants from France breaking out around the world this year, boob jobs are becoming something of a national pastime in India. Men have their own rationale. "Doc, can you do something about my breasts? I am getting married next month. I don't want to stand in a dhoti with my breasts hanging out." The young man, a software professional in Bangalore, wants to remove his "moobs" (or male boobs). To Dr M.S. Venkatesh, surgeon and professor at Ramaiah Medical College, he is just another patient of gynaecomastia, where hormones, genes, and sedentary life lead to abnormal accumulation of fat on male chests. The doctor cut out his breasts through a small incision below

DREAMSTIME

breast implant surgeries were done in India in 2010-11, out of 1.5 million across the world.

Cover Story

BREASTIMPLANTS
years, the hunger for cleavage takes Dr Khazanchi by surprise. The director of plastic, aesthetic and reconstructive surgery at Medanta Medicity in Gurgaon tries to hide his dismay by sketching out the anatomy of breasts: "Normal breasts are shaped like tear drops. They are never perfectly round, never show cleavage without support and never jut out like that. Don't trust photos." As the patient retreats into a sulk, her anxious parents coax the doctor to enlarge her breasts as much as possible. Just another day at a cosmetic surgeon's chamber. It is 50 years since homemaker Timmie Jean Lindsey of Texas, US, was persuaded by doctors on the payroll of a chemical company to undergo the new operation. When and how it came to India remains shrouded in silence and denial. Dr Narendra Pandya of Mumbai, who has ramped up more celebrity breasts than one can count, recalls his first case in 1973: A stealthy midnight surgery on a patient whose face was kept covered and name secret from him. But in the last five years, the breast has become one of the most popular cosmetic surgery sites, reports the Association of Plastic Surgeons of India. In a country that lacks a national registry of cosmetic surgery procedures, sale of implants indicates the trend. There were 51,000 breast enlargement surgeries in India in 201011, out of 1.5 million across the world, according to an International Society of Aesthetic Plastic Surgery survey. And women are increasingly opting for

his areola (the small darkened area around the nipple). "Gynaecomastia is very common in Indian men," says Venkatesh. "Most of these are fatty accumulation that starts mostly during late puberty." When he started his career in 1994, he received merely 7-8 such patients in a year. Now, these comprise 35 per cent of all his surgeries. Breast surgery has replaced the popular nose job in India in the last two years. With films, television ads, billboards and magazines showing six-pack male Adonises all the time and with new minimally-invasive surgery techniques within reach, men are reasserting their masculinity by taking recourse to new procedures in cosmetic surgery. A study by the Association of Plastic Surgeons of India reveals that male breast surgery has taken a giant leap of nearly 150 per cent in the last five years. At the Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, till a decade ago, patients were mostly women. "But over the last three to four years, men have formed one-fourth of the clientele," says Dr Ramesh Kumar Sharma, who heads the department of plastic surgery. "Men have become more demanding and aggressive about the way they look." "I can't turn you from size 32 to 36," Dr Rakesh Khazanchi tells a patient. "But I want those," his patient insists, pointing at photographs of a starlet with spectacular breasts. For the first time in a career spanning 30

OPERATION BOOB JOB
Breast enlargement is a serious surgery with potential complications

Armpit insertion
Incision less concealed. Difficult to place implants, can create a wide cleavage. Breast-feeding is easier. larger 350-400 cc implants instead of the medium-sized 275-325cc. In a first-of-its-kind study, Max Healthcare, Delhi, has analysed over 1,000 patients undergoing breast surgery in the capital. The study shows that the surge in demand is fuelled largely by the 25-45 age group, with 43 per cent women and 88 per cent men being unmarried. About 70 per cent men and 53 per cent women are socially and financially independent; 67 per cent come from the middle and 25 per cent from elite classes. And they are no longer the shy, diffident patients of the past. "Earlier, people used to pretend they were meeting doctors on someone else's behalf," says Dr Sunil Choudhary, head of aesthetic and reconstructive surgery at Max, who conducted the study. "Now it's as direct as, `I would like to go for a breast surgery and would like to know more about the procedure'." The demand for breast surgeries is rising here at 20 per cent every year," he says. On any given day, call in on a plastic surgeon and you will be taken aback by the range and scale of demands driving patients to doctors' chambers. Dr Pandya of Mumbai would typically get a pretty young thing with an impossible list of demands (one film star's cleavage with another's shape). In Delhi, Dr Choudhary says patients are wellinformed and often come after watching YouTube videos of real surgeries. "They are well-educated, new generation, independent, and most of them

A breast surgery takes APPROXIMATELY

CHEST MUSCLE

2-3 HOURS
IMPLANT

FILLER
Silicone pouches and saline bags SILICONE
Filled with a thick, sticky silicone gel. It most closely mimics the natural breast.

SALINE
Implants are filled with salt water after being placed in the body. It's more firm.

PROFILE
Patient chooses between low, moderate or high-profile implants to suit own body type
LOW PROFILE MODERATE PROFILE HIGH PROFILE

Breast crease insertion
Incision under the breast. Easy to place implants, creates attractive cleavage, not much scarring. Quickest procedure.

ANATOMY
TEARDROP Looks natural, but can flip over if not placed right and make breasts shapeless. ROUND Gives maximum cleavage; doesn't flip but looks artificial. ROUND TEARDROP

Nipple insertion
Half-circle incision around the coloured area of the nipple. Best access for placing implants, gives strong cleavage. Scar blends well but makes breastfeeding difficult.

85%
of breast implant surgeries are done with saline implants.

10 years
is the average lifespan of breast implants but that can vary.

2-6 weeks
is the usual time taken to recover after breast surgery.

Graphics: MADHUMANGAL SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Source: Association of Plastic Surgeons of India; International Society of Aesthetic Plastic Surgery; Surveys by Department of Aesthetic & Reconstructive Surgery, Max Healthcare, Delhi, 2004-2012

WAYS TO TELL FAKE BREASTS FROM REAL

FIVE

Despite a price tag of Rs 1.5-2.5 lakh, fake breasts can fool even the most discerning

``

Implants are good for those who want to stand like statues, not for dancers like me. I am back to being 100 per cent natural.
RAKHI SAWANT, ITEM GIRL

3

Are they too round? Breasts are not perfect orbs but shaped like tear drops.

4 5

1
20

Look too rigid? Real breasts are plain fat, hence jiggle, stretch and flatten out. They can never look like solid muscle.

Too high up or too low on the chest? A sign of bad boob job. Breasts should be at armpit height.

'' 2

IF A WOMAN WANTS BIGGER BREASTS, OR IF SHE WANTS TO LOOK A CERTAIN WAY FOR HER HUSBAND. SHE SHOULD OPT FOR SURGERY. SUNNY LEONE,
ADULT MOVIE STAR

``

Fake boobs defy gravity, while natural breasts follow a more sliding curve. They are supposed to droop a bit. Too far apart or too close? They're substandard. The doctor did a bad job.
FOTOCORP

``

Woohoo! It's Happy Cleavage Day. How should I celebrate? I celebrate it every day.
POONAM PANDEY, MODEL

PREEN LAND
Countries that performed the most breast surgeries in 2010-11
USA Brazil Mexico Italy China Colombia

''

336,648 254,214 85,099 75,225 55,400 52,298

''

ONLY ITEM GIRLS AND SMALL-TIME ACTORS GO FOR BREAST IMPLANTS AS THERE IS PRESSURE TO LOOK SEXY.

``

ROZLYN KHAN, STARLET
BOLLYBREAK.COM

BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

''

India

51,000
APRIL 30, 2012  INDIA TODAY

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

21

Cover Story BREASTIMPLANTS
are getting it done with their own money," he says. In Bangalore, Venkatesh says, demand for removal of male breasts between age 17 and 38 ("mostly professionals, students and aspiring models") is on the upswing. When does a taboo lose its power? "When it becomes mainstream," says Samita Sen, director of Women's Studies, Jadavpur University in Kolkata. "What plays a vital part in the normalisation of a once hush-hush surgery is that people are not afraid to talk openly about it anymore," she says. Plastic surgery in India began in full swing in the 1980s as movie stars and fashion icons of the time often went under the knife to enhance their charms. Despite the storm of speculation, every case also led to greater awareness: From rumours about a beauty queen-turned-actress' fake breasts to a Mumbai doctor's claim that a model-turned-actress had not paid him for her surgery in 2002, item girl Rakhi Sawant donning and doffing her implants since 2007 to porn star Sunny Leone flaunting her award-winning fake breasts on a popular TV reality show in 2011--a narrative of cosmetic surgery as personal fulfilment has been created. "The idea that one can change one's looks is liberating in a world where appearance matters the most," says Sen. Rakhi Sawant, Bollywood's noisiest item girl, captured the spirit of the age with her candid comment: "Jo cheezein God nahi deta, wo doctor deta hai (whatever God doesn't provide, the doctor does)." She wanted bigger breasts to perk up her career but the casualness with which she went about it shocked the nation into viewing breast surgeries as routine, risk-free and essential. She danced her way to earn the Rs 3 lakh that she needed for surgery in the US

MOOBS NOT WANTED
Breast removal has become the most popular cosmetic surgery for men in the last two years

88%
MEN WHO WANT TO GET RID OF UNWANTED BREAST GROWTH ARE UNMARRIED.

150%
rise in male breast surgeries in the last five years in India.

17-38
AGE GROUP IS DRIVING THE DEMAND FOR REMOVAL OF MALE BREASTS.
RITESH SHARMA

and started getting noticed in the industry for her assets, she told INDIA TODAY. That's not all. Within months, she started talking about taking them out, because they were coming in the way of her rehearsals for a reality dance show on TV. Sawant and Pandey are the typical role models. Young women often bring their photographs as references for doctors. "Breast enhancement is the favourite surgery among 20-something unmarried young women," says Dr Anup Dhir of Apollo Hospital, Delhi. "It's seen as an investment that would give a girl a competitive edge in the marriage market. It's often a gift from a brother, very often from parents. I have even had fathers bringing in daughters." The spotlight on breast can be explained by the relatively new entry of a new `ism', "lookism", defined by the Oxford's Twentieth Century Words as "prejudice or discrimination on the grounds of appearance". Now economists tell us that those of above-average beauty earn more than those with below-average looks. Social scientists claim that society attributes all kinds of positive traits--smarter, more sexually-active, wealthier and happier--to people who look good. Not surprisingly, as a 2012 Max Hospital survey on 1,300 middle-class respondents in colleges, corporate firms and malls shows, acceptability of aesthetic surgery is at an all-time high, with 40 per cent considering it a valid means to enhance looks; 64 per cent agreeing that good looks boost confidence and image; 36 per cent claiming they would gladly opt for aesthetic surgery if affordable and they felt like it; and 53 per cent saying they would support their partners if they wished to undergo such procedures. In Mumbai, lunch-time `boob jobs' for super-

THE SCALPEL SECRETS

50 years after the first cosmetic breast surgery, India is among the top 10 markets globally

1965
Dr H.R. Arion, a French surgeon, introduces inflatable saline breast implants.

1972-73
First surgery in India. No recorded history. Doctors often operated clandestinely.

1990s
Cohesive gel implants that combine silicone and saline invented.

2010-11
Breast augmentation becomes the most popular form of plastic surgery in the world.

2011-12
PIP health scare. French firm using industrial grade silicone that can cause cancer.

1962
World's first implant on Timmie Jean Lindsey, Texas, US. Thomas Cronin and Frank Gerow invent the silicone breast implant.

1980s
Soybean oil breast implants are developed by an American scientist. They become popular in Europe. Banned in US.

2009
Augmenting the breast with the body's own fat, condemned in the early 1990s, now in demand.

22

VIKRAM RYAN

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

Dr SunilChoudhary
GUEST COLUMN

THERE'S NOTHING TO BE COYABOUT
Regular men and women who want to look good and feel good don't hesitate to go under the knife

S

omeone once asked me what I actually do as a plastic surgeon. I replied, "I create balance, both in body proportions and in life." Nowhere does the law of balance apply more than in breast surgery. Breasts are the symbol of feminity and when a woman starts feeling unhappy about them, it can lead to serious repercussions on her relationships, lifestyle, appearance and attitude. In our profession, we all start off as reconstructive surgeons and then progress gradually towards

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

the more demanding art of cosmetic surgery. Not because it is more complex but because expectations from patients are humungous. You have to be very careful in choosing patients: Women asking for very large implants may not be very stable mentally. Also those who want to go through a surgery but don't want anyone to notice are putting forward contradictory requests, which is hard to fulfil. Women who want to go under the knife to regain a lost partner or attract someone new are usually found to suffer from unrealistic expectations. Those who don't see reason are refused surgery. I tell them very bluntly that I cannot meet their expectations. Earlier, I used to get patients
00
INDIA TODAY  OCTOBER 13, 2008

who would pretend to ask about the procedure for someone else. Only after a few consultations would they admit that they were the patients. That shyness has gone. Now it is as direct as, "I would like to go for a breast augmentation and I would like to know more about the procedure." The women I see today are not psychologically unstable and most of them are not Page 3 girls. They are all very normal people who wish to look good and feel good about themselves. Sample this email request I received from a Canadian NRI: "I have a very small cup size, so small that sometimes I feel they don't exist. No one says anything to me but I feel very embarrassed and would like to go for breast augmentation." Recently, one of my patients came back for a follow-up after a year. She has just got married and her husband seemed completely unperturbed by the fact that she had gone through breast augmentation before marriage. It's not just women but men, too, who come because they are uncomfortable with their torsos. Often youngsters come with their parents. But the most common group of patients is 30-plus women who have lost breast volume due to pregnancy and breastfeeding. They want to regain their confidence. I stumbled upon a `Thank You' card given to me by one of my breast cancer reconstruction patients. It read, "Thank you for giving me my womanhood back." Most of my patients tell me how low they feel when they see themselves in the mirror. Their husbands are usually quite supportive and often more interested in the procedure than the wives.
Dr Choudhary is the director of the Institute of Aesthetic & Reconstructive Surgery, Max Healthcare, Delhi

busy professionals are in. Dr Mohan Thomas, senior consultant cosmetic surgeon with Breach Candy Hospital, carries out 24-hour breast augmentation procedures routinely. "For most of our patients, getting back to work early is a priority," he says. "Thanks to an innovative post-operative regimen they can do so the very next day." It takes about two to three hours to complete the entire procedure. A special set of exercises that begins on the day of the operation helps to reduce the discomfort and tight feeling after surgery. Desk jobs and light physical activity can be resumed in a few days. "But we ask them not to get into upper body exercises or put pressure on breasts for a month." Dr Jyotsna Murthy of Ramachandra Hospital in Porur, Chennai, comes across a rising population of patients, software professionals, engineers, businessmen

EARLIER PEOPLE USED TO PRETEND THEYWERE MEETING DOCTORS ON BEHALF OF SOMEONE ELSE. NOW IT'S AS DIRECT AS,"I WOULD LIKE TO GO FOR A BREAST SURGERY."
and media professionals. "They all have the same, insatiable desire to look good," she says. About 30 per cent of the boom in breast jobs is being driven by 30-plus women who have lost their breast volume due to pregnancy and breast feeding, say doctors. Consider the Chandigarh mother: The day she turned 40, she looked at herself in the mirror and decided to pay a visit to a cosmetic surgeon. There was nothing dramatic about her decision, just a slow dawning. She had everything: A loving husband who was climbing up the corporate ladder, two lively children, a home that people oohed and aahed over. But she didn't like the person staring back at her. "My breasts were sunken after nursing my children. It was a major source of insecurity to me," she says. So she traipsed off to the doctor's chamber

Cover Story BREASTIMPLANTS
AFP

DEATH SCARE IN FRENCH CUPS
French company, PIP (Poly Implant Prothese) was filling their implants with unapproved industrial grade silicone, meant for bed mattresses, at unbeatably low rates across the world since 2001. More than one lakh women in Europe are believed to have used the implants. They ruptured faster than the superior grade implants. The ruptures have put patients at high risk by leaking into lymph nodes and other organs. Doctors in India deny using PIP, but how safe are the cheap implants flooding the market from China?

BEYOND PERFECTION
claim? In a country without any official estimate of cosmetic surgery procedures, can anyone guarantee safety? Are patients given a realistic impression of the dangers of breast surgeries--that 25-40 per cent patients need many more surgeries to set right the first one, to deal with leaks, ruptures, pain, discomfort or change implants that have expired? The lifespan of an implant is about 10 years. Concern is also mounting over the safety of cheap implants coming to India. Ideally, all breast implants should be approved by the Medical Council of India but this doesn't happen, say experts. Chinese implants used in smaller clinics are suspect. Since January, a major health scare has broken out all over from cheap French breast implants that can cause cancer to millions of women across the world. More than one lakh women in Europe are believed to have used implants made by the French company Poly Implant Prothese (PIP) which the manufacturer had filled with an industrial grade silicone. In 1962, Timmie Jean Lindsey, guinea pig for the first breast implant operation, was told a new-improved bust would bring her happiness. She did get her share of wolf whistles but at age 75 now, after carrying around the silicone orbs in her chest for 50 years, she has gone on record about a life of extreme and continuous pain, with her breasts hardening over time. It's time to say: Let there be no more Timmies.
with Prachi Rege and Nishat Bari

for what is being called a `mommy makeover'. It was a life-changing decision, for which she convinced her husband to shell out Rs 5 lakh. Cosmetic surgeons increasingly operate in an expanding universe of breast-wannabes, with unlikely subsets of patients queuing up at their chambers. The 14-year-old girl was always the fat kid on the block, yo-yo dieting her way up and down the scale, until she became obese at age 11, with a body mass index over 40 (a BMI of 18.5-24.9 is normal). In November 2011, her doctor recommended a bariatric weight-loss surgery, where a band is placed around the top portion of the stomach, restricting the amount of food. But the massive weight loss, from 120 kg to 60 kg, inflicted collateral damage: The loss of excess fat from her body also meant empty breast sacs. "Along with body-lift surgeries, she also needed breast implants to get back a normal figure," says Dr Choudhary. Despite a price tag of Rs 1.5 lakh2.5 lakh, the old shame of breast surgeries is giving way to celebration, as India's new prosperity and globalised tastes meld with an array of constantly evolving techniques and an army of trained professionals. New generation implants, approved by the US Food and Drug Administration, are entering the market. Implants now range from the conventional silicone pouches to saline bags that look like water balloons, to cohesive silicone that combines both and has the least chance of rupturing or losing shape. There are

The surgery comes with its share of risks and side-effects Pain, hardness and numbness are common. Thick, raised scars may develop and require treatment. Implants often break within days of surgery. Most need a revision surgery within five years. Serious complications can occur within three years. Surgery can affect breast-feeding. Implants age and break down inside the body. Blood can pool up, causing severe pain and swelling. Scar tissues contract and squeeze the soft implant, making breasts hard and painful.

now implants that can last a lifetime. Surgical procedures have been refined to give fake breasts a more natural look. "The latest trend is that of using a patient's own fat as a volume-filler for enhancement," says Dr Choudhary. Breast surgery is not an out-patient procedure. It's a surgery with all the risks that a patient faces in any other surgery. Moreover, breast enhancement procedures can lead to a range of complications of their own, especially if done by unskilled practitioners. Is India really danger-free, as doctors

26

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 30, 2012

