Society BOOKS

ACASE OFEXPLODING THRILLERS
Courtesy the War on Terror, US bestsellers are now often set in the AfPak region
arlier this year, readers in India would have learned about Pakistan dropping a nuclear bomb over Jammu and Kashmir, and the American President rushing to New Delhi. The worst nightmares of the two countries came true in Coup d'Etat, an action thriller by Ben Coes, which was released in India in January after its US release in 2011. The book is the latest in a series of action thrillers by American authors where most of the action takes place in the rugged mountains and bustling

E

since the 9/11 attack. Ignatius, a columnist with The Washington Post and author of books like Body Of Lies, which was made into a movie starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Russell Crowe, drew on first-hand information for his work. His latest spy thriller Bloodmoney, about a CIA operation in Pakistan, was published in 2011. Ignatius travelled through South Waziristan and the Swat Valley and met several military commanders and senior Inter-Services Intelligence officials. Coes, a veteran of US

which is good versus evil and a lot of fancy gadgets." Adds Ignatius, "There is a temptation to put more action in the book than happens in real life." But spotty research doesn't seem to hurt sales. Peter Cannon, a senior editor at Publishers Weekly, says, "First of all, the typical American reader doesn't care that much about accuracy. They might want to learn more about that part of the world but in these kinds of books the emphasis is on the action, not too much on character development or

The true stories are so astounding that it's hard to understand why you would need to write fiction about the spy wars of South Asia, and specially those involving Pakistan."
BRUCE RIEDEL
FORMER
OFFICIAL CIA

The Devil's Light
Richard North Patterson (2011)

Bloodmoney
David Ignatius (2011)

Against All Enemies
Tom Clancy with Peter Telep (2011)

Pakistan is a democracy that's 97 per cent Muslim. In my opinion, it's a question of when, not if, Pakistan elects a radical Islamist to lead the country. "
BEN COES
AUTHOR , COUP D'ETAT

Coup d'Etat
Ben Coes (2011)

cities of Afghanistan and Pakistan, apparently where "enemies of the US" are based. In recent years, the subcontinent has captured the imagination of US thriller writers in a way reminiscent of the Cold War and drug wars in South America. Most of the top thriller writers, including Tom Clancy, Vince Flynn, Brad Thor, Richard North Patterson and David Ignatius, have featured the region in their books. Mainstream US media coverage of events in Afghanistan and Pakistan has grown steadily negative

administrations, explains his choice of plot in Coup d'Etat: "Pakistan is a democracy that's 97 per cent Muslim. In my opinion, it's a question of when, not if, Pakistan elects a radical Islamist to lead the country. And so what happens when you have someone who is a radical Islamist in charge of several hundred nuclear weapons?" Experts say these books don't always portray events accurately. Bruce Riedel, a former CIA official, says, "Authors understand what plays to an American audience,

describing the culture." Ignatius wryly adds that "jingoistic literature" sells more than his books. Thrillers are a big part of American popular culture. Vince Flynn has sold over 14 million books worldwide. Brad Thor's book sales have crossed seven million in North America alone. Both regularly figure on the list of bestsellers. Hollywood too has taken the cue, with several thrillers like Body of Lies going on to becoming blockbusters. Studios are only too keen to see their cash registers ringing. by Indira Kannan

66

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

