Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

THE FUTURE SHOCK
Slow growth rate and rising inequality take the sheen off the Indian economic story
By Dhiraj Nayyar

T
BREAKOUT NATIONS: IN PURSUIT OFTHE NEXT ECONOMIC MIRACLES
byRuchir Sharma Norton Price: RS 1,400 Pages: 292 BETWEEN THE COVERS At the core of Breakout Nations is the counterintuitive argument that the boom of the mid2000s was a blip in the long historical trend for emerging economies and that the next decade may be one of decelerating.

o predict the future is the chosen profession of astrologers and favourite pastime of economists. Ruchir Sharma is neither, but his stake in calling the future right is higher. As the head of Morgan Stanley's Emerging Markets Equities division, he has to put his (or at least his clients') money where his mouth is. Those who are looking for a book that will predict the fate of emerging economies in 2030 or 2040, will be disappointed by Breakout Nations. Sharma's reason for not looking that far ahead is rational enough. No one really knows how things will turn out that far into the future. Most CEOs, investors and politicians, who determine the fate of major economies, set a three-seven year horizon. Breakout Nations is very much a book about the next decade, as it is about the decade gone by. History is often the best guide to the future. Emerging economies, which include India, would like the history of the boom years between 2003 and 2007 to repeat itself. Sharma says that is unlikely. At the core of this impressive book is the counter-intuitive argument that the boom of the mid-2000s was a blip in the long historical trend for emerging economies and that the next decade may be one of decelerating. In Sharma's view, the much-hyped decline of the West and emergence of the rest may take a lot longer than optimists would like to believe. Even superstar China may be on the verge of slowing down to a 6-7 per cent growth trajectory. Its export-driven growth model is running out of steam as the advanced economies show few signs of slowdown. Contrary to popular perception, Sharma points out that there isn't much room for China to boost domestic consumption as a substitute driver of growth. That has been

growing at 9 per cent annually for 30 years. Any faster, and inflation would become a big problem. The prognosis for India is much bleaker. Unlike China, it has the demographic advantage of a younger population. Unlike China, its state had limited capacity to either provide world-class infrastructure or to pursue tough policy reforms. The book warns Indian politicians of the complacency that came from the boom years of 20032007. For all the comparisons with China, Sharma worries about India meeting the fate of Brazil instead, with flattening of growth rates, rising inequality and the unfulfilled promise of catch-up. Instead of the gigantic BRICs, the nations which may emerge fastest may be smaller but no less significant. These include the Muslim democracies of Turkey and Indonesia, both of which are set to become trillion dollar economies in the near future, and some of the reformed Communist countries of Eastern Europe, particularly Poland. Breakout Nations offers no easy formulae for success. Political systems may matter less than many believe. Sharma believes that leaders matter more. He may have a point. Vietnam, for example, has not emulated China's success despite a similar authoritarian system. The wisdom of economists isn't always helpful either. Some economies like Korea and China have grown rapidly with state intervention. Others like Brazil and India have not. On the other hand, the conventional wisdom of a sound macro-economic environment (read low debt, low deficits, low inflation) hasn't always powered high growth in emerging economies, South Africa being a good example. Breakout Nations doesn't subscribe to any received wisdom. It is certainly a timely alarm for the overconfident BRICs. Turkey and Indonesia are waiting to break the wall.  SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

APRIL 9, 2012  INDIA TODAY

65

