Cr ime

CONTRACTKILLERS
and goes underground. Kalia and his six associates took off on a `pilgrimage' to Shirdi, Solapur, Sangli in Maharashtra, Pavagadh in Gujarat, Bijapur in Karnataka and Madurai and Rameswaram in Tamil Nadu. The asking price for a contract killing is often renegotiated, especially if new information surfaces. With no clue about who Dey is, Kalia had initially settled for Rs 2 lakh to kill him. He raised his demand to Rs 5 lakh after switching on TV and realising that his victim was a well-known journalist. V. Balu, a criminal lawyer in the Madras High Court, also points out that the advent of modern gadgets allows deals to be struck differently. "A contract killer need not be present during negotiations with his handlers. 3G-enabled phones suffice. The money can always be deposited in a bank or through hawala channels," he says. Prices vary with the city and the quantum of risk involved. They range between Rs 50,000 and Rs 5 lakh in Uttar Pradesh, and upwards of Rs 10,000 in Tamil Nadu. Ansari's December 14, 2010, killing in Bengal was arranged for Rs 50,000. Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, however, remain the reservoir for sharpshooters. "Gangsters nowadays find it difficult to recruit local shooters, so they hire them from these states," says Mumbai Additional Commissioner of Police (Crime) Deven Bharti. "Widespread unemployment among the youth, especially in the eastern districts, is a key factor," says former Uttar Pradesh director-general of police K.L. Gupta. A Mumbai Crime Branch officer says sharpshooters from Uttar Pradesh get Rs 5,000 for killings in Delhi but can pocket Rs 15,000 for the same in Mumbai. The price of life is falling. "Mumbai gangsters used to demand up to Rs 25 lakh for a hit. With better assault weapons, one doesn't need to get too close to the target, reducing the risk of being caught or felled in retaliatory fire. Now they often settle for even Rs 1 lakh," the officer adds.
with Kiran Tare, Ashish Misra, Anup Dutta, Partha Dasgupta, Surendra Trivedi and R. Ramasubramanian

PRICE OFMURDER

RS 3 LAKH
By Abdus Salam

It doesn't cost much to take out a Shehla Masood or a J. Dey. As hitmen abound, contract killing rates slide.
tract killings, making mapping of changes in prices, modus operandi and weapons used difficult. Potential contract killers are often historysheeters. Sharpshooter Irfan, held in the Masood case, has more than a dozen criminal cases lodged against him in various police stations in and around Kanpur. Son of a cloth dealer in the Moolganj area of Kanpur, he was also a supplier of heroin. The hired guns are often poor. Satish Kalia, who eliminated senior Mumbai journalist Jyotirmoy Dey for the Chhota Rajan gang, needed money as his illegal house at Golibar in Santa Cruz (East) was demolished by the Slum Rehabilitation Authority. Kalia had packed his bags and left for his native town Thiruvananthapuram in Kerala. Rajan, allegedly, convinced him to come back to Mumbai and kill his `target'. An underworld contract killer from eastern Uttar Pradesh, now `retired', offers insight into the way such murders are transacted: "Gangsters send out middlemen to source people experienced in firing weapons, and these people bring in others. They get commissions for introducing new sharpshooters. The middleman has to arrange weapons to be used in the killing, mostly from Munger in Bihar, a popular destination for illegal weapons. The plan is discussed in advance--including how many rounds of bullets would be fired--and the contract killer follows the brief." A 2000 study, `Combating Organi-

Target Shehla Masood Accused Irfan and aides

Shanu Olanga, Salim

ubarak ho, ghar key samney kaam ho gaya (Congratulations, we did it in front of the house)." That's what Saquib Ali said after the August 16, 2011 killing of Bhopal-based RTI activist Shehla Masood. Three sharpshooters sourced from Uttar Pradesh, a bike and .32 bore pistols for them is all it took for middleman Saquib--who is otherwise a builder--to execute the perfect murder. The tab: Rs 3 lakh, paid by interior designer Zahida Pervez, 36, the main alleged conspirator. Cut-price supari (contract) killings in cold blood, memorably depicted in Company, Ram Gopal Varma's 2002 take on the Mumbai underworld, are back in business. Dawood Ibrahim recruited youngsters from Azamgarh and adjoining areas in eastern Uttar Pradesh who would visit Mumbai and melt away into the hinterland in classic hit-and-run style. But the recent spate of contract killings has unearthed newer points of outsourcing. These are Kanpur, where Saquib's hitmen came from, and Jhitkia in Madhepura, Bihar, where West Bengal-based cloth merchant Hira Ansari's killer Raju Debsharma was traced to. Some, however, are local recruits, as suspected in the case of the 2011 murder of Chennai-based RTI activist S. Bhuvaneshwaran. State police across the country do not maintain separate files for con-

M

Weapon used .32 bore pistol
Price Rs 3 lakh
(LEFT) SHEHLA MASOOD SHOT DEAD IN HER CAR; HER ALLEGED KILLER, IRFAN
PANKAJ TIWARI/www.indiatodayimages.com

(LEFT) SATISH KALIA, WHO KILLED JOURNALIST J. DEY (RIGHT)

Target Jyotirmoy Dey Accused Satish Kalia & 6 aides

Weapon used .32 bore revolver
Price Rs 5 lakh
BHASKAR PAUL/www.indiatodayimages.com

sed Crime: A Case Study of Mumbai City' by Sumita Sarkar and Arvind Tiwari of the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai, says roughly 60 per cent sharpshooters are under 35 and 96 per cent of them have not gone beyond Class XII. "There is no initiation ceremony or ritual. A `hopeful' is involved in a criminal situation to test his mental capacity," it states. The plan is often elaborate, involv-

ing a prolonged recce of the target's workplace, home and his or her movements. Middleman Saquib, contract killer Irfan and his two aides Shanu and Salim snooped around Masood's Koh-e-Fiza house in Bhopal for three days prior to murdering her. Raju Chowdhury, middleman in the contract killing of Ansari in Raiganj, pressed into service three local youths for Rs 25,000 to assist killer Deb-

sharma. Kalia flew to Nainital to collect a Slovakia-made revolver from a Rajan aide in early June 2011. Back in Mumbai, he recced Dey's office and house. Rajan aide Vinod Asrani helped Kalia identify Dey at a bar in Mulund on June 10. The next day, Kalia pumped three bullets into Dey's body outside his home in Powai. Job done, the contract killer meets the middleman, pockets the money,

62

INDIA TODAY  APRIL 9, 2012

APRIL 9, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

NEW

NEW

