Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

German Twist
Amy Jackson may have reason to worry. Indo-German model Evelyn Sharma, 23, will soon be seen draping herself over Prateik in Manish Tiwary's Issaq. Although she started out studying business and worked at a German law firm, she may turn out to be better than Jackson, having done an acting course from the New York City acting school Stella Adler. She even dubs her own lines. Sharma has been the face of Parachute body lotion, Park Avenue and has even bagged a role in Ayan Mukherjee's Yeh Jawani Hai Deewani. But we'll hold our verdict on this one.

SCREEN SCORCHER
Canadian model Mia Uyeda, 27, has clearly generated sparks with actor Kunal Khemu in Mukesh Bhatt's Blood Money. Their love-making scene has gone viral even before its release. She plays Rosa, Khemu's smart manipulative co-worker, who seduces him. Uyeda hosted the show India's Saturday Night Shuffle on MTV, did a cameo in Tees Maar Khan and participated in Khatron Ke Khiladi 4. Says Bollywood's newest import, "It was nerve-wracking to be intimate in front of the entire crew." She better get used to it.

UYEDA

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND THINGS THAT MATTER
MUST DO

Crossover Star
Kannada actress SUBBAIAH Nidhi Subbaiah, 25, often mistaken for Chitrangada Singh at first glance, joins the band of south Indian stars taking the leap into Bollywood. She was taken on board Akshay Kumar's home production Oh My God! after he spotted her at a party. Helmed by director Umesh Shukla, the film is based on a Gujarati B K RAMESH play Kanji Viruddh Kanji. A trained sailor, Subbaiah also studied civil engineering. She will soon be seen in the Kannada film Anna Bond with Puneeth Rajkumar. Ah, so she is a Bond babe.


52-day GoaWire music festival at 40 venues across the state, with performances by 60 international DJs, starting Easter Sunday.
MUST NOT

Fall for Justin Bieber's telephone prank where he posted a Texan couple's number as his own and asked fans to call in.
MUST READ

Julianne Moore's book on parenting--My Mom Is A Foreigner,which shows the Hollywood actor is not different from a working parent.
MUST IGNORE

SHARMA

Accusations that Lionel Messi sent secret signals to gun smuggling rebels in Syria with his dribbling skills during a match.

72

Volume XXXVII Number 15; For the week April 3-9, 2012, released on April 2

Compiled by Nishat Bari and

Prachi Rege

