BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

THE WHIFF OF 1969
T
Each week something happens, minor or major, to jolt a here is a straight connect between the knee and the tongue: Through the jerk. When a political knee jerks, party already in grip of ceaseless tremors. Examine the it smashes into your chin, cuts your tongue and catalogue of the past seven days. A former Maharashtra produces garble that you can regret in the luxury of time. chief minister is indicted in high-rise corruption. A former Mrs Sushma Swaraj is a veteran who has seen the seasons, national spokesman of the party is trapped in low-rise and is careful with words. She must be wondering which slip shenanigans. A court hears allegations of corruption against of the mind persuaded her to describe Pranab Mukherjee, the Union home minister. Revolt begins to unhinge the most the leader of her House, the Lok Sabha, and Hamid Ansari, successful Congress CM, in Assam. Rumour gives the chairman of the Rajya Sabha, as men of insufficient stature Congress CM in Andhra only a few more weeks in office. A frightened Government tries to frighten media with a for the post of President of India. To be fair, she possibly meant that her preferred candidate for President, Abdul private member's "Print and Electronic Media Standards Kalam, had higher stature than Congress nominees. But that and Regulations Bill, 2012". It seeks to legitimise censorship and authoritarian coercion through familiar means, like an is not what the world heard. A lapse lasts only as long as a news cycle. The hurry to annual licence renewal and punitive fines for "unverified name candidates is quite inexplicable. There are still six and dubious material", a phrase whose elasticity could weeks left for nominations; and 10 for the actual poll. This bankrupt most media companies through legal fees. Government, incidentally, never has a problem with is the time to ponder; judgment can come later. Long used to filling Rashtrapati Bhavan by selection, po- lawyers' fees: It pays them with your money. The author of litical parties seem a trifle bemused by the prospect of a gen- this proposed legislation is Meenakshi Natrajan, whose fame uine election. Congress is merely repeating what it did in rests on her proximity to Rahul Gandhi. Congress spokes2007: Throwing up names to check which will float, which men deny Rahul Gandhi's role; but you could hardly expect will be punctured by pellets, and which will sink under their them to confirm it. Curiously, neither the Government nor the Opposition has own deadweight. In 2007 Pranab Mukherjee was on the first Congress list. Mrs Sonia Gandhi sabotaged Mukherjee only a majority in this Lok Sabha. The Opposition is in disarray after he shifted from probable to possible, after endorsement since the largest Opposition party, BJP, has not successfully nefrom the Left. She then pulled out Mrs Pratibha Patil from gotiated the terms of reference for a viable alternative. The well-deserved anonymity, aware that a short deadline left Government is not strong enough to govern; the Opposition is little opportunity for debate. The early Congress bird does not strong enough to displace it. Government wafts along from not necessarily get the worm. crisis to crisis on this anomaly. 2012 is different for at least two reasons. After five years The situation is reminiscent of 1969. Exploiting uncerof Mrs Patil, Indians want someone with dignity, calibre and tainty with great skill, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi defied honesty as their President. Another sleight-of-the-hand her own party and put up V.V. Giri against the official choice might, just conceivably, muster Congress nominee Sanjeeva Reddy. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com up numbers in the electoral college, Presidential campaigns are conbut will be punished by public opinion. ducted in silence. When 1969's deals In 2007, discussions were about were done, every traditional line candidates, not victory. Today, between left, right and centre had Congress is racked with uncertainty blurred. No one was certain which because it heads a coalition that is inway the vote would go. Mrs Gandhi vulnerable on paper and vulnerable triumphed thanks to the Akali Dal in practice. Numbers do not bring staand the second preference votes of a bility; governance does. UPA 1 had west UP leader, Chaudhary Charan Singh. In six years, the Akalis as focus and cogency, as well as allies well as Charan Singh were in who knew the value of questions. Mrs Gandhi's Emergency jails; in That partnership of the willing has 1977, they routed Congress and degenerated into an alliance of the After five years of Mrs Patil, made Sanjeeva Reddy President. haphazard. Congress has destabilised Indians want someone with In 1969 Mrs Gandhi prepared two itself; and this infection has spread to dignity, calibre and honesty. speeches on counting day. One of allies. If the axis of a coalition beAnother sleight-of-the-hand them was meant for defeat, in which comes unsteady, the rim cannot hold. choice might muster up numbers case she would have resigned. Defeat in UP or Punjab or Delhi is only in the electoral college, but will Selection is tick-tac-toe. An election is a symptom; the wasting disease is a game with formidable stakes. shrinking credibility.  be punished by public opinion.

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

