Leisure
T R AV E L FA S H I O N REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Raining Films
In her debut film Oye Lucky! Lucky Oye! she played Dolly, the garrulous girl who tried to seduce Abhay Deol's character Lucky. Almost four years later, Richa Chadda, 25, has got the lead role in Anurag Kashyap's Gangs of Wasseypur, soon to be screened at the Cannes Film Festival, in the Directors' Fortnight section. She plays Rajini, wife of Manoj Bajpai's character Shaad in the film, which tells the story of the coal mafia in Wasseypur. Chadda, who is originally a theatre actor from Delhi, will be walking the red carpet with the film's cast. Wonder what she'll wear.
CHADDA

STARLET GUIDE
Becoming a foreign starlet in Bollywood is not as difficult as it is made out to be. Ask Russian-Australian model Kristina Akheeva, who is walking down the path set by predecessors Nargis Fakhri and Angela Jonsson. Land modelling assignments, get linked to young stars and make enough noise about taking Hindi lessons till a director takes note. Akheeva has been the face of Holii bags, Sunsilk, Park Avenue, done television commercials for Wild Stone deodorant and Dish TV. She is apparently also Shahid Kapoor's latest conquest. How about Hindi lessons and Kathak classes?

AKHEEVA

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND THINGS THAT MATTER
MIX-UP OF THE WEEK

In Daddy's Shoes
When she was 11, her filmmaker father Vikram Bhatt dedicated his autobiographical film Ankahee to her. In 2011, she did a cameo as a pianist in his first 3D horror film Haunted. Meet Krishna Bhatt, 17, who is acting in Dangerous Ishhq and will share screen space with Karisma KRISHNA BHATT Kapoor. Junior Bhatt plays a fictional character based in the Mughal era in the film, a rebirth saga spanning over six decades. She is currently pursuing her International Baccalaureate programme from Ryan Global School, Mumbai, and is more interested in making films than acting. Like father, like daughter.


Bobby Darling was part of a group of 50 women, among them Mugdha Godse and Pooja Bedi, recognised as achievers by a Mumbai organisation.
STAR OF THE WEEK

Hrithik Roshan is on a tour of Maharashtra shooting for a documentary film as the new brand ambassador of the state.
MISTAKE OF THE WEEK

In spite of several botched surgeries,Koena Mitra continues her relentless tryst with cosmetic surgery,inaugurating a third outlet of a cosmetic clinic in Delhi. . CENTURY OF THE WEEK Bollywood actor Zohra Sehgal, who conquered many hearts in her prime, turned 100 on May 5.
66

Volume XXXVII Number 20; For the week May 8-14, 2012, released on May 7

Compiled by Prachi Rege

and Nishat Bari

