NET FLUX

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI
A GEM FROM THE SEA OFTHE WORLDWIDEWEB

smart sheet

ARTIST'S IMPRESSION
Ranjit Bhatnagar, 47, an artist and musician based in New York, found poetry on the Internet, specifically on Twitter. By creating an algorithm that could source tweets across the microblogging site, he founded Pentametron, which houses rhyming tweets put together as poems.The poems are in iambic pentameter, a commonly used rhythm for poems, particularly in Shakespeare's plays.The website, with the tagline "With algorithms subtle and discrete, I seek iambic writings to re-

Angry and Gay
An NYTimes article published on April 27 revealed that homophobia could stem from latent homosexual urges. The article titled `Homophobic? Maybe you're Gay' , was written by Richard M. Ryan,a psychology professor at the University of Rochester and William S. Ryan,a doctoral student in psychology. Their article covers studies in the US and Germany among 784 college students.They found that 20 per cent of self-described straight people indicated some same-sex attraction.This could explain the behaviour of anti-gay activists like evangelical leader Ted Haggard and former US Republican senator Larry Craig embroiled in samesex scandals.

BHATNAGAR AT WORK

GORD FYNES

tweet", is updated with different 14-line poems everyday. While the poems can't rival the works of Tennyson, Milton and Frost, sometimes it is hard to believe that the poems were conjured through a computer programme.They are whimsical, funny and un-

knowingly profound. Sample an excerpt from a poem that emerged on Labour Day--"I absolutely hate the letter K; no work tomorrow! Happy Labour Day! :); I've never met a bigger hypocrite; Don't criticise the present.....live in it."

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for those who like to study the earth, play with numbers and photos. Download on your smartphone. Fragile Earth shows the impact of climate change on the planet through satellite images. . The Math Mage will get your kids counting again with the game that battles monsters through maths. . PhunnyPhace will let you mix and match features from different photos for that funny look.

web wow

Twitter Granny

Josephine Lamberti, 80, wants you to follow her on Twitter. Her Twitter page @J_DIMPS explains that she is on a quest for "80K followers (or maybe a million) before I die!" She has almost reached her goal and has about 65,000 followers, including actors Jason Segel and Hayden Panettiere as well as singer Rihanna.

viral video app buzz

Dance Wars

Tangled in Love
Having doubts about your relationship? Well, try the `Should I Break Up With My Boyfriend'app.This app helps you take a call on whether you should break up or make up.Adopting a scientific approach, this app tracks how you feel about your lover on a day-to-day basis for two weeks and allows you to record your thoughts.Then it analyses the data and displays a graph on the fluctuation of your feelings and offers advice. Sarah Gray, the app's developer, said that the idea was born out of a relationship in the past. She wanted to track how she felt about him and found out she was feeling "good"only 39 per cent of the time.

buzz watch

Tiger Diaries
Tigernation.org was launched in March to keep track of India's remaining tigers. Subscribers can choose a tiger to track on the site,identified on the basis of stripe pattern by park naturalists,conservationists and park visitors using their cameras.Upon choosing a tiger,they can read daily updates using 3D maps, look at photos and video clips and track the movement of specific tigers.

On April 22, a dancing Stormtrooper-- an evil soldier from the George Lucas classic Star Wars, was seen grooving around London. The man in costume, Danny Choo, 40, is a Japanese TV personality and has performed in Tokyo, Singapore and Paris since 2007. Most people stared at his rather zany shows, while some joined in. Dancing Stormtrooper now features on the official Star Wars blog.

MAY 14, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

