The World

EUROPEAN UNION
British, whose urgent efforts to balance the books have turned a once recovering economy into a double-dip recession. He could point at Ireland, whose public sector cuts of 14 per cent have driven the country into negative growth. In Spain, even before a single government job has been lost through austerity, the economy has is fast spreading across the continent. tipped back into recession. Across the eurozone, unemployment is now 10.9 per cent and rising. The votes against austerity in Europe are being watched carefully in both Wall Street and the White House as an indicator of what may happen in the presidential election in November. Like Merkel, Obama's Republican challenger Mitt Romney is committed to a hard line against government deficits and borrowing, but Europe is providing evidence that such fiscal probity takes a long time to work, if it works at all, and comes at a heavy political price. Obama may now hope voters have got the message that the Tea Party alternative is horribly painful. Fiscal conservatives look askance at Hollande and his Keynesian friends, believing it is no more sensible to try to defy the market than to defy gravity. It is the money markets that will make their judgment on whether a government is fiscally continent, by fixing the level of interest levied on new government borrowing. To defy the markets, Hollande must convince Merkel it is in her interest to allow the European Central Bank to bolster Europe's fragile banks and buy government debt at a reasonable price. But Merkel has her own electoral problems. Next year, she must convince HOLLANDE German voters she has protected both WILL ARGUE the European Union and the euro, which THATTHE hold the key to Germany's continuing prosperity, while safeguarding them PRIORITYFOR from what they consider reckless and THE EUROPEAN profligate behaviour by their indebted UNION SHOULD southern European neighbours. Since the Second World War, Germans have BE NEWJOBS. HOLLANDE been prepared, if not happy, to subsidise AP the rest of Europe, but now a new genEuropean governments, and last weekend toppled eration of young Germans, who have no guilt about their Nikolas Sarkozy in France and Lucas Papademos in country's Nazi past, are growing impatient at having to bail Greece. Those, such as the French Socialist Francois out those they believe do not work as hard as they do. Hollande, who have taken their place, are demanding The last word, however, goes to Keynes. In his that Merkel rethink her hard-nosed policies and replace Economic Consequences of the Peace, he predicted that if them with kinder Keynesian measures. at the end of the First World War the victorious Allies begSo, after a Keynesian renaissance followed by a gared the defeated Germans with crippling reparations, Hayekian `Austrian economics' retrenchment, are the extremist politics would arise that would lead to a second Keynesians once more on the ascendant? It seems so. world war. He was proved calamitously right. Hollande's first trip abroad is to Berlin, where his top Now, it is the Germans who are demanding their priority is to encourage Merkel to change her mind European partners endure swingeing austerity for at least about insisting on financial continence throughout a decade. With the recent electoral success of extreme parEurope. He will argue that the priority for the European ties, we are already seeing evidence of the dangerous trend Union should be a Keynesian programme to create that Keynes prophesied more than 90 years ago. new jobs and he will suggest that the problem with her sound money, anti-inflation alternative is that it has simThe writer is the author of Keynes Hayek: ply not worked. He might cite the experience of the The Clash That Defined Modern Economics

EUROPE RISES AGAINST AUSTERITY
Voters in France and Greece give the thumbs down to fiscal conservatism. The sentiment
By Nicholas Wapshott

he election results in France and Greece, rejecting their governments' harsh economic policies and demanding a softer road to fiscal redemption, represent the latest battle in an intellectual war that has been going on for more than 80 years. In the autumn of 1931, the British economist John Maynard Keynes turned to face his most intransigent foe, Friedrich Hayek, to argue that when an economy is in recession, it is the government's duty to intervene to restore growth and boost employment. He suggested low interest rates, deep tax cuts, and public spending to bolster demand, paid for by government borrowing. The Austrian economist countered that such actions would pervert the `natural' operation of the free market and would at best only postpone the painful day of reckoning. Despite months of vituperative argument, which the distinguished professor of economics at Cambridge, Albert Pigou, described as "conducted in the manner of Kilkenny cats", the two thinkers never settled the profound differences between them. Political MERKELMUST economists and finance ministers have RETHINK HER been arguing the point ever since. HARD-NOSED The Keynes-Hayek divide continues to dominate political discourse in POLICIES AND America, the European Union and REPLACE THEM Britain, as governments wrestle with the economic disaster left by the stock WITH KEYNESIAN market collapse of 2008 and the subMERKEL MEASURES. sequent freezing of financial instituREUTERS tions. At first, the Keynesians were on the ascendant as US President George W. Bush and then federal government ground to a halt. A similar story of blowing hot and cold on the need for Barack Obama hosed public money at banks to prevent them from collapsing. This was followed by a Keynesian government intervention took place in Britain, where the stimulus of nearly $1 trillion spent on tax breaks, hand- Keynesian Gordon Brown was ousted and replaced by David outs to the needy, bailing out the failing motor industry Cameron's coalition which pledged to balance the national and bankrupt state governments, as well as the funding budget within five years by imposing spending cuts of £130 billion and by firing 5,00,000 public sector workers. of large-scale infrastructure projects. In Europe, to protect the value of the single currency, the But no sooner had Keynesian measures been introduced than there was buyers' remorse. In America, angry euro, German President Angela Merkel insisted that governtaxpayers, pressed by high debt and the prospect of job- ments must pay their debts without delay, by imposing cuts lessness, formed the Tea Party to petition lawmakers to not and redundancies as savage as those in Britain. The result of such a harsh regimen has been widespread misery in only halt government borrowing, but to lower taxes. Obama soon found he could not persuade the countries such as Spain, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, and Hayekians in Congress to agree a further $500 billion stim- Greece which have over the decades accrued massive pubulus he insisted was essential to put Americans back to lic debt burdens. And one by one, as the tough policies have work. Instead, after winning the mid-term elections, taken hold, the people have rebelled. The revolt against austerity has so far broken 11 Republicans refused to compromise and the work of the

T

38

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

MAY 21, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

39

