UP FRONT

KANWAL SIBAL

THE NORMALSOCIALIST
hat does Francois Hollande's victory in the French journeys in the interim, not to mention early visits by our presidential election mean for India, Europe and foreign and commerce ministers to France. Evidently, Hollande's election has the greatest signifithe rest of the world? We know very little about him in India. Hollande's po- cance for Europe because France, along with Germany, has litical career has been confined to domestic politics, but been at the centre of the European project and this project without any governmental experience even though he has is in crisis, to the extent that the survival of the Euro is headed the French Socialist Party from 1997 to 2008. threatened, the weaknesses of the much-vaunted Foreign affairs has not been his forte so far, though now European enterprise are being openly acknowledged. he will be deeply involved in it as the French President Hollande is questioning the German nostrum of austerity has traditionally had a privileged role in conducting the and strict budgetary balance to address Europe's sovereign country's foreign policy. It is not too important if we do debt malady. He is proposing instead a strategy of growth, not know his views about India because Indo-French re- investment and job creation that would involve higher lations have matured sufficiently and do not await new spending and budget deficits. German Chancellor Angela leaders to discover mutual interests hitherto indis- Merkel's preference for Sarkozy over Hollande and the latcernible. Personalities can make some difference in in- ter's frontal challenge to German financial prescriptions for creasing levels of engagement with specific countries Europe and his intention to re-negotiate the EU's fiscal disbased on personal inclinations and judgment, but we may cipline pact sets the stage for crippling policy tussles benot expect notched-up attention to India from Hollande. tween the two key pillars of Europe. France and Germany Nicolas Sarkozy, who had no known interest in India will eventually find a modus vivendi as both have vital before becoming president, turned out to be very good for stakes in Europe, but any prolongation of the Eurozone India-France relations. He consolidated the positive mo- crisis because of basic policy differences that Hollande is mentum of bilateral ties under Jacques Chirac, reinforc- signalling would be costly for Europe and others. The hyperactive Sarkozy, always looking for a leadering French support for India's membership of the UNSC and international civilian nuclear cooperation with India and ship role, increased France's visibility on the internafortifying the strategic dialogue between the two coun- tional stage. He made mediatory moves in the tries. India may have selected the Rafale jet fighter for Russia-Georgia conflict, punched Iran diplomatically, led technical-commercial reasons, but Sarkozy's contribution the military action against Libya and adopted an uncomto creating a congenial political atmosphere for the deal promising language against Syrian President Bashar alcannot be disregarded. Given Hollande's background, it is Assad. He stood by his obligations in Afghanistan and has enough if he maintains Sarkozy's level of interest in India. been forthright on terrorism, including on Pakistan's role. Hollande's more moderate personality may temper this In the case of France, the perception is that the Gaullist political spectrum is better for India than the Socialists. hyper-activism. His intention to withdraw French troops This is partly because barring Francois Mitterrand, no from Afghanistan by 2012-end may require US-France parleys. On Islamist radicalism, his Socialist has been president in the AP PHOTO stance may reflect his party's softer Fifth Republic. When the socialist view on France's Muslim problem. Lionel Jospin was prime minister His misgivings about globalisation in the `co-habitation' period from and unfair external competition 1997 to 2002, it was President may incite more protectionist tenChirac's empathy for India that dencies in Europe, which worry guided the conduct of the Jospin India and others. His lack of enthugovernment. Hollande's success siasm for nuclear energy may immay not, therefore, automatically pact the scope of Indo-French comfort India because an unplans in this area. known entity succeeds a known Hollande has won as expected, one, but the strong foundations of but with a margin narrower than existing bilateral ties provide sufanticipated. Sarkozy lost more beficient reason to be at ease about cause of his personality flaws than the electoral result. Hollande's misgivings about his performance failures. HollNaturally, we should establish globalisation and unfair external ande will be, as he says, a more contact with Hollande quickly at competition may incite more pro- `normal' president. high level and invite him to India, tectionist tendencies in Europe, with a halt by our Prime Minister which worry India and others. in Paris on one of his westward Kanwal Sibal is a former foreign secretary

W

12

INDIA TODAY N MAY 21, 2012

