CAPITAL COURSE
The upcoming `metacollege'concept will make DU the only Indian university where students can mix-and-match interdisciplinary courses in one degree. In 2013, special four-year bachelor courses will be introduced with exit options after 2-3 years, a first for any Indian university. A joint degree with Jamia Millia Islamia is the first in line for collaborations whereby DU students can study at any external university of their choice. An e-learning portal featuring virtual experiments, online assessments, live lecture streaming and video conferencing will soon be launched across the university.

VICE-CHANCELLOR DINESH SINGH WITH STUDENTS

and personal emails. Soon, live lecture streaming, online assessments, online report cards and digital display boards will also be added. Technology isn't the only innovation underway at DU. The vice-chancellor also aims to revolutionise the existing course structure. His `meta-college' concept will be a first for India. He pictures a time when DU students will be able to choose their own courses at any college within the university. The university will also be the only one in India where students will be able to mix-and-match interdisciplinary fields in one degree. "Why should students be saddled with restrictions and predetermined courses? We all have an inner drumbeat that we must learn to hear and march in harmony with. I want my students to be able to discover their true calling. If a maths student wants to study a bit of piano on the side, so be it. It will only help him progress in life and academics," explains Singh. Under its cluster innovation centre, the first course to imbibe the metacollege concept will be a BTech in Humanities for 2012-13. All students opting for this course will be able to design their own path of study and research. "Many find a BTech in humanities to be an oxymoron. Tell me then, how much sense does a doctor of

``

We had a serious and dedicated team of professors who were also our best friends. The best days of my life were spent at DU. Rohit Bal
Fashion designer; BA History (Hons), 1983

''

``

College experience was unforgettable at DU. I was encouraged to follow my dreams. This is where it all started for me. Rizwana Iqbal

Assistant Lecturer, London School of Economics; BA Economics (Hons), 2008

''

1

DELHI UNIVERSITY

Ready for the Future
By Sonali Acharjee

An e-learning portal. Joint degrees with selected varsities. Mix-and-match courses. No wonder all roads lead to Delhi.
students can access pre-recorded lectures in 12 courses on the university's e-learning portal. By July, more courses, e-lessons, virtual experiment labs and e-quizzes will also be made available. "Before I leave office in 2019, I will ensure that every classroom in every college of DU is equipped with an LCD projector and a laptop. We have excellent faculty and I want students to be able to access the diversity of this university sitting in just one classroom. Imagine a time when a

hagat Singh was imprisoned here, the Gandhi-Irwin pact was signed in the next room and Lord Mountbatten proposed to his wife in the gardens outside. You are standing in history itself," enthuses Dinesh Singh, the vice-chancellor (VC) of Delhi University (DU), referring to his office, which used to be the viceroy's residence. A group of 20 research scholars of geology and zoology listen eagerly.

B

They've been given a break from the lab, for an unexpected afternoon of kaju barfi, coffee and conversation with Singh. Traditionally, VCs have been aloof from students, focusing more on planning and administration, but Singh is trying to make deans and department heads accessible to students. Delhi University is keeping pace with the capital it's situated in. Instead of relying on class notes and photocopies passed down generations, today, with the click of a mouse,

student of English at Miranda House will be able to listen to literature lectures from Lady Shri Ram lecturers," says Singh, who is a mathematician by training. He has taught at DU for the past 20 years. At the heart of the technological transformation is the advanced Information and Communication Technology (ICT) network that was set up in 2012 across 56 colleges. ICT was initiated by a grant of Rs 3.85 crore from the Department of Information Technology. The project aims to traverse geographical limitations and connect all 77 colleges under DU for the first time via a superfast electronic network. The benefits of this system can already be felt across the north and south campus with the network linking together books, journals, information

NUMBERS GAME

803 faculty members 77 colleges 13 departments/schools 15 : 17 male-female
student ratio

20,279 postgraduate students 1 : 29 teacher-student ratio 877 papers published in 2011

philosophy (PhD) in science make? We must learn to question the given and turn the thoughts in our head. A dynamic and challenging mindset is what I want students to take away from the university," says Singh. The VC is also hopeful on collaborations with other universities wherein DU students can undertake studies outside the university. This will allow a student to study for a degree at DU and at the same time take courses at IIT, Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) or any other university of their choice. A joint degree with Jamia Millia Islamia (MA in Mathematics Education) has been introduced and a degree in Health Education with IIT-Delhi, Jamia and JNU is also in the works. The introduction of a four-year bachelor's degree in 2013 is another ambitious transformation aimed at the existing course structure. The degree will allow students to opt for a two-year course (associate degree), a three-year course (bachelor's degree) or a fouryear course (honours degree). Students exiting in the third year will also have the option to return and complete their honours within 10 years. "I am looking forward to it. Sixteen years of education will mean that students will be able to apply to US universities for postgraduation without having to do an extra year of study

62

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

MAY 28, 2012  INDIA TODAY

63

GViswanathan
GUEST COLUMN
The writer is founder and chancellor of VIT University elsewhere. And the third year exit makes it convenient for those wishing to study further in India or take up employment immediately. I wish it had been introduced before," says Kirti Mathur, 25, who did her BA in English from Gargi College. Projects, seminars and out-of-thebox research proposals are increasingly finding their way into the university's agenda. These interactive exposures to the outside environment actually help strengthen the classroom experience. To this effect the university launched their `Understanding India' pilot project. The project will take 1,000 students on a train journey around the country, giving them the rare opportunity to study India as never before. "Dilli Vishwavidyalaya Gyanodaya Express or the `Don of Knowledge' will be the name of the train," says Singh. The entire train will be booked for the students and 30 faculty members. They will first travel to Mahatman Gandhi's Sabarmati Ashram and Gujarat Vidyapeeth. Then they will travel on to visit INS Vikrant in Mumbai, the Goan naval docks, Indian Space Research Organisation in Bangalore and Gandhi's ashram in Wardha. "It will be a cultural revelation. They will research on how trains function, help suggest improvements for various railway stations and experience diverse ways of life," says Singh. The journey will take place during university vacations in July this year and has already evoked interest from foreign universities such as Princeton, Columbia and Maryland. The train is being provided by the Indian Railways and a grant has been set up by the university to fund it. "Those were amazing days. Lazing around in the lush sprawling lawns. We had a serious and dedicated team of professors who were also our best friends," says fashion designer Rohit Bal, 54, who graduated in history from St Stephen's College in 1983. "But after classes came long sessions of intellectual trivia while stuffing our mouths with chai, gulab jamuns, mince and scrambled eggs. The best days of my life were spent at DU." 

Liberalise Education
Autonomy should be given to private universities. That will help in providing top-class education.
ducation should be kept away from politics. Wherever you have more regulations, you will also have more corruption. That is why private universities were propagated in the first place; to build an environment away from the trifling matters faced in public colleges. But the little autonomy private universities enjoyed is gradually being eroded. The set of New Regulations introduced by UGC in 2010 is a perfect example of this. Five years ago, private universities petitioned the Government to receive the status of `university' instead of `deemed university'. No other country recognises the term `deemed university' and it led to unnecessary misconceptions when applying for funds or collaborations. Arjun Singh, the then human resource development minister, set up the Tandon Committee to look into this. The committee recommended that private universities should be allowed to use the label of `university' while mentioning that the status was granted under Section 3 of the UGC Act. UGC's New Regulations now state the label will revert to `deemed university'. It also states that the chairman of the university trust cannot be a chancellor. It abolishes the post of prochancellor and for every new board member appointed or course added, it says permis- VELLORE INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY sion needs to be taken from UGC. Education reforms and bills are usually about decreasing control; in India, it seems to work the other way around. When Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT) started in 1984, we aimed to be the best engineering university in terms of flexibility of courses, diversity of academic disciplines and quality of faculty. One of our first innovative ideas was to introduce a course called MA in Computer-aided Design (CAD) and Computer-aided Manufacturing (CAM). At that time, we were under University of Madras. When we sought approval for the course, the university recommended we call it MA in CAD and drop CAM. Then AICTE stepped in and asked us to call it MA in Mechanical Engineering instead. We waited almost six months for approval on just the name. Tell me then, why would any institution be motivated to enhance the quality of education? If this country wants private universities, then we need to remove the stumbling blocks. In the US, private universities get free land and they are allowed to sell part of it to raise funds. In India, the Government gives over Rs 500 crore a year to IITs but no reward is given to private institutions. An educational institute that has succeeded in providing wholesome education should be rewarded. Only then will private universities be driven to enhance their overall quality. Private universities are needed. Not every student is lucky enough to get past the intense competition faced at top government institutes. What options do these students have then? Or what about field scholars who don't wish to be perturbed by policy hurdles each time they apply for funding? Private universities are the answer. This country needs to motivate, not hinder, the growth of these institutions. It's time that education was liberalised in India, just like industry and business. as told to Sonali Acharjee

E

64

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

