flnllTIP

CTfealuie

In recent times, higher education has emerged as India's major strength, especially in professional and technical education, and isthe envy of the developing world. India, with its diversity, fascinates one and all. According to Wikipedia, India's higher education system is the third largest in the world, after China and the United States. This became possible with the entry of the private sector in the higher education system, which was earlier seen as solely the government's responsibility. Private participation has not only accelerated the growth, but also added a new dimension to the higher education landscape. The private sector is the fastest growing segment in higher education in many countries around the world. During the past few years, more private institutions than public ones have been established in most developing countries and emerging economies of the world. There have been three phases in the growth of private higher education in India - first as private colleges (many of them becoming aided colleges), then os private deemed universities and finally as private universities established by law. Universities are established as major institutions for providing higher education and research opportunities to the youth for shaping their future. Universities world-over perform many additional functions nowadays, such as undertaking sponsored R&D, providing knowledge-based advice and consultancy, preparation/publication of educational material and extending services to society. As a result, the development of university education and research has been receiving high priority worldwide and in India. Let's take a look at some of the major contributors to the development of Education in India.

IN

WITH

Suneel Galgotia CHANCELLOR

и What differentiates Galgotias University from other universities? Galgotias University has been founded with a vision to create and perpetuate a thinking ecosystem for the education of outstanding students so as to enlarge their thinking and imagination. When we started Galgotias Educational Institutions, we had one clear objective: that we would create institutions, not mere organisations. The mission of Galgotias University is to enable the finest student and faculty bodies to learn together, through the most evolved education processes in an atmosphere of rigour and discipline. Galgotias believes that for India to become a world leader in innovation, it needs an ecosystem that develops mature Thinking Quotient as a continuous process. We cal! this Thinking Quotient and it is the pursuit of this unique value that differentiates Galgotias University from all others. * What global advantages is Galgotias University bringing to India? We have put a number of global level academic building blocks into place to ensure that Galgotias University serves as a beacon of excellence for all to emulate for generations to come. FIRST, we firmly believe that only the finest minds can shape the finest minds of the future, for life. This is why Galgotias University's global-level faculty comprises the finest academic minds drawn from Purdue University, Georgia Tech, Oakland, Arkansas State University & National University Singapore. I SECONDLY to augment our quest for academic : excellence, we have put in place a basket of International pedagogies right from the beginning. These bring out the best in every student and enable students 11@ maximise their potential. This makes sure that students are able to pursue their ambitions as well as their passions in a balanced manner, so as to develop as-complete human beings. ^ * What building blocks enable Gaigotias to get ,100% placements? Gaigotias industry-led syllabus enables comprehensive

student training, industry-relevant project support, industry visits and internships, hands-on technical and soft skills training. Extensive interaction with domain experts ensures the absolute job-readiness of each student. Industry and media surveys reveal placements of 100% every year. Key recruiters like Infosys are recruiting in ever-greater numbers every year because they huge growth in the quality of Galgotias students. и How important is research and development at Galgotias University? We have empowered our students with the power of thinking quotient, the art of experiential learning and skills to learn continuously for life. This is supported with Galgotias University's research-driven education, huge laboratory infrastructure and dedicated research-oriented faculty with a proven track record of instilling a research culture in the students body right from year one. Recently, Galgotias has done India proud. NASA has recognised Galgotias1 talent by selecting the Moon-Buggy designed by Galgotias student's for permanent exhibit at the NASA Marshall Space Centre, Huntsville, Alabama, U.S.A. What is even more credit worthy that NASA has selected Galgotias among five Universities from across the globe and Galgotias is the only private university to be selected from India. и How do you ensure quality in terms of student enrolment as well as quality faculty? To ensure this we take students of good merit only, like in the case of engineering, students with less than 85%(PCM) do not qualify for admission at Galgotias University, Diligent students with a serious bent of mind are drawn to the global level educational facilities and practices at Galgotias University. High quality intake applies to the faculty too. The basic qualification for teaching here is a Ph.D., so that even first year students are taught by Ph.D. level faculty who have studied and taught in institutions of excellence across the world. All faculties have to be the best in their respective fields and from the finest academic institutions of the world.

AnimPACTreatiire

ARC University Shimla

SCALING THE ZENITH OF EXCELLENCE
estled in the majestic Himalayan Mountains, APG Shimla has built a campus that embodies its vision of the future. From futuristic classrooms and accommodation facilities to a dedicated sports complex and 24-hour health services, all situated in the lushness of a thirty five acre verdant environ, APG Shimla students can look forward to living, studying, and blossoming at one of the most indisputably unique campuses in the country. The University aims at the holistic nurture of its students and unwaveringly believes that gaining knowledge of just one particular subject is not enough in today's hypercompetiiive wor!d. Hence; APG Shimla offers its students not only yoga classes and breathing technique tutorials, but also the option of choosing from a wide range of foreign language options, APG Shimla has also pioneered the use of music therapy, in which music and ail of its facets is employed to help the students improve and maintain their health. APG Shimla takes pride in the amazing quality of its faculty, a cadre of academically and professionally experienced teachers whose selfprofessed aim is to mentor and nurture the next generation. APG Snimla students will also have the opportunity to attend lectures and presentations from a distinguished group of guest lecturers, which includes world; renowned experts and corporate leaders. Overall, the faculty encourages creativity and independence with the watchwords b":"" '""" '*""* и--* *- l teach our students what to think, but how to think" ~~. Practical training courses and internships are an integral part of a comprehensive education; they provide students with a gateway into trie world after university. Receiving practical training in the second, or even the first year, will give students the chance to learn things that they can apply in their studies, besides giving them a head-start after they graduate. MA! J'-" !:;jia, we believe in the value of our unique holistic philosophy; the unparalleled depth and breadth of our courses; %biit r ^ . i tonal faculty; our unwavering commitment to elgei и&ии.!<;>>и_. a ;=;-/ ess, flexible, and creative culture; and the cutting -u:^ telfe and infrastructy^ jphin a wg statable -.=!:; -.-x= >-:-'"- -,i* ol our campus. We aim to produce n^^K^s Bi it hex! generation of Indian and global Iea$er$<|:

ARCHIVINC EXCELLENCE THROUCH QUALITY EDUCATION
ituated at Pacheri Bari on the district of Jrmnjhunu (Rajasthan) on the Delhi-Narnaul Singhana - Pilani Road. Singhania University has a campus that covers an area of about thirty acres of land is picturesque and away from the din of the metropolis. The serenity of the hills around the campus provides just the right environment for the students to pursuer education. The Singhania University came in existence by the inspirations of Smt. Narmada Devi Singhania, mother of the founder Shri. D.C. Singhania. Inaugurated on the 21st of October 2007 by a great visionary and a philanthropist, Shri D.C. Singhania to impart quality education of world class standards, reflecting the latest advances in the field of education and research with state-of-the-art academic and administrative infrastructure; the University boasts of a well stocked and fully furnished library, well equipped labs, facilities for both indoor and outdoor sports activities. The institute also has well equipped and spacious hostels separate for boys and girls along with we 11-furnished cottages for faculty, wide open spaces, lush green lawns, colourful flowerbeds and well kept orchards in sylvan surroundings.

S

Singhania University offers world-class infrastructure, highly qualified and dedicated faculties and excellent environment for academic and intellectual growth. The faculty is fully committed to impart quality education by investing all its skills and knowledge. The University endeavours not only to produce excellent academic results but also to produce excellent and successful professionals. The University offers diploma courses in a wide of subjects ranging from yoga to journalism along with B.Sc, M.Sc, B.A, B.Tech and M.Tech courses in a wide range of disciplines. The enterprising chancellor Shri D.C. Singhania speaks on behalf of this esteemed University saying, "Due to negative growth population in developed countries, demand for educated professionals is increasing day by day and our goal is to provide such education as may suit the emerging employment opportunities globally. We, being a University Campus, have got the freedom to design our courses and practical training in a way that would enable the students to get gainfully employed not only in India but globally."

'

"

и

:

'

'

ии-

I

''

'

'

-

"

AnimPACTreature

G.D.GOENKA UNIVERSITY TO LAUNCH IN 2013
f.D.Goenka group is currently running over 25 schools all over the country and opening another 25 schools in the next 3 years. The Group has been in the Educational line for over 20 years. The group further expanded into Higher Education by starting the G.D.Goenka World Institute in 2009 with a tie up with the Lancaster University, UK by bringing their Management/ Engineering programmes to India. The group has successfully integrated all the LU programmes in India and is well on its way to becoming one of the largest institutions in India.
9 1 3 9 *

G

.D.Goenka University will be opening its doors with UGC approval in 2013, by bringing world class Education to the Indian masses with their own courses as well as tie-ups with world renowned institutions/Universities. Currently a new campus is being integrated to the existing infrastructure of 9 lac sq ft, of which in the 1st year of operation 3 lac sq ft space is being put in place. This is going to be a Green Building which will be closely monitored by the' Indian Green Building Council1 (IGBC) The Campus will have all state of Art facilities like Gymnasium, fitness centre, playfields, and the whole centre will be centrally air conditioned. In the 1st phase there will be 5 schools, i.e. .Management, Design, Law School, Engineering School and Hospitality. The Management School will be adding another 15 programmes, apart from the courses already in place from Lancaster University. The Design School will be collaborating with the World Renowned 'Politecnico Di Milano' from Milan Italy. The Engineering Programmes will be adding 2 new courses to the already existing programme that of Civil Engineering and Electronic & Communication Engineering. The G.D. Goenka School of Design will be the piece de resistance of the GD Goenka University. To be established in collaboration with the famous Politecnico di Milano of Italy, the school will bring the edgy Italian design education to Indian students. Italy is perceived world over as the fountainhead of good design. Even today each fashion season kicks off with the Milan Fashion week followed by Paris and New York. GD Goenka and Politechnico di Milano Schools of Design

represent the best of Indo-ltalian collaboration in the field of design education. Ranked no. 1 in Italy (18th in Europe and 48th in the world among according to The Times Higher Education-QS World University Ranking 2011), Politecnico di Milano is the best and the largest technical University having the largest school of architecture, design and engineering. Politecnico the Milano is a state University accredited by MUIR or Ministry of Education, Universities and Research, Italy. In the first instance the G D Goenka School of Design will introduce 3-year undergraduate programmes in Fashion Design, Jewelny Design, Knitwear Design, Communication Design, Interior Design and Product Design; and, 1year Masters programme in Strategic Design, New-tech style design, Accessories Design, Retail Interior Design and Brand Communication. The teaching and learning methodology of all programmes will be truly Italian. Currently the G D Goenka University is in the process of hiring faculty of highly reputable standards that have a Global outlook. The University is also scouting out for logical tie-ups with Universities from the USA/UK /Europe. For the Law school we are looking for tie-ups with foreign Universities for Exchange Programmes and Faculty. The G.D. Goenka group has a vision to make educational institutions truly world class. Being pioneers in this field, G.D. Goenka will benchmark educational standards at all levels, thereby setting the standards for others to follow.

