Spe cial Report CONGRESS
A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKER/www.indiatodayimages.com

STARING AT GROUND ZERO
AP PHOTO

Though the future of the Congress will be decided in 2014, the party is withering away in crucial states where there are no charismatic leaders to revive it

By Priya Sahgal

onia Gandhi doesn't need armchair committees to tell her what ails the Congress. All she needs to do is to take a good look at the map of the Gangetic plain. In the 167 Lok Sabha seats of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal that fall on the river's course, the Congress holds a mere 34 seats. Next time, the figure could be smaller. Nor are India's other rivers more helpful. The party is drying up in states along the Krishna-Godavari map that brought the Congress to power twice in 2004 and 2009, while BJP holds sway along the shores of the Narmada. But before the Congress can consolidate, Sonia needs to shore up the party morale. Morale can recover only with victory, and that is not the most visible element on the horizon. Congress chief ministers of Rajasthan and Maharashtra are facing dissidence from within, while the party is on the verge of losing Andhra Pradesh to a former Congressman. There is some good news from Karnataka and Gujarat. In the former, the Congress hopes to benefit from BJP leader B.S. Yeddyurappa's revolt while in Gujarat, the state leaders have called a truce to take on Narendra Modi in the 2012 Assembly elections. No one is certain about the Cauvery. The future of the Congress will be decided in 2014. But before that, as many as 10 states go to polls in the next 18 months. These include Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi and Chhattisgarh. With the exception of Delhi, the Congress has no charismatic

S

(FROM LEFT) CONGRESS CHIEF MINISTERS KIRAN KUMAR REDDY, PRITHVIRAJ CHAVAN AND ASHOK GEHLOT ARE UNDER PRESSURE

SONIA AND RAHUL NEED TO SHORE UP THE PARTY MORALE AFTER THE RECENT REVERSES

local leader to lead the campaign. The immediate challenge is the round of 18 Assembly bypolls due in Andhra Pradesh on June 12. Privately, the Congress has lost hope. There are few takers for tickets. "It will be a Himalayan task for us to win even half the number," says a senior minister in the state government who prefers anonymity to protect his candour. There are reasons behind his lack of self-assurance. One, the Congress has a weak chief minister in Kiran Kumar Reddy. Thus, the charismatic rebel Jaganmohan Reddy, son of the late Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy, has mobilised the youth and won sympathy. Another is UPA's vacillating stand on Telangana. When Sonia Gandhi met Kiran Kumar Reddy in mid-April, the Congress president is said to have told him to be more assertive and mediasavvy. Vayalar Ravi, Union minister in charge of Andhra Pradesh, has another solution. He is egging actor Chiranjeevi to sign his 150th film. He is hoping that the Congress will coast on the actor's credit ratings. But Chiranjeevi was hoping to play a larger role within the Congress and not on the silver screen when he merged his Praja Rajyam Party with the Congress in August 2011. Once the

press conference welcoming him was over, he was consigned to the dustheap. This is one reason why Yeddyurappa, the BJP rebel in Karnataka, is hesitating to align with the Congress. Another is the Income Tax raids at Chiranjeevi's daughter Sushmita's home in Chennai on May 11. A senior BJP leader told Yeddyurappa, "Chiranjeevi was brought in to counter Jagan. But look at the way the Congress is treating him." Nonetheless, Yeddyurappa's revolt has been a shot in the arm for the beleaguered Congress unit in Karnataka. Once condemned to the sidelines, Congressmen are suddenly sensing resurrection thanks to internal fighting in BJP. In Gujarat, the party's four state leaders--Shaktisinh Gohil, Arjun Modhwadia, Shankersinh Vaghela and Bharat Solanki--have declared a truce.

The immediate challenge is the 18 Assembly bypolls due in Andhra Pradesh on June 12. Privately, Congress has already lost hope.

This is largely due to the efforts of Sonia's political adviser Ahmed Patel who monitors the state keenly. The recent victory in the Mansa by-election has cheered party cadre. But while the Congress hopes to increase its numbers, not even the most optimistic leader is hopeful of wresting the state from Modi. In other states, the news is depressing. Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot is facing a rebellion from 22 of his MLAs. Thirteen of them met Rahul Gandhi in Delhi on April 3 and told him that the party would be defeated in the 2013 Assembly elections if he did not replace Gehlot. "Things have been bad for a while but we waited till the Uttar Pradesh elections. We hope you don't want to lose Rajasthan too," Uday Lal Anjana, a second-time MLA, told Rahul. The reason why Gehlot doesn't indulge his critics within the Congress is that he has the support of six Bahujan Samaj Party MLAs who joined the party after the 2008 polls along with nine independents. He has kept these `outsiders' happy by giving them ministerial posts and other perks at the cost of party veterans. But it is the Congress which will pay the price. The prediction is a rout in the next elections. According to a Congress general

34

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

MAY 28, 2012  INDIA TODAY

35

NEW

NEW

Spe cial Report CONGRESS
THE LAST SATRAPS
UTTAR PRADESH N.D. Tiwari, three-time chief minister of Uttar Pradesh till 1989. UTTARAKHAND N.D. Tiwari, chief minister till 2007. GUJARAT Madhavsinh Solanki, three-time chief minister till 1990. TAMIL NADU G.K. Moopanar, who left the party in 1996. MAHARASHTRA Sharad Pawar, three-time chief minister till 1995. He left the Congress in 1999.

The idea of a strong regional leader is history for the Congress
MADHYA PRADESH Digvijaya Singh, two-time chief minister till 2003. BIHAR Jagannath Mishra, three-time chief minister till 1990. He was expelled from the party in 1998. KERALA K. Karunakaran, four-time chief minister till 1995; Oommen Chandy, current Chief Minister who is holding office for the second time. HIMACHAL PRADESH Virbhadra Singh, four-time chief minister till 2007. DELHI Sheila Dikshit, current Chief Minister into her third term. CHHATTISGARH Ajit Jogi, chief minister till 2003. HARYANA Bhajan Lal, two-time chief minister till 1996 who left the Congress in 2008; Bhupinder Hooda, current Chief Minister who is holding office for the second time. ASSAM Tarun Gogoi, current Chief Minister into his third term. PUNJAB Amarinder Singh, chief minister till 2007. WEST BENGAL Pranab Mukherjee.

RAJASTHAN Mohan Lal Sukhadia, fourtime chief minister till 1971; Ashok Gehlot, current Chief Minister who is holding office for the second time. KARNATAKA Devaraj Urs, two-time chief minister till 1980 and Veerendra Patil, twotime chief minister till 1990. ANDHRA PRADESH Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy, two-time chief minister till 2009. ODISHA J.B. Patnaik, three-time chief minister till 1999.

secretary, Sonia is planning to change the chief ministers of Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh. Prithviraj Chavan, the Maharashtra Chief Minister, is keen to relinquish his job and return to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's Cabinet at the Centre. A favourite of both Sonia and Manmohan, he was sent to the state even though he did not have local support. But the Congress faces a dilemma: Most of the other chief ministerial aspirants such as Vilasrao Deshmukh and Sushilkumar Shinde face allegations in various scams. Unlike BJP, which has an array of regional satraps from Narendra Modi to Raman Singh in Chhattisgarh, the Congress has only Tarun Gogoi in Assam, Sheila Dikshit in Delhi and Bhupinder Hooda in Haryana. None of them rules large states. Sonia is insecure about promoting state satraps as she does not want any challenge to Rahul. As a result, the idea of a strong, regional leader is history (see box). This reluctance to promote a mass leader was evident as recently as the Uttarakhand results when Sonia opted

for the lightweight Vijay Bahuguna over the more popular Harish Rawat. Some party leaders fear she might do the same in Himachal Pradesh--one of the few states that the Congress is hoping to win in the next round of elections--by promoting a rootless Anand Sharma over the four-time former chief minister Virbhadra Singh. The party is yet to learn lessons from the past. In the 2010 Bihar state elections, the Congress got only four of
YASBANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

Yeddyurappa's revolt has been a reviver tonic for the beleaguered Congress in Karnataka.

the 243 seats but it is yet to change its state unit chief, Mehboob Ali Kaiser. In Uttar Pradesh, the Pradesh Congress Committee leader Rita Bahuguna Joshi handed in her resignation two months ago. But no new leader has been appointed. As a former Congress MP said, "The debacle of the Congress in Uttar Pradesh is the fall from H.N. Bahuguna to Rita Bahuguna." One was a former chief minister and a party stalwart while the other barely managed to win her own Assembly seat, Lucknow (Cantt). When Rahul visited his constituency, Amethi, on April 30 to conduct a post-mortem of the Assembly rout, he was given basic lessons in grassroots politics. Partymen told him that he needed to be more accessible and responsive and instead of promoting outsiders like Beni Prasad Varma, he should promote his own people. These are lessons that will help Rahul not just in Uttar Pradesh but in other states too.
with Uday Mahurkar, Amarnath K. Menon, Sowmya Aji, Kiran Tare, Asit Jolly, Rohit Parihar and Amitabh Srivastava

36

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

NEW

