UP FRONT

EDOUARD WAINTROP

GANGS OFINDIAATCANNES
wo years ago I was organising a retrospective of feel a little smell of Bollywood in Gangs of Wasseypur contemporary Indian cinema at Fribourg in but used in a very different way. In Gangs, Anurag uses Switzerland. During that time I took some movies the traditional form of storytelling in very different representing Mumbai noir and came upon the work of ways. I will give you the example of a Bhojpuri rap song Ram Gopal Varma. I saw his Sarkar, Ab Tak Chhappan which has travelled to the movie all the way from the by Shimit Amin, Ek Haseena Thi and Johnny Gaddar by Caribbean. It goes like this: I'm a hunter/She want to see Sriram Raghavan, and Black Friday by Anurag Kashyap. my gun/When I pull it out/Why women start to run? Why am I so impressed with this new cinema? Well, I was interested in this new Indian cinema. It was talking about a change in Indian society and it was trying to I think the humour is used in a very interesting way. find a new way to tell detective stories. I was suddenly Remember that's usually the most difficult aspect to made aware of the cinema of new Mumbai directors. export. But here it's remarkable because at the heart of Then I became artistic director of the Director's it, it is also a story about idiotic gangsters who can kill Fortnight at the Cannes Film Festival in 2011. people at random but will not be able to hold a girl's Coincidentally, I met Anurag at the Berlin Film Festival hand. I can say with confidence that audiences at Cannes in February this year. He told me his new movie was com- who watch this movie will be delighted by it. We are also pleted, and he was carrying a DVD of it. I asked to see it. managing a debate on May 23, a day after Gangs of The sound was not mixed, some pictures were not Wasseypur premieres, on the new Indian cinema, with definitive. But I fell in love with the cinema. It was an all the people we can find appropriate to the subject. I haven't met Ram Gopal Varma but I have met epic about gangsters but really it was the story of love and death spanning 60 years. And it was classical, Anurag twice now, once at Berlin and then in Paris. He is almost in the tradition of the masters of noir in the a fantastic resource for a lot of emerging new voices in Hollywood of the '40s. This cinema suggested a lot of Indian cinema. It's a great feeling to be on the verge of things, didn't quite spoonfeed the audience. I also found discovering new cinema. It is difficult to make people units changing tone wonderful. At one moment it was derstand it at first but then when you slowly find converts, cruel, at another it was comic. What's more, it was in it makes the journey worthwhile. I remember when we two parts. I had to wait three hours to see the second showed these Indian movies at Fribourg, a journalist at one of the premier Swiss part after I saw the first magazines, L'Hebdo, and I tell you I couldn't A STILL FROM GANGS wrote a story titled wait. It's 5 hours 20 minOF WASSEYPUR Coppola Masala and reutes in all, with a 20ally when I watched Ram minute break and for Gopal Varma's Sarkar, audiences at Cannes, we that's how I felt. are providing a family The last time I came tree of the three generato India was for the tions of three families International Film Fesportrayed in the movie. tival four years ago. I There's such a could sense the energy change in the air that I but didn't watch enough can feel. It's evident cinema. Now I'm glad I in our other two selecdid and I'm ready to tions from India at show it to the world. Cannes this time. There's Peddlers, which is directed by Vasan Bala, Edouard Waintrop is the artiswhich I've seen and is tic director of the Director's showing at the Critics' Why am I so impressed with this new cinema? Fortnight at the Cannes Film Week and there's Ashim Festival. India has four films Well, I think the humour is used in a very Ahluwalia's Miss Lovely interesting way. Here it's remarkable because at Cannes this year: Gangs of in the Un Certain Regard Wasseypur I and II, Vasan at the heart of it, it is also a story about idiotic Bala's Peddlers, and Ashim section, which I have not gangsters who can kill people at random but Ahluwalia's Miss Lovely. He seen but have heard a great buzz about. I can spoke to Kaveree Bamzai. will not be able to hold a girl's hand.

T

14

INDIA TODAY  MAY 28, 2012

