BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

HORSE WHISPERERS OF RAISINA
hen does a horse in a race turn dark? It has nothing hardly make him PM when she cannot trust him as to do with colour, obviously. This occurs when a horse president. A.K. Antony is closer to her comfort levels, becomes both visible and invisible; not because it is but is hardly the inspirational orator who can command the winds to bend to his will. P. Chidambaram could get out of sight, but because it is out of mind. Why would Mrs Sonia Gandhi consider a dark horse the temporary job, but his reputation is swirling in the option in the race for President of India when the field is full nether regions; not quite the right signal to send to a of those who claim a fairer pedigree, and at least one of country in a punishing mood. If Mrs Gandhi leaves the Cabinet alone, do her chances them, Pranab Mukherjee, would probably make it a onehorse race? Because every contender in the many shades of of victory in the presidential election improve? This, in pracwhite--pale, dawn-grey, ashen or saintly bright--carries tical terms, narrows her options down to chairs of the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha, Vice-President Hamid Ansari the handicap of consequences. Now that paper-white Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Speaker Meira Kumar. Both have their merits, but a difhas, in his prim, half-uttered, half-implied manner, finally ferent sort of handicap. Would they be acceptable to all sides admitted that Rashtrapati Bhavan could be his finest retire- of the one-issue coalition that Congress needs to elect a presment benefit plan, let us do a cost-benefit analysis from the ident? The present UPA has about 4,60,000 votes in an elecperspective of Mrs Gandhi, who will take all the decisions, torate of about 11,50,000. It needs to ensure the support of from initial to final. She certainly realises that this tired, a semi-ally or two; Mulayam Singh Yadav is the swing facrudderless UPA 2 has crossed its sell-by date as far as the tor who could be decisive. Mulayam Singh has hinted that voter, tortured by inflation and incensed at corruption, is he has a different Muslim candidate in mind, in which case concerned. This would be an honourable exit for Dr Singh, Mrs Gandhi would have to accept his nominee as the price creating the opportunity to attempt a desperately needed for his support. Meira Kumar would not be acceptable to new beginning. Moreover, despite the fact that his ministers Mayawati. Each variable has problems. It was all so simple five years ago. An unknown Pratibha constitute the most unwholesome bunch to have ever shared a Cabinet table, Dr Singh is still broadly acceptable Patil sailed through because while Congress had fewer MPs, it had greater confidence thanks to better leadership and in a non-executive office. Now for the bad news. Who can step into the chair to be popular support. A battered Congress in 2012 might find that when all the preening is over, Mrs Patil would be the vacated by Dr Singh? Dr Singh looks depressed now, except when he is abroad, least controversial runner. Mrs Patil's reputation is frayed, SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com but that is hardly hanging offence but in 2009 he came as close to in a culture where politicians put a laughing in public as he ever has or spell in jail on their CVs. Her most will. Even at the height of his acimportant qualification remains an claim, there was never any debate unshakeable loyalty to Mrs Gandhi. over the heir, although there was Mrs Patil brings a formidable uncertainty over when. At his first political advantage: Her candidapress conference, Dr Singh offered ture protects the status quo. Every his chair to Rahul Gandhi at a moother choice shifts some hinge in ment's notice. Rahul Gandhi should a structure whose foundations read Shakespeare: There is a tide in have eroded. Mrs Gandhi could the affairs of men which when even reach out to Opposition with taken at the flood leads on to forher name; Shiv Sena supported tune. More prosaically, time and Mrs Patil in 2007 for regional reatide wait for no man. After the Uttar sons. She could tempt BJP with Pradesh elections, the river went a quid pro quo offer for the vicedry. Since hierarchy is non-negotiable in Congress, an interim PM president's post. Suddenly Mrs can only be replaced by another inGandhi has a dark horse which terim PM. This is not a problem for could trip early favourites, with a Mrs Patil's reputation is frayed, but aspirants, most of whom would be feint here and a dodge there. that is hardly hanging offence in a perfectly content even if they could Mrs Patil has faded from public culture where politicians put a become PM for a day. The problem view, but she could be perched spell in jail on their CVs. Her most is that there are too many of them. where it matters: In Mrs Sonia important qualification remains an Pranab Mukherjee is a natural Gandhi's thoughts. As they say, it's unshakeable loyalty to Mrs Gandhi. the thought which counts. successor; but Mrs Gandhi will I

W

JUNE 11, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

11

