Wishful Thinking
Now connect with people around the world based on their last hopes and dreams. My Last Wish, created by Kirtan Thaker, a 25-year-old techie from Ahmedabad, is an app that links people with similar dreams.Available for free at the iTunes store, it has a "Wish Wall"where one can share one's last hope with the world.An icon of a palm will appear beside the wish that would allow you to `high-five'people with similar dreams."I believed in the possibility that there can be two persons in this world with the same hopes, dreams and wishes," says Thaker, who released the app this month.
THAKER

buzz feed

inter story

Dark Magic

Birthday Greetings
Pac-Man, the iconic video arcade game, is 32 years old.The game, named after its main character with a yellow face with a saw for a mouth, has become a social phenomenon. Developed by Japanese corporation Namco, the game was first released in Japan on May 22, 1980.You can navigate Pac-Man through a maze filled with dots, while also avoiding ghosts.

The Harry Potter series is far from over. At least not if director Leo Kei Angelos, 24, can help it. Auror's Tale, the first chapter in the 10-episode Web series, is set in New York City, where dark magic rules the underworld. Aurors, the wizarding world's answer to policemen, are the city's only hope. According to the trailer, the project will not feature any pre-existing character from J.K. Rowling's series.

viral video
Actor Isaac Lamb, 31, surprised his girlfriend Amy Frankel, 33, with an unabashedly romantic marriage proposal.While Frankel was driven through the streets of Oregon in a Honda CRV, friends and family emerged, dancing to singer Bruno Mars' Marry Me, an elaborately choreographed lip-synched performance. Lamb soon appeared through the crowd and went down on his knees to propose to his girlfriend.When asked whether he had any doubt that she would say yes, Lamb answered,"Not one.This whole production was a good insurance policy." The video has gone viral on YouTube with over 1.5 million views.

NET FLUX

Marry Me
by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

net ninjas

Rage Overdrive

app alert

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for the multi-tasker, the app junkie and the private person. Download these cool apps on your smartphone. Alarm Security System will alert you if your phone falls out of your pocket or is being used by another. OoVoo connects with Facebook to let you engage in multiple video, text or voice conversations. Clueful says which apps are culling personal details like your address book or browser history from you.

BROWN

Singer Chris Brown has had a lot of bad press, especially after admitting to having physically assaulted his then girlfriend and singer Rihanna in 2009. Now his fans, dubbed `Team Breezy' by Brown, are facing flak. They went into an overdrive when model Chrissy Teigen tweeted a joke at the Billboard Music Awards in Las Vegas on May 22 about Brown's rage issues. Soon fans were tweeting death threats and verbal abuse. The mayhem died down when Brown asked them to stop. Referring to Teigen as a `hater', he said they were turning her into a victim.

A GEM FROM THE SEA OF THE WORLDWIDEWEB

blog watch

PAYNE

Lunch Tales
Anine-year-old girl's blog highlighting the pitiable state of Scotland's Lochgilphead Primary School's lunches has gone viral. Martha Payne started the blog Never Seconds with her father to document the condition of food served at her school.Meals were rated according to taste, health and also the amount of hair in them.Backed by celebrity chef Jamie Oliver,the blog has gained popularity and Payne has been receiving pictures of school lunches from across the world.More importantly, her school has taken note of it and is now serving healthier meals.

JUNE 11, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

85

