Na tion
HIMACHALPRADESH

Shimla rejects Congress
Party loses for first time since 1986 in municipal polls
NEWLY ELECTED MAYOR SANJAY CHAUHAN (LEFT ) WAVES TO THE CROWD

T

he Congress's hopes of recapturing the government in Himachal Pradesh this fall has suffered a setback with its defeat in the Shimla Municipal Corporation polls. This, after having continuously ruled the civic body since its inception in 1986. With a 64 per cent turnout, the May 27 polls saw the Congress reduced to a minority of 10 in the 25-member

house. It also lost both top positions of mayor and deputy mayor. BJP improved from its previous eight members to 12. The CPI(M) pulled off a historic upset by winning both the mayor and deputy mayor's posts. Newly elected Deputy Mayor Tikender Panwar, 40, sees the verdict as "the urban middle class's deep disillusionment with the neo-liberal policies pursued by UPA 2". The very voters

who championed UPA 1 showed no hesitation in rejecting its reincarnate amid rising prices, he said. The verdict is a shot in the arm for Chief Minister Prem Kumar Dhumal. BJP may not have got a clear majority in the municipality, but to him it signals "a clear rejection of Congress". Barely four months ahead of the Assembly polls, this can only mean good things for BJP. by Asit Jolly

ODISHA

BACK IN THE NDAEMBRACE?
Odisha Chief Minister's most trusted aide turns against him, but revolt fizzles out
PATNAIK (LEFT) WITH MOHAPATRA

n attempted revolt against Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik by Biju Janata Dal (BJD) Rajya Sabha MP Pyari Mohan Mohapatra may bring Patnaik a step closer to returning to the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) fold. Mohapatra, a once trusted aide of Patnaik, had timed his revolt well, with the Chief Minister away on a trip to the

A

UK. Despite his efforts, Mohapatra failed to drum up the support of more than 33 MLAs in a party that boasts of 104 MLAs in a 147-strong Assembly. The revolt fizzled out. However, it was a red flag for the Chief Minister. Reacting on the overnight rebellion, a senior BJD leader said, "The realisation must have dawned on Patnaik that with Congress ready to lend support to people conspiring against him, he can hope to survive only with the support of NDA, even though he has cut off his ties with BJP in the state." The leader says that the Chief Minister is now likely to rethink his efforts to promote a new third

front. "He needs a tried and tested front like NDA," he added. If Patnaik decides to take such a step, he would be welcomed by both BJP and NDA who are looking for support from regional satraps. In fact, leaders of the state BJP, given their poor performance in the last elections, are keen on reviving their ties with the Patnaik-led BJD. Meanwhile, Mohapatra continues to be defiant. He has challenged the party leadership to take action against him. Until last year, he was regarded as a super chief minister who called the shots from behind the scenes. He also handpicked party candidates in the elections. However, his unbridled power had begun to cause resentment within the party. Some traditionalists who had worked with the late Biju Patnaik were beginning to question Mohapatra's authority. The Chief Minister had ignored them then. Clearly, he can't afford to do so now.
by Rakesh Dixit

50

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 11, 2012

NEW

