Mail

The Lost Tycoons
M AY 2 8 , 2 0 1 2

The UPA Government has resurrected the ghost of Socialist tendencies past. Retrograde policies, buried in the 1990s, are killing India Inc.

It can be very safely contended that India has grown in spite of the Government, not because of it.
V. K . T A N G R I ,
Dehradun

Stunted Growth
It certainly is worrisome that India's remarkable growth story has hit a major roadblock with the rate of growth plummeting from the exalted position of 8.4 per cent in 20102011 to an abysmal 6.9 per cent in 2011-2012 and the consequent fall of the Indian rupee to an alltime low ("No Business of the State", May 28). It is little wonder then that enterprising India Inc, that had scripted India's stupendous growth story when India opened up its economic doors, is today an embittered lot. The Government's policies of reverting back to protectionism and red tapism is alarmingly reminiscent of the Socialist pre-liberalisation era.
NALINI VIJAYARAGHAVAN, Thiruvananthapuram

PRABHJOT SINGH GILL AMRITSAR

Not-So-Pleasant Memories
Debates on Operation Bluestar have always focused more on "destroying sanctimony" of the Golden Temple and "hurting religious beliefs" of the Sikhs rather than on the annihilation of murderous militants who occupied the temple ("From Militant to Martyr", May 28). Punjab seems to be going the Pakistan way, where religious fundamentalists, with explicit support of politicians, eulogise and brand dreaded terrorists as martyrs.
ABHISHEK SINGH CHAUHAN, Jodhpur

The memorial Shaheedganj is apparently not solely in Bhindranwale's honour as the story seeks to suggest. As mentioned in the story itself, it would be a symbol agianst zulm (oppression) just like the adjacent Jallianwala Bagh.
GURSHARAN S. SIDHU, www.intoday.com

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

``
I am extremely surprised to read the following points in the article titled "No Business of the State", May 28, 2012 issue in which the private sector has been praised at the expense of the public sector, without ascertaining facts: 1. It may be remembered that Coal India fuels 80 per cent of India's power generation and has recently given a dividend of more than Rs 5,000 crore to the exchequer, which no private sector company is capable of doing. 2. It also has been mentioned in the article that "Zohra Chatterji, an additional secretary in the Ministry of Coal, ignored the instruction of India's most powerful bureaucrat" and "did not comply with the orders to sign fuel supply agreements with power producers". The fact of the matter is that it
JUNE 11, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

``

13

Mail
was Zohra Chatterji who in fact complied with the presidential directive in her capacity as chairman, Coal India at the time and sent the approved fuel supply agreements to the subsidiary companies for signature. As such the facts are just the reverse of what is reported. 3. It is also incorrectly stated that Coal India has no problem of forestry and environment clearance or that it has received any communication which it has refused to act upon regarding blending of imported coal with domestic output. I hope you will set the record right for the information of readers.
N. KUMAR, Director (Technical), Coal India Limited
INDIA TODAY

35
that Coal India has problems with environmental clearances. But in the view of experts, these claims are over-exaggerated. Sources in Government confirm that a suggestion to blend imported coal with domestic coal was made to Coal India. We, therefore, stand by our story. should have behaved more responsibly even if he was provoked, as he claims. The new celebrities should take a leaf out of Amitabh Bachchan's book and learn a thing or two about conduct in public.
GAURAV GUPTA, Kota

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J U LY 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

A Timely Transition
Indian leathers of a sweeping variety, deftly tanned and expertly finished, are now capturing several fashion capitals of the world. The hike in overall exports from about Rs 104 crore in 1971-72 to over Rs 313 crore in 1976-77, with a target of about Rs 365 crore for the current fiscal year, is a tremendous achievement. A traditional exporter of raw hides and skins stated that the industry has now transformed itself into a supplier of sophisticated processed leathers, footwear and other goods to several transnational markets. In fact, the transition through different stages on the export front--raw hides, semiprocessed categories and finished leathers--has been remarkably fast. Not long ago, overseas sales of raw hides and skins were banned to promote higher exports of semi-finished varieties like wet blue and East India leathers. A few years back, the government stepped in again and imposed quotas on dispatches of semi-finished types abroad in a bid to boost export of finished leathers. This policy decision set off a flurry of protests and controversies. The argument of the industry was that it was not prepared for the switchover to production of finished leathers in a signifcant way in the absence of modern equipment, adequate finance and necessary auxiliaries (chemicals). by Hubschber
INDIAN LEATHER BAGS INVADING FOREIGN FASHION CAPITALS

Trouble in the Air
In the midst of mounting losses, it is a sad commentary that quality of services by Air India continue to deteriorate despite the generosity of the Government, offering a bailout from time to time by pumping in taxpayers' money ("Captains of Crash-Landing", May 28). In return, Air India pilots resorting to a flash strike is not only painful but unacceptable as it has resulted in cancellation of services leading to immense problems to stranded passengers at various airports. It is time the Government put a stop to all the bailout packages meant for the national carrier and think of some alternative measures to devise a robust long-term solution.
K.R. SRINIVASAN, Secunderabad

It has become fashionable these days for pompous celebrities to regularly throw tantrums citing an excuse of being provoked. It is indeed ironic and certainly not lost on fans that while one Khan is in the news for all the wrong reasons, another has been grabbing headlines by trying to bring about a social change.
ANJUM M. SAMUEL, Mumbai

Clarification
This is in reference to my interview that appeared in the May 14, 2012 issue ("Blood Politics on Siachen"). I did not say-- "Now the time of harping only on the Kashmir issue is long gone." It has been correctly reflected that we had made a lot of progress on Kashmir (on the `Back Channel') and that Sir Creek was a signature away from a solution. I had also said that it is my belief that the draft of a possible solution of Kashmir that we were working on would have been acceptable to about 85 per cent of Kashmiris, Pakistanis and Indians.
KHURSHID MAHMUD KASURI, Former Foreign Minister, Pakistan

responds: 1.The story gave due credit to Coal India's financial performance by clearly saying that it is sitting on huge cash reserves of Rs 56,000 crore. This is, of course, because it is a monopoly. 2.The story said that Coal India under the acting chairmanship of Zohra Chatterji failed to comply with Principal Secretary to PM Pulok Chatterjee's first order to sign fuel supply agreements before March 31, 2012. That fact is not disputed by your letter. It took a presidential directive to get the process moving. 3.The story acknowledges

On-field Drama
Shah Rukh Khan's behaviour at the Wankhede is totally unacceptable ("King of Spoilsports", May 28). A public figure of his stature

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

16

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 11, 2012

