Nei ghbours

PAKISTAN
AFP

QUICK WHEN ITWANTS
AFP

Shame at Midnight
Taliban threaten teachers, free speech on campus
rofessor Mujeeb-ur-Rehman, head of University of Peshawar's English department, received an unusual letter on May 1. It was a sealed missive from Tariq Afridi, commander of the banned Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP). Afridi accused the university of trying to include author Salman Rushdie's Shame and Midnight's Children in its syllabus. "We will send our faithful to silence them (teachers)." The same day, Sarfraz Khan, head of the Area Study Centre at the university, received a similar letter. These are no empty threats. Since 2009, militants have kidnapped and murdered teachers in the restive Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. Only a few cases have been reported. Those

It takes a Pakistan court just over two months to punish the man who helped track Osama. But Hafiz Saeed still roams free.
By Qaswar Abbas

P

n May 24, a tribal court in Bara, the capital of Pakistan's Khyber Agency area, sentenced Dr Shakeel Afridi, the man who helped track down the world's most wanted terrorist Osama bin Laden, to 33 years in prison for "treason". Afridi conducted a fake vaccination campaign to collect DNA samples that helped the US Central Intelligence Agency identify the bin Laden family, hiding in a compound in Abbottabad. The verdict has deepened the already frayed relations between Pakistan and the US. The secret trial lasted just two and a half months. Tribal courts in Pakistan operate under the Frontier Crimes Regulation, a special judicial system that bypasses the regular justice system. In sharp contrast, the trial against three Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) operatives, named by India as co-conspirators in the November 26, 2008, attack on Mumbai that killed 166 people, has continued for over three years. The three accused--Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi, Zarar Shah and Abu AlQama--were arrested after a military raid on their Muzaffarabad base camp and produced before the special court on February 19, 2009. Jamat-ud-Dawa (JuD) chief Hafiz Saeed, widely suspected as having masterminded the attack, is also a free man. An anti terrorism special court in Lahore cleared him of any 26/11 link on February 16, 2009; the Lahore High Court subsequently quashed all cases against Saeed on October 12, 2009, and

O

suicide bombers in Swat district. According to its Bureau of Statistics, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province has 29,907 schools, 233 colleges and seven universities. This is the only province which has been directly targeted by the Taliban. Teachers lament that no specific security measures have been undertaken for schools and colleges. The provincial government has set up one police station with five security officers each at the universities. Poverty has prevented teachers from moving to other regions. "We have no other option but to stay on," says a teacher, refusing to be identified. The provincial police seem to be helpless. "The Taliban use ransom money to buy weapons," a senior police officer
AP

(LEFT) PAKISTANI NEWSPAPERS CARRY NEWS OF AFRIDI'S CONVICTION; MUMBAI ATTACK MASTERMIND HAFIZ SAEED

set him free. The court also ruled that JuD was not a banned organisation and could work freely in Pakistan. The decision to free Saeed disappointed many civil society activists in Pakistan who saw it as a failure to punish all those behind the gruesome 26/11 attack. "Pakistani courts have a history of taking years to decide cases. However, the tribal court's speedy trial in Afridi's case was evidence that the establishment wanted him behind bars," said a Peshawar-based lawyer who did not want to be named. He cited the release of the JuD chief to illustrate his point. "The Pakistani establishment did not want to put the JuD chief behind bars, so his case was never pursued seriously. As a result, he manage to secure release," the lawyer said. India has presented fresh evidence against Saeed

during the May 24-25 home secretarylevel talks in Islamabad. The Pakistani side is yet to respond to it. Saeed's release only added to Pakistan's poor record of punishing extremists. In January this year, Malik Ishaq, the leader of the notorious antiShia outfit Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, was released after serving 14 years in the Lahore's Kot Lakhpat jail. Charged with 44 cases of murder and terrorism, he was acquitted in 34 cases and granted bail in the remaining 10. His release is particularly controversial given accusations that he masterminded the 2009 attack on the Sri Lankan cricket team in Lahore. Other verdicts have only buttressed this popular notion of the courts being soft on extremists. On May 13, an antiterrorism court released nine suspects

THE TRIALAGAINST THREE LET OPERATIVES NAMED BY INDIA AS CO-CONSPIRATORS IN THE 26/11 MUMBAI ATTACK HAS DRAGGED ON FOR OVER THREE YEARS.

detained for the February 25, 2008, suicide-bomb attack on then Pakistan Army surgeon general Mushtaq Baig. On May 5, 2011, an anti-terrorism court acquitted four people accused of the September 20, 2008 Islamabad Marriott Hotel bombing in which 54 people were killed. Those acquitted include Mohammed Aqeel alias Dr Usman, who has been implicated in various assaults, including the March 3, 2009, attack on the Sri Lankan team and on the army headquarters in Rawalpindi on October 10, 2009. On May 25, 2010, Pakistan's Supreme Court dismissed appeals filed by federal interior ministry authorities challenging Saeed's release from house arrest. On April 17, 2009, the Supreme Court ordered that Maulana Abdul Aziz, head cleric of Islamabad's Lal Masjid--the target of a Pakistani Army clean-up operation in 2007--be freed on bail as he awaits trial. The preacher faces a total of 26 charges, including abetment to murder, kidnap and incitement through hate speech. I

A SOLDIER GUARDS THE AREA OUTSIDE A SCHOOL IN PESHAWAR

who managed to secure their freedom, have done so after paying ransom. In October 2010, the Pakistani Taliban murdered Farooq Khan, vicechancellor of Swat University. A Taliban spokesperson said it was because Farooq Khan was involved in propaganda against them and was writing anti-Taliban books. Teachers, however, believe the vice-chancellor was murdered because he ran a rehabilitation centre for 175 rescued

in Peshawar told INDIA TODAY. Sources told INDIA TODAY that the banned jihadi organisation Jamaat-udDawa too launched campaigns across various universities in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa to lure students towards jihadi activities. The Pakistan Army has been involved in operations against the TTP in the region since 2005. However, it has had little impact on the of kidnappings and murders of teachers in the province. by Qaswar Abbas

60

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 11, 2012

JUNE 11, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

61

NEW

NEW

