UP FRONT

RUCHIRA GUPTA

SAVIOUR OFTHE SECOND SEX
S Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's first stop when titution that was preying upon an increasing number of she flew into India in May was not to talk about de- girls in the US, India and the rest of the world. Her aides fence or trade but to meet with victims, survivors introduced me to key senators with whom I worked for and activists working to end sex trafficking. "Only if the the passage of a US anti-trafficking law. I testified to the buyers are arrested will the brothels close down and will US Senate as an expert witness. The Traffic Victim we be safe," 19-year-old Uma told Clinton. She then asked Prevention Act was passed in 2000. As I struggled to get the law changed in my own counher to wear a wristband saying, `Cool Men Don't Buy Sex', and join Apne Aap's campaign to confront the demand for try, so that instead of blaming and imprisoning prostituted sex trafficking. Secretary Clinton promptly put on the women and girls, the law would pursue the pimps and the wristband. Then she asked everyone in the room to wear Johns who bought and sold them, I decided to reach out to the band too. Soon, the entire diplomatic corps, members her. I wrote a letter to Secretary Clinton's office asking her of the Secret Service and even the travelling press corps to visit the women of Apne Aap and support our cause. I were wearing a wristband. Next day, most newspapers knew somehow that she would find time in her busy schedule and stand by the most marginalised girls in the world. published photographs of this. And she did this month in Kolkata. "Since the first time While walking into the conference room where other anti-trafficking activists were waiting, Clinton saw US I met you 17 years ago," I admitted ruefully, "I am still officials hustling out the press. She immediately asked me struggling to make trafficking a mainstream issue." She if I wanted to call the press back: "Don't we need them reminded me, "Remember, you were not doing this when here for the publicity? The press is important to make this we met." Her reminder was encouraging. Since making mainstream." Because of her, two journalists were the documentary, I had actually begun to play a more proactive role by organising vicallowed to stay. Still, I must SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com tims and survivors to resist have sounded tired while exploitation. The first way talking about the immensity women in power can help the of the sex industry. Again, she rest of us is just by remembersaid encouragingly, "Don't ing and paying attention. be weary; I'm your cheerLater when she was back in leader from afar." New York, she continued to Over the years, I have seen highlight the issue. Hillary Clinton demonstrating Clinton is not afraid to the same commitment time cross boundaries or support and again in whatever office uncomfortable and too often she has held, either through invisible issues. She has institutional support or perhelped me make visible an sonal encouragement to indiactivist strand in my own life. vidual women. It was 1997 She was not afraid to seek my when I first met her. She was expertise from India to get a the First Lady of the US and I law passed in the US. I began had made a documentary, to realise she saw women's The Selling of Innocents, issues as universal and unabout sex trafficking from bounded by nationalism. Nepal to Mumbai. I had travHillary Clinton taught me elled to the White House at that a powerful woman can her invitation to serve on the change the molecules in the first advisory board of Vital air we breathe--not only for Voices, an organisation she Hillary Clinton is not afraid to cross women in her own country but founded to empower women boundaries or support uncomfortable on the other side of the world. leaders throughout the world. She is creating a new path. I remember telling her then and too often invisible issues. She has that we needed more atten- helped me make visible an activist strand tion to the problem of Ruchira Gupta is founder-president in my own life. I began to realise she saw sex trafficking--new policies, of Apne Aap Women Worldwide, a women's issues as universal and laws and global protocols to grassroots movement to end unbounded by nationalism. dismantle the system of prossex trafficking

U

14

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 18, 2012

