Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

DIAMOND IN THE MUD
was not there on the riverbank, braving drizzle and wind, very English for the occasion, as the flotilla sailed down the Thames, recreating Canaletto's iconic canvas, The Thames on Lord Mayor's Day, circa 1747. I was not part of that swelling humanity in thrall of the Crown's enduring charisma, straining my neck for that wave of the gloved hand, that smile of gratitude, as the Queen, a woman of eighty-six, small and bespectacled, resplendent in an ivory dress, floated like an apparition of reassurance in an age of austerity in the grey waters of history. Instead, on the day the world's most popular monarch in a democracy celebrated the sixtieth anniversary of her coronation, I joined the revellers at the poshest street party in London, at Piccadilly Circus, and, enjoying a glass of bubbly, courtesy Fortnum&Mason, in the sheltering shadow of the Royal Academy of Arts, watched the spectacle for a while on a giant screen, as the house band of the Ritz played music. I missed the guest appearance of the Prince of Wales, the heir apparent who will never live another day like this in his lifetime, and the Duchess of Cornwall, who had just left the venue. In the pageant of simulated glory, a nation realised just how the power of symbolism neutralises the harshness of reality. On that first Sunday in June, they were all Elizabethans. As the monarchists soaked in Pimm's and pride, the harrumphing minority of Republicans took refuge in the inside pages of The Guardian. The commentariat has already exhausted history and sociology while dissecting the popularity of Elizabeth II. How come, in the imperium of popular affection, she is still Empress Shining, well, like a diamond in the

I

mud. According to a YouGov-Sunday Times poll, most Brits believe the Queen is more worried about their woes than the politicians, and an overwhelming majority prefers the monarchy to an elected president. The streets of London last weekend were a vindication of this, and, in an indirect way, an indication of the disenchantment with the political class. As the hardcore monarchist and Conservative columnist, Charles Moore, writes, "With Elizabeth II at the masthead, we cannot all be in the same boat, but we are in the same flotilla." The flotilla has been particularly reassuring, even rejuvenating, in the context of the sinking ship of 10 Downing Street. Two years ago, when David Cameron, personifying the youthful idealism of Conservatism, dawned on Britain, it marked a radical beginning after the drab, doctrinaire interregnum of Gordon Brown. It was a bold inauguration in politics, and the Cameron brand of social conservatism made Broken Britain its priority. Today, for a growing number of Brits, he is not Conservative enough either in society or in the marketplace. He is too much of a toff with a guilt complex to stand by the familiar virtues of Conservatism. And the economy, verging on double-dip recession, is defying the desperate remedies of the Chancellor. In the Kingdom of Disillusion, the plutocrats of the City, the politicians of Westminster, and the media in the wake of the News of the World scandal form the discredited class. Ironically, that old lady with a handbag is the only English institution that is changing with the times, and consolidating its place in the popular mind. The Empire is long dead but the Queen of Hearts still conquers.

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

ON THAT FIRST SUNDAY IN JUNE, THEY WERE ALL ELIZABETHANS. AS THE MONARCHISTS SOAKED IN PIMM'S AND PRIDE, THE HARRUMPHING MINORITY OF REPUBLICANS TOOK REFUGE IN THE INSIDE PAGES OF THE GUARDIAN.

S I G N P O STS
SWORN IN Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar, as a member of the TENDULKAR upper house of Parliament. He was nominated in April and is the first active sportsman to be a member of the House.

WON Bronze medal by five-time champions India, in the Sultan Azlan Shah hockey tournament in Malaysia. India beat tournament favourites Great Britain 3-1. The win over Britain will give India the much needed boost ahead of the 2012 London Games.

WON US national spelling bee contest by 14-yearold Indian-American Snidgha Nandipati. She made the winning move by spelling the French word "Guetapens", which means ambush. KILLED Ranvir Sena chief Brahmeshwar Singh,

after he was shot at by unidentified assailants in Ara, Bihar. An SIT of the SINGH state police, investigating the murder, arrested seven people from different villages in Bhojpur.

JUNE 18, 2012  INDIA TODAY

19

