SIMPLY DELHI

Inside

COVER STORY

BUZZ

Chill Out!

s-4

In the City

s-18

This summer, let's beat the heat- the fun way!
CULTURE

A check list on where to eat and what to shop for
CELEB SPEAK

History of keeping cool s-16
See how Dilliwallahs o f y o r e k e p t c o o l in the summers

Star Ideas

s-22

Check out how the celebrities do it

Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie Chief Executive Officer Ashish Bagga  Editorial Director M.J Akbar Assistant Editor Insiyah Vahanvaty Editorial Team Rewati Rau, Ekta Alreja, Sibi Arasu, Shilpa Mehta, Ekta Marwaha, Marcia Rodrigues Photo Editor T Narayan Photo Department Ravi S. Sahani, Reuben Singh, Vikram Sharma, Subir Halder, Sipra Das, Rashmi Hajela (Chief Photo Researcher) Design Associates Madhu Bhaskar, Vandana Nayar Production Surinder Hastu (Chief of Production), Harish Aggarwal, Naveen Gupta Layout Execution Ramesh Gusain, Ravishanker Singh, Rajesh Kumar Rawat  Group Business Head Manoj Sharma Associate Publisher (Impact) Anil Fernandes  IMPACT TEAM Senior General Managers Sonal Pandey (West and South), Preeti Kohli (North), Sunil R. (Bangalore) Kaustav Chatterjee (East) V. Somasundaram (Chennai) Jitendra Lad (West)

Cover photo courtsey ImagesBazaar

OUR PICK of the month
Eco tours
Here's your chance to take a hi-tech tour around the capital city, with the first-of-its-kind, Segway PT tours. Segway is now offering tours for you to explore the political nerve centre of the city. The tour is not conducted on foot, instead you get to ride a two wheeled, battery powered Segway PT or Personal Transporter, which has zero-emissions and is a convenient device to travel short distances. In their 45 minute tours which commence from the Rashtrapati Bhawan, tourists get to see the South and North Block, Parliament house, Amar Jawan Jyoti and the India Gate. The tours are conducted from 5:15 to 8:00 am. Prior to the tour, safety gear as well as a crash-course on operating the Segway PT are given. Cost Rs 1,350 on weekdays and Rs 1,630 on weekends Tel 0124 4610666; segwaytour.in

Want to tell us about an event?A new store? A restaurant?People doing interesting things?Anything newsworthy? Please email us at: simplydelhi@intoday.com

