SIMPLY DELHI

Culture

History of keeping COOL
See how Dilliwallahs of yore kept cool in the summers

I

BY SIBI ARASU

n the Tuzk-e Babri, the chronicles of the founder of the Mughal dynasty, Zahir-ud-din Muhammad Babur, he dedicates an entire chapter to the lament of the Hindosthani summer, especially in the capital city of Dilli. While winters here have always been beautiful, the excruciating summers can be an ordeal. Through the pages of history, we find accounts of how those from the yesteryears have dealt with the heat. BAOLIS A popular congregation spot for the Maharanis and women of the royal zenanas, baolis not only provided respite from the heat but were also hot spots for local gossip. Traditional step well systems that are indigenous to this region, the earliest baolis are set to predate even the Delhi-sultanate period. Baolis are simple yet ingenious systems of building wells below the ground level, with a series of steps for people to walk down and fetch water. Baolis such as the Rajaon Ki Baoli in Mehrauli boasts of a grandiose layout created through an impressive feat of engineering wherein the dreaded loo (hot wind) was converted to cool air through intricate cool-

ing systems. On the other hand, baolis like the one inside the Kotla Firoze Shah are places where religion and mysticism coincide- where the occasional sighting of resident djinns are often rumoured to have taken place. Some baolis across Delhi, the remnants of which still remain, include the Firoze Shah Kotla Baoli, Agrasen Ki Baoli, Rajaon Ki Baoli and Ghandak Ki Baoli among others. TEHKHANAS Legend has it that Colonel Skinner, a 19th century Anglo-Indian military adventurer had built a tehkhana in his haveli that was so cool that he could freeze ice there! While the story might be a case of a fantastical version of truth that was passed through the ages, tehkhanas themselves were indeed underground rooms which were constructed to get away from the scorching heat outside. Many havelis and masjids in the city boasted of tehkhanas which were similar to present-day cellars. These were expansive rooms built below the ground level, where the temperature would always remain at a constant, cool level. "Even the great poet, Mirza Ghalib, talks about the time he spent in his tehkhana with his books,

favourite wine and kebabs during an especially hot Ramzan," says writer and filmmaker, Sohail Hashmi . Tehkhanas such as the one below the Rang Mahal at the Red Fort were said to be as grand as the palaces above them and were places which were utilised to entertain guests during summer months. Tourist access to these underground cool rooms is not easy though, and with no formal way of attaining permission, it requires a great passage through bureaucratic hurdles to get to see them. THE SEED OF ISABGOL A long standing tradition in Northern India and a staple item in most kitchens of those days, Isabgol or psyllium seed husks are known to be greatly effective for a variety of purposes. The seed husks of this magic plant is can be used as a laxative for those suffering from constipation. It is also common knowledge that when the seed of Isabgol itself, without the husk, is added to traditional sherbet mixes, the resultant drink acts as an excellent coolant and offers relief from dehydration. Isabgol seeds can also be mixed with syrup, milk, fruit juice and salted curd with water.

The Baoli at Firoze Shah Kotla

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

