Na tion KERALA

FREE FALLRUPEE IS KERALA'S WINDFALL Mumbai's Night Raider
MAHARASHTRA KERALA

Sliding rupee is proving to be an advantage for Kerala's 25 lakh-strong diaspora which earns in dollars

EXPATS AT THE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT IN THIRUVANANTHAPURAM

ACP Dhoble raids a pub, gives Maximum City a rude jolt

O

By M.G. Radhakrishnan

od's Own Country alone appears blissfully free from the gloom spreading across the country on the rupee's fall from grace. Commercial banks in Kerala and families of the state's 25 lakh-strong diaspora--based in the Gulf and US--are enjoying the windfall caused by the unabated free fall of the rupee's value against the dollar. As the rupee hit an all-time low of Rs 56.24 against the dollar in last week of May, registering only modest recovery subsequently, the Indian expat community in the Gulf and US embarked on a feverish gold rush to take advantage. They are busy sending money to their families back home. The slide has also triggered record appreciation of other currencies in the Gulf region. The depreciation of more than 25 per cent in the past eight months is the sharpest decline among emerging market currencies. The rupee's value fell from Rs 44 against one dollar in August 2011 to Rs 56.24 by May 31, 2012. If a non-resident Indian (NRI) had sent $1,000 to his family in India in 2011, it would have fetched them Rs 44,000; today they will get at least Rs 10,000 more. To attract NRI remittances, commercial banks in Kerala are competing with each other to peg up the interest rates for tax-free non-resident external (NRE) term deposits, which rose from less than 4 per cent

G

n June 5, two cousins, Anamika Rao and Bindiya Handa, were attending a birthday party at Masala Curry restaurant in Oshiwara, a suburb of Mumbai best known for its TV studios. At 6.30 p.m., a police team led by Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) Vasant Dhoble raided the restaurant. He found that men at the restaurant were being charged Rs 3,500 for entry, while the women were allowed a free pass. Suspecting a prostitution racket, Dhoble arrested the cousins, alleging they were prostitutes.

of the case was adjourned on June 13, he said, "I am not against partying, but the partygoers must abide by the law." The law states that not more than 17 people should gather in an area of 200 sq ft in a bar. The cousins, both housewives, have not yet been released from the reform home. On June 11, they submitted their income tax returns in the court. Dhoble's argument that women were allowed free entry at the restaurant is the bone of contention. In Mumbai, most nightclubs offer concessions to women patrons as a mar-

C SHANKAR

in December 2011 to 10 per cent in January 2012, following the Reserve Bank of India's deregulation of the rates. The windfall is expected to help Kerala end up with more than Rs 60,000 crore by the end of 2012--four times more than its annual state plan. "Ever since the rupee began to depreciate, there has been an unprecedented rush by Indian expatriates to currency exchange centres in the

TOTAL NRI DEPOSITS IN KERALA BANKS ROSE FROM RS 31,585 CRORE IN 2008 TO RS 41,719 CRORE IN 2011 AND IS LIKELY TO TOUCH RS 50,000 CRORE IN 2012.

Gulf. Many have even taken loans from banks in the Gulf to send money to India and take advantage of the difference in value and interest rates," says K. Manoj Kumar from Kottayam. He works at a bank in the Gulf, and says this has ensured stiff competition among exchange companies in the Gulf to offer the best rates. "I got Rs 15.50 for one dirham, which even grey markets do not offer," he adds. Banks in Kerala are overflowing with remittances from expat clients. Total NRI deposits with banks rose from Rs 31,585 crore in 2008 to Rs 41,719 crore in 2011 and are likely to touch Rs 50,000 crore in 2012. "Our non-resident deposits have grown by nearly 100 per cent this year, thanks to the new developments," says P. C. Cyriac, chairman of the Kerala-based Federal Bank. The fall in rupee value has brought considerable dividends to exporters too. Spices such as pepper and car-

damom have registered a rise in export volume. The happiest is the FMGC sector as the money inflow has fuelled Kerala's consumption expenditure. Kerala is today one of the largest markets for luxury cars, jewellery and diamonds, expensive home appliances and electronic gadgets. According to auto industry sources, the sales of luxury cars registered a 35 per cent rise in Kerala in 2011-12 Many in Kerala, however, feel the good times may not last. "If there is no proportionate increase in the demand for credit and loans, banks would be burdened with a surfeit of costly funds. I fear a fall in credit deposit ratio," says Cyriac. He thinks the free fall of rupee will harm the banks in the long run. Exporters too are sceptical about the sustainability of the happy times. Kerala's booming construction sector too is not impressed by the rupee's fall. But for now, it's raining money in Kerala. I

(LEFT) A TV GRAB OF SOME WOMEN WHO WERE AT MASALA CURRY RESTAURANT; DHOBLE

The next day, Rao, a resident of Mumbai, and Handa, a Delhiite who had come to Mumbai on a holiday, were produced before a metropolitan magistrate in Mazgaon under the Prevention of Illegal Trafficking Act (PITA). The magistrate sent them to a reform home in Chembur, where a few bar girls were lodged under similar charges. On June 7, the cousins filed a suit against Dhoble in the Bombay High Court seeking compensation for "illegal detention and defamation". Dhoble claims the birthday party was just a cover for a prostitution racket. The management of the restaurant has refuted the allegation. As Dhoble stepped out of the Bombay High Court after the hearing

keting strategy to promote business. The incident has created a stir on social networking sites, with Dhoble being portrayed as the man who is trying to kill the Maximum City's nightlife. Criticising Dhoble's arbitrary action, comedian Vikram Sathaye tweeted "please don't discuss Dhoble so much that he gets an offer from Bigg Boss". Dhoble was Mumbai Police Commissioner Arup Patnaik's first choice to head the social service branch of Mumbai Police, which is entitled to take action against antisocial activities. Patnaik is a wellknown bar buster, and was known to raid pubs with a hockey stick in hand. The commissioner is unlikely to take any action against Dhoble. by Kiran Tare

52

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

53

NEW

NEW

