Mail

The Price of Vendetta
JUNE 11, 2012

The CBI crackdown on Jagan Mohan Reddy adds to the emerging iconic aura of the south's new political star and spells further catastrophe for the already crumbling Congress edifice across the country.

The targeting of Jagan Mohan Reddy by the Congress is nothing but an act of cutting one's nose to spite the face.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR,

Bangalore

Big Mistake
Looks like the Congress in Andhra Pradesh is in panic mode as it faces the prospect of being wiped out in the 18 by-elections to the Assembly and lone by-election to the Lok Sabha at the hands of Jagan Mohan Reddy ("The Price of Vendetta", June 11). Late YSR Reddy was allowed to have his way in return for sumptuous victories for the party at the Centre. The Reddys used this long rope to further their personal interests, and now this rope has ensnared the Congress. No matter how much distance the party might want to put between itself and Jagan Mohan, it cannot run away from the fact that his sins are also its own, since he committed them in connivance with the party in power.
J.S. ACHARYA, Hyderabad

SOMNATH SEN

All for Sale
If earlier it was `purchase' of individual MLAs for entry to Rajya Sabha, now the `purchase' is in bulk by dealing directly with party bosses ("Politics is No Business", June 11). But even then, secret voting is better because it is practically impossible to find out if some MLA might not have voted for a candidate after being bribed. However, secrecy can be made more stringent by introducing EVMs for Rajya Sabha elections too. Perception is that Rajya Sabha seats are largely saleable.
MADHU AGRAWAL, Delhi

Action by CBI against Jagan Mohan Reddy cannot be held unjustified in view of the large empire of wealth set up by the family during the term of Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy as chief minister. It is now proved beyond doubt that CBI can't dare to act against a corrupt and dishonest politician having acquired enormous wealth if he/she himself is a politician or a favourite of those in power.
S.C. AGRAWAL, Delhi

Reforms are necessary in Rajya Sabha elections for the most trustworthy party representation. Constitutional provision of opting for useless white elephants in the form of Legislative Councils in states should be abolished because these do not serve any purpose other than to rehabilitate favourites of political rulers.
MANI CHATTERJEE, Kolkata

By disadvantaging itself to harm its adversary, the Congress is spelling doom for itself. Truly, a thorough clean-up of the Congress's Augean stables is called for. But the huge wealth amassed by Jagan Mohan Reddy is shameful, to say the least.
RIYA PARASHER, Mumbai

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

``

``

Mail
It seems CBI has trimmed its sails to suit the prevailing political winds. The arrest of Jagan Mohan Reddy could not have come at a worse time for the Congress, smarting as it is from the recent poll debacle in the municipal elections in Himachal Pradesh. Naturally, a frustrated Congress has jumped the gun in ordering the Income Tax Department and the Enforcement Directorate to probe into Jagan's business well before the high court had directed CBI that Jagan's assets be investigated. But if the huge crowds attending Jagan's mother's rallies are anything to go by, Jagan's party should be romping to a handsome win in the by-elections.
KANGAYAM R. NARASIMHAN, Chennai

35
General's Mess
General Bikram Singh's mission `Operation Cleanup' is not clear ("Fresh Battle for Army Honour", June 11). Clean up what? The Army never went off track, and is as good as ever. It is only some of the senior officers who have brought disrepute to the organisation, which the new chief will do well to sort out. The problem is that the senior officers like to preach the core values to their juniors without following these values themselves. That is why young officers have lost faith in them. General V.K. Singh made one blunder, that of fighting for his date of birth. But he has done a lot of good for the Army. History will remember General V. K. Singh as the conscientious Army chief who had the gumption to fight corruption in Army. The new chief, General Bikram Singh. should build up on the positives of his predecessor.
R. D. SINGH, Haryana

Call of the Wild
The efforts of Gujarat in protecting the lions of Gir Sanctuary are worth praising ("Neighbour's Pride is Owner's Envy", June 11). The safety and security of the lions is a paramount consideration. It is really painful to know that the issue of alternative home for some lions at Kuno-Palpur Sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh has been dragged in the Supreme Court. The issue is sensitive and a decision should only be based on the advice of wildlife experts. There should not be any involvement of politics in such issues.
R. D. DESHPANDE, Bangalore

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J U LY 1 6 - 3 1 , 1 9 7 7

Admission to Respectability
Every season the "factory gates" swing open. Outside the billowing force of a new form of "labour" jostle, push and pull strings in an effort to get in. The product is a sheet of paper with an embossing and a few lines. It is a university degree --the sine qua non of respectability. As the high school results started pouring in, the long queues and the struggle for admission began in dead earnest. Every parent forgot the solemn sermons on the dignity of labour and wanted their sons and daughters to be admitted to the best possible college. The degree was more than a status symbol. It was the first lever to turn the lock which would open the magic box of a white collar job. With results from certain higher secondary boards still come to an estimated 4,00,000 school graduates would be seeking admissions in the country's 80 or so universities. In Delhi alone the estimated number of applicants was 36,730 against last year's 33,287 applicants. Delhi University colleges have a capacity of 33,000 seats. An additional 1,000 has been sanctioned by the UGC this year. The shortfall in seats is expected to be made up through admissions into places like the NonCollegiate Board etc. These official statistics of the University however fail to take into account the 8,000 students of the first year who have applied for readmission after they had failed to make it to the second year of the by C. Joshi degree course.
APPLICANTS LINE UP FOR JOBS

Winners Take All
The Kolkata Knight Riders winning IPL 5 final is a matter of joy. However, the premier league is purely a commercial venture. Unlike national or international cricket matches in which players play for the state or country, cricketers in IPL play for the sake of money. The felicitation ceremony organised by Mamata Banerjee was too over the top. There is nothing really for the state to celebrate. Unfortunately politics has entered every field and cricket remains no exception. In my opinion, for the love of sports and cricket, politics must be kept miles away.
MAHESH KAPASI, Mumbai

Border Relations
Even while Myanmar surely moves out of its shadow, our ambivalence in gainfully engaging Myanmar still casts a long shadow in our bilateral relations ("Myanmar Out of the General's Shadow", June 11). Socially, historically and culturally, we are much closer to Myanmar than China, yet the Chinese have artfully managed to consolidate their geostrategic interests in Myanmar. Should political correctness always blur our national interests?
R. CHAKRAVARTY, Delhi

Indian Army has earned enviable honour across the world by keeping its high tradition of servicebefore-self alive. Let it not indulge in petty issues that may rob it of its lustre. General Bikram Singh's sacred duty lies in bringing it back to its pristine glory while boldly overcoming the formidable challenges it faces.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

JUNE 25, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

