NET FLUX
news now

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video
This week, videos of a fake zombie attack in Miami, trailer of Quentin Tarantino's Django Unchained and sprinter Usain Bolt Miami zombie attack crashing into a flower girl 9.3 million in Oslo have gone viral. views

app alert

It's been an exciting week in the World Wide Web. Apple launched the Next Gen Pro laptop on June 11.The device is thinner than a finger and has a 15.4-inch screen. Olympic swimmers from Australia Nick D'Arcy and Kenrick Monk have been banned from using social media after they tweeted pictures of themselves with guns. Microsoft is revamping Hotmail's design. Leaked images show green as the dominant colour on the page.

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for the shutterbugs, the indecisive ones and solution seekers. Now make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. InstaCC organises your Instagram photos in a calendar format and finds photos from a specific date. FixYa gives free solutions to any problem--from fixing your toaster to finding the right camera lens. Thumb gives you a virtual opinion on any subject by just posting a question or picture.

> >

> >

Usain Bolt

Django Unchained teaser trailer

5,92,000 views

1.5 million views

> >
star of the week

tweet tweet

In the Limelight
These headlines topped the Twitter verse on June 11: West Indies cricketer Tino Best was lauded for scoring the highest-ever runs (95) by a Number 11 Test cricket batsman. News of the Euro 2012 football championship and badminton champion Saina Nehwal's victory at the Thailand Open dominated social networks. The plight of the disabled became a trending topic after the airing of the recent Satyamev Jayate episode. The most frivolous subject had tweeters replacing titles of famous films with `Troll' , such as `No One Trolled Jessica' and `Tanu Trolls Manu' .
#Tino Best
29,41,654
KUMAR MODI

* Views from when
videos were uploaded

net ninjas

Hitting Out
Contenders Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi vs Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar The Argument Modi criticised Bihar's slow socio-economic growth, while Kumar said Modi should mind his own state (Gujarat). Fans raised the pitch. Winner Kumar, because he was trending on Twitter on June 11.

Wonder Pug

web tips
On June 6, a Russian hacker stole over six million LinkedIn passwords. Ways to prevent this: Your password should have eight characters--alphabets,numbers and special characters. Avoid disclosing personal information such as pets and family names. Change your password once in four months.

#Spain Vs Italy
10,82,536

#Troll Movies
2,84,091

This little black pug has taken the web world by storm. Simply known as `Berks dog' , this picture of the canine staring at weirdonet a tennis ball, was first posted on June 6 on Live OCD Free, an app that will social networking site help treat people with OCD, is out. Reddit.The picture has Inventions launched this month been shared by 188 users include diet glasses that magnify and since then, the dog food and trick you into eating less has his own Tumblr and a smart bed that makes itself. blog page. Nearly 38,000 comments Malaysian Hi Yong created a portrait of Mark have poured in. Zuckerberg made out of pages from books. Justin Bieber's fans broke the Guinness World Record for posting 214,900 tweets in a day.

#For The Disabled
1,64,627

#Saina Nehwal
34,386

*Figures denote number of followers

