Na tion ASSAM

C

ongress MLA Rumee Nath's elopement and second marriage to Facebook friend Jackie Zakir has become the subject of a heated argument between two senior Assam ministers. Minister of State for Border Development Siddeque Ahmed and Public Health Engineering Minister Gautam Roy have accused each other of assisting Rumee in her marriage to Zakir, even though she is not legally separated from her first husband. This is not the first time that the two Barak Valley stalwarts, both of whom have been vying to become the undisputed leader in the region, have clashed in public. In January, Ahmed and Roy fought over the foundation stone-laying ceremony of All India Radio's FM station at Inatpur in Karimganj, Ahmed's home district. Rumee, 33, already married and mother of a two-year-old girl, and Zakir, 29, a lower division assistant in the social welfare department at Bhanga in Karimganj district, went missing from Silchar on May 22, only to surface on June 4 at Rumee's official home in Guwahati. Rumee, who is also a doctor, accepted her second marriage, but denied reports of her conversion to Islam. "I did not convert to Islam. I only adopted it to facilitate the wedding. It is Ahmed who helped me in getting married to Zakir, and is now spreading the news of my conversion," she told INDIA TODAY. Rumee is yet to divorce her first husband, Rakesh Kumar Singh, a doctor-turned businessman from Uttar Pradesh. Rumee's marriage to Zakir first came to light in the second week of April, when her Facebook profile status was updated to "Married to Jackie Zakir". She had dismissed the news then, saying that her profile was hacked. Ahmed has denied his role in the marriage, saying that Zakir had called Roy after the marriage on April 13. "I, along with another minister, was with Roy then. When Zakir called, Roy put the phone on loudspeaker for both of us to hear," says Ahmed. Roy has refused to react to Ahmed's allegations. "Let him say whatever he wants. I don't care," he told INDIA TODAY.

GITIKA TALUKDAR

RUMEE WITH ZAKIR

MLAMARRIAGE CREATES STIR
Congress politician's second marriage to her Faceboook friend sparks a string of allegations and counter-allegations
The issue has also acquired communal overtones. Local units of the Bajrang Dal and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad feel Rumee has disgraced her community. The Nrimata Bhairab Seva Samity, a temple committee in Barkhola, filed a case in June before the Cachar Chief Judicial Magistrate, accusing her of hurting religious sentiment by marrying a Muslim and still visiting temples in her constituency with her first husband before finally eloping with Zakir. Rumee's first husband has filed a case at the Silchar sessions court accusing her of theft and illegal marriage. The MLA filed a counter petition at the Dispur police station, alleging that Singh had harassed her mentally and physically. Rumee won the Assembly elections in 2004 from Barkhola in Silchar district on a BJP ticket. However, in 2010, she was expelled from BJP for cross-voting to benefit the Congress in the Rajya Sabha elections. The Congress rewarded her with a ticket in the 2011 Assembly elections and she won again. The Silchar District Congress Committee has now written a letter to the Pradesh Congress Committee President Bhubaneswar Kalita, asking him to take action against Rumee. "People in the party have better things to do than to be interested in my marriage," Rumee told INDIA TODAY.
by Kaushik Deka and Zahir Zacharia

MLA RUMEE NATH MARRIED JACKIE ZAKIR EVEN THOUGH SHE IS NOT LEGALLY SEPARATED FROM HER FIRST HUSBAND.

54

INDIA TODAY N JUNE 25, 2012

