AnimPACTFeature
How do you envisage bringing Indian ports at par with international ports? One of our focus areas during the last few years has indeed been to achieve international standards in the performance of our ports. The thumb-rule yardstick is to see how quickly a ship can turn around after calling at a port. '"'- --sessed our ports and have adopted a gy to make Indian Ports achieve tational standards through Capacity Creation, increase in the drafts, mechanization, development of adequate storage areas, 'providing seamless hinterland connectivity and attaining cost efficiency so that Indian Ports improve their berth Productivity and Turnaround Time at par with the best ports in the world. ; Could you enlighten us on the salient features of the Maritime Agenda 2020? The Maritime Agenda 2020 launched in 2011 by the Ministry is the vision document for the next ten years. It encompasses the vision for almost all aspects of both the ports and shipping sectors. Its salient features include ncreasing Port capacity to 3200 MT for Handling about 2500 MT of cargo, improving jjbrt efficiency, mechanisation of port Iperations, promoting Coastal shipping, Increasing India's shipping tonnage, increasing Indian ship building capacity from the 1% to |%. It also covers inland waterways, maritime (education, port connectivity, port security, safe fjavigation, etc. ;; What are the key challenges before the shipping industry? Jtie Indian fleet size is presently around 11 fmillion GT which is only about 1% of the global fleet size. The share of Indian bottoms in carrying India's EXIM trade is around 8.3% (2009-10) compared to about 40% in the late 80s. This is because the Indian fleet could not catch up with the growth in EXIM trade. Therefore, what is needed is a substantial augmentation of Indian tonnage. In the present environment, the sector is hampered by various factors such as lack of soft finance for Indian shipping, global economic slowdown, etc. For sometime now, we have also been experiencing low freight levels and growing bunker prices. We are taking necessary steps to address these issues. Will you go ahead with your plans to build a major port each on the east and the west coast of India, along with new shipyards as proposed in the Maritime Agenda? To augment Indian port capacity, I had written to all the Chief Ministers of maritime states last year regarding building new ports cum shipbuilding yards. We have received some responses and technical committees are looking into them. Do you think that the industry needs an Ombudsman or Tribunal, in other words, a Ports Regulatory Authority for shipping matters? Presently, in the absence of any institutional mechanism, disputes arising out of port related issues are referred to Courts of Law. This issue therefore needs a serious thought. A Inter-Ministerial Task Force chaired by Member (Transport), Planning Commission, is examining the matter.

7
INTALKWITH
IGKVASAN
Union Minister of Shipping

i Can you brief us on the current scenario in shipping industry? Indian shipping industry is presently having around 11 million GT of fleet size and the Indian seaborne trade has been growing at a rate of 12.25%. Considering the fact that Indian seaborne trade could increase by more than 3.5 times by 2020, the Indian shipping tonnage needs to be augmented substantially. The Indian shipping tonnage needs to grow at a fast pace. But, higher levels of taxation and unavailability of soft financing for Indian shipping, which is very important in the present market scenario, are proving to be major hurdles. i Does your ministry envisage entering into bilateral maritime agreements with some countries? India has bilateral agreements/MoU with Netherlands, South Africa, USA, Morocco, China, Iran, Singapore, Russian Federation, Turkey, Germany, Denmark, Finland, Poland and Sri Lanka. Also, we are at various stages of bilateral and multilateral negotiations with several other countries. > Don't you think some kind of tribunal is required to settle shippingrelated matters? Presently, there is no mechanism to settle port-related disputes. So far as tariff matters relating to port sector is concerned, we have a statutory body named Tariff Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) which fixes tariffs for major ports of the country. It has no jurisdiction over non-major ports which come under Maritime States. Presently, an Inter-Ministerial Task Force under chairmanship of Member (Transport), Planning Commission has been

INTALKWITH
I P K SINHA
Secretary, Ministry of Shipping constituted to examine all aspects relating to this matter. Given the growing incidents of oil pilferages & spill offs, any strategy to check them? The major ports have cameras-installed Vessel Traffic Monitoring System (VTMS) which can identify major oil spills in the sea, alert the concerned port and advise legal and other actions against the ship causing pollution and oil spills. The Indian Coast Guard is the nodal agency for combating, monitoring and reporting oil spills to the port. All major ports have the preparedness to tackle Tier-l level oil spills (up to 1000 MT). The equipment, chemicals and dispensers are procured by the Ports with assistance of oil companies.

CTf feature

rt THIS

Raising the bar with high calibre performance

M

umbai Port has long been the principal gateway for trade and commerce in India and helped transform the seven islands of Mumbai into the country's commercial capital. Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT) will be completing 140 years next year. Despite competition MbPT has maintained its relevance improving its ranking from 6th to 4th among the Major Ports in 2011-12. While traffic declined by 1.73% in Major Ports, Mumbai Port grew by 3%.
Opening of Ihe Alexandra Dock (Indira Dock) - 21st March 1914

Versatility - Its Mainstay
Mumbai Port caters to entire range of cargo types like break bulk, iron and steel, project cargo, edible oil, POL, coal, chemicals, automobile, cement, fertilisers, containers, grains and also provides services for cruise shipping, ship breaking, dry docking, fishery terminals, ferry terminals, CFSs, long term storage/warehousing, etc. This requires highly versatile manpower and diverse facilities as the variety in cargo types and ever-changing packaging pose a challenge to achieve efficient, cost effective and safe handling of cargo. Among all Major Ports, Mumbai is number one for automobiles, iron and steel & shipbreaking, and number two for POL and the preferred port for project cargo. Mumbai Port continues to be the number one cruise port of India with around 42 international cruise calls per year.

Busiest Harbour
The Mumbai harbour is the busiest with over 5300 ships visiting annually. It is the first Port in the country to install a Vessel Traffic System (VTS) for safe navigation. This system was recently upgraded with a new state-of-the-art VTS.

Measure to Attract Customers
Pro-active measures have been taken to reduce costs and make the port more attractive for customers. Pre-shipment storage facilities were extended for iron and steel, sugar & automobiles. Free days for general and container cargo were increased. Stevedoring charges for midstream discharge and top up operations were reduced. Concessional rates were introduced for coastal cargo, imported bagged cargo storage and demurrage on agri exports. Mumbai Port Trust counts top-notch corporates like BPCL, HPCL, ONGC, Indian Oil, Tata Power, JSW, RCF, etc. among its customers.

Land Bank
The Port with 1700 acres of prime land in Mumbai is perhaps one of the most asset rich organisations in terms of land value. Some of the most iconic buildings of Mumbai i.e. Gateway of India and Taj Mahal Hotel are on the Port land.

reature

Cruising to Future with Confidence
With growth of the city, the port's expansion plans have to dovetail with the requirements of public infrastructure projects such as Eastern Free way are coming up on Port land.

Capacity Addition Projects
 Offshore Container Terminal with a capacity of 1 million TEUs at a cost of ? 1460 crores is expected to be commissioned by March 2013 on EOT basis with port sharing about one-third cost.  Dredging work for Re-development of Harbour Wall berths in Indira Dock for handling deep drafted vessels (cost of ? 353 crores) and capacity increase of 7 MMTPA is likely to be awarded by June 2012.  2nd Chemical Berth project at Pir Pau will add 2 million tons capacity and likely to be commissioned by December 2013.  A dedicated Port funded rail-line connecting Wadala and Kurla is being developed to connect port traffic to the 5th & 6th line of Central Railway.

Other Projects
 Dedicated world class cruise facilities and marina.  Dry dock for small crafts in Indira Dock.

Corporate Social Responsibility
The Port has contributed? 5.01 crore towards the GSR Fund during 2011-12 and also has a Heritage Committee to take up preservation of the rich heritage and set-up a Maritime Museum. It is working with other stake-holders to improve the eastern water-front of the city. Some of employee welfare measures include quarters for almost 40% of workforce, a 246 bed hospital & five dispensaries, scholarships to children and education loan at concessional rates.

Port's Contribution to City
 28 acres of land developed as gardens and green areas  Sewri mudlands, a Mangrove Park, attracts thousands of migrating flamingos every winter for breeding.  Roads developed at Colaba, Ballard Estate, Masjid, etc. now managed by MCGM, 63 k.m. length roads developed and maintained by the Port for public use.  Maintaining two fishing harbours, that support the livelihood of thousands of people.  Two major terminals for public 1 ferry service between Mumbai 1 and Mora, Revas & Mandwa.

Port House

Mumbai Port Trust
An ISO 9001:2008 Port

www.mumbaiport.gov.in

