Na tion KARNATAKA

Caught in the Act
CBI accuses special judge of accepting a bribe to facilitate

former Karnataka minister Janardhan Reddy's bail

JANARDHAN REDDY

PATTABHI RAMA RAO

ining tycoon and former Karnataka tourism minister Gali Janardhan Reddy's fifth attempt to secure bail in the illegal mining scam has landed him in more trouble with the allegation that he was trying to bribe a judge. On June 9, the Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB) in Andhra Pradesh registered a case against the First Additional Special Judge for CBI cases in Hyderabad, Talluri Pattabhi Rama Rao, as well as seven others for facilitating Reddy's bail. He was booked for criminal conspiracy, criminal act by several persons, abetment of crime and subversion of judicial proceedings by corrupt means. Janardhan Reddy has been in Hyderabad's Chanchalguda and Bangalore's Parappana Agrahara

M

prisons since his arrest on September 5, 2011. CBI estimates that Janardhan Reddy spent at least Rs 10 crore in the cash-for-bail deal that prompted Rama Rao to grant him bail on May 11. But he was not released from prison in Bangalore as he is detained there in another illegal mining case. On CBI's appeal, the Andhra Pradesh High Court suspended both the bail order and Rama Rao "in public interest" on charges of bribery and corruption, on May 31. Rama Rao was appointed special judge to consider CBI-related cases on March 11 and this new court was constituted in April this year. On June 13, the high court set aside Rama Rao's controversial bail order and said that Janardhan Reddy could approach the special CBI court again to seek bail.

The revelation has sent shockwaves through the normally blase political circles. "How can a judge commit such a crime? The government must punish him severely if the allegations are proved," says TDP President N. Chandrababu Naidu. Lok Satta president N. Jayaprakash Narayan feels such acts will cause citizens to lose faith in the judiciary. What raised initial suspicions about a bail-for-cash nexus was the manner in which Rama Rao granted bail even though the CBI opposed it vehemently. After granting bail, Rama Rao rejected the CBI's request to keep his order in abeyance by a few days to enable an appeal in the high court. The CBI had to wait for three days to get the copy of the order and approach high court to get it annulled. Meanwhile, the CBI stepped up surveillance after May 11 and by May 22, got the green signal from Chief Justice Madan B. Lokur to gather incriminating evidence. Surveillance camera recordings from a hotel in Hyderabad, telephone conversations and other information pieced together by CBI suggested the involvement of Janardhan Reddy's brother, G. Somasekhara Reddy. Also suspected were Karantaka MLA, T.H. Suresh Babu of the BJP; retired judge T. V. Chalapathi Rao, a friend of Rama Rao; T. Ravichandra, the elder son of the disgraced judge; D. Dasaratharami Reddy, a relative of Janardhan Reddy; and T. Aditya, a lawyer in Janardhan Reddy's team. The high court has now instituted a detailed inquiry against Rama Rao and also launched disciplinary proceedings against him.
by Amarnath K. Menon

To gauge popular perception,the India Today Group has launched the PickYour President campaign. We invite readers to pick their choice for the next President.
ONLINE POLL RESULT SMS POLL RESULT

SMS PREZAFOR APJ Kalam 69.49 63.44

SMS PREZB FOR SMS PREZC FOR Pranab Mukherjee Anna Hazare 16.50 18.70 9.47 12.30

SMS PREZD FOR SMS PREZE FOR Hamid Ansari Manmohan Singh 2.95 2.50 1.59 3.06

Or To pick your president log on to www.indiatoday.in/prez<http://www.indiatoday.in/prez>

For the week ending june 13, 2012; figures in percentage

