UP FRONT

VINOD RAINA

LETTHERE BE FUN IN THE BOOK
mong the likely fallouts of the controversy around that the cartoon, first drawn in 1949 and seen by Shankar's cartoon in the Class XI political science Ambedkar himself, is derogatory. If it is alleged to be textbook is the possibility of rolling back the books defamatory and insulting then it must be put under the and the entire process that saw the creation of some of the scanner of rule of law, as defamatory charges routinely are. best school textbooks by an autonomous agency, NCERT, in The tenets of justice enshrined in India's Constitution demand that the Government, instead of accepting only the recent years. That would be a catastrophe. Faced with a mob-like situation in Parliament, with agitated and emotional argument, invoke the court of law MPs across party lines, including from Congress and its to decide whether the cartoon with the accompanying text own constituent parties skewering the UPA Government, it is indeed insulting and defamatory. MPs and media do not is inconceivable that the immediate response of the HRD decide on guilt and punishment in matters of civil disputes, minister could have been much different from what it crimes or defamation; courts do. Anything else would was--an apology, decision to withdraw the book in its damage the justice structure of the state immeasurably. More importantly, it would be terrible if the present form and an inquiry. The mob attack on Suhas Palshikar's office a day later must have added to the Government decided to dump the baby with the bath retreat of the Government. Dalits obviously form such a water by deciding to roll back all the books, or the process vital electoral constituency in India's politics that no of making books in place from 2006 after the adoption of party or government can hope to retain or come back to the National Curriculum Framework in 2005. For the first power if they are even mildly displeased; and in this time, the much desired involvement of a large number of case, they were wrathful. The reaction of the MPs was, creative minds and innovative practitioners in preparing learning material for schoolchildren was put into place however, on expected lines. Whereas one must always be aware and cognisant of through this initiative of NCERT, and the very best the historical injustices to Dalits and its impact on Dalit people readily volunteered. The drafts were overseen by consciousness, what was surprising was some prominent a monitoring committee which was anything but ornaDalit intellectuals proclaiming that Ambedkar was a mental. I was involved in recommending the axing of the prophet to the Dalits and any suspicion of defamation or complete draft of the Class III mathematics book, which disgrace would never be tolerated and must be punished. the writers' group heroically rewrote from scratch, in By such deification, the political relespite of time constraints. There were SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com vance of Ambedkar is in danger of many more examples of draft material being marginalised, to the detriment being changed, removed and rewritof Dalit interests, which ought to be obten once found unsuitable, including, vious at least to the Dalit intellectuals one must add, when deemed that it and academics, if not the political could be derogatory to a particular activists and MPs. Such deification of section of society, `hurting their sentia remarkable person who made the ments', a phenomenon that is becommaterial-rational philosophy of ing increasingly widespread in the Buddha the guiding doctrine for Dalit country. This resulted in many skircause is particularly ironic. mishes between the writing groups The 60th year of the formation of and the monitoring committee, but Parliament is also a time of celebration the process went on in the best acafor the creation of the Constitution that demic spirit, without creating enemade the Parliament, the judiciary mies of one another. Holding another and the executive possible, in which review by a committee headed by Ambedkar played a key role. These Professor Thorat is fine, but this state structures are meant to prevent should not be done with the intention or deal with precisely what the carof expunging all cartoons and visuals toon controversy saw unleashed: A MPs and media do not decide in one stroke without justification, and mob culture. One of these structures, in particular, with a view to recomon guilt and punishment in namely the judiciary, must now be almend reverting back to pedagogically matters of civil disputes, lowed to play its role; otherwise we crimes or defamation; courts unsound, uninteresting and boring could be witnessing the handing down books of the past. do. Anything else would of banana justice. Not everyone agrees with the agi- damage the justice structure Vinod Raina was a member of the Monitoring of the state immeasurably. tated MPs and some Dalit intellectuals Committee for the NCERT textbooks

A

10

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

