Mail

State of the Symbol
M AY 1 4 , 2 0 1 2

The office of the President has been devalued over the years by desperate governments. It is time to restore the status and dignity of the Republic's supreme constitutional authority.

``
The Next President
The President's is a political office and we need someone who can straddle, with equal efficiency and ease, both worlds of politics and statecraft ("State of the Symbol", May 21). The call of the hour is a president who is unbiased, has administrative acumen and fair decision-making ability. The office should not be treated as a retirement resort as Pratibha Patil did. What is desirable is a right-thinking candidate, political or apolitical, like N.R. Narayana Murthy or the tried-and-tested Abdul Kalam for another term.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore

The President's office deserves the best, and petty politics should not lead to a wrong decision, for at stake is the prestige of the whole country.
S A N YA M R A I N A ,
Dehradun

K M KISHAN

To Her Husband's Rescue
Lalu Yadav, for long, has conveniently used Rabri Devi to bail himself out of tight corners ("Lalu's Safest Bet", May 21). However, it is not going to be easy to upstage Nitish Kumar this time. The Chief Minister has a vast and faithful support base in the state owing to his proactive role in rescuing Bihar from the shambles that Lalu and Co had left it in.
SAVITA SEN, Kolkata

Pranab Mukherjee would be the ideal choice for the next president. Unlike Pratibha Patil, Mukherjee

In what is actually a long pending amendment of the Constitution, the provision of Legislative Councils should be abolished altogether, for it serves no other purpose other than rehabilitating failed politicians like Lalu and giving them much needed time to revive their careers, all at the taxpayer's expense.
BRIJMOHAN PANDEY, Allahabad

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  JUNE 4, 2012

``

is a man of stature. Moreover, his name has found acceptability among the Congress's allies. Sonia Gandhi cannot afford to overlook this factor when she decides upon the name of the UPA's nominee. After five years of sheer mediocrity, it is high time we had a person of stature as our next president
AMBAR MALLICK, Kolkata

Fall from Grace
The disgraceful fall of an icon like Rajat Gupta is very unfortunate ("Indian Icon in American Trial", May 21). Greed makes people lose their sense of judgment and indulge in immoral activities that lead to their downfall. If he is innocent, then a veteran of his status should be careful about disclosing board proceedings.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Mail
Insulting Indian Women
This refers to your cover story ("The Booby Trap", April 30), which shows the cleavage of a female breast. The article begins, "Woo hoo! It's Happy Cleavage Day. How should I celebrate?" Then follow the details about breast surgery to increase the female breasts to make them more attractive to men. This is said to have become a rage in India. The article mentions the cost--Rs 1.5 to 2.5 lakh--and says it is no longer unaffordable.What has most of the media become? Have you lost all sense of shame? In a poor country like India where most women are bravely feeding and supporting their families on the pittance which their husbands, or they themselves, earn, is it not a gross insult to them to talk of breast enlargement by surgery? It is estimated that 47 per cent of Indian children are malnourished. This means that about half our children do not get enough to eat. And since most mothers would rather remain hungry than see their children hungry, this means maybe 75 per cent of our women are malnourished. Do our Indian women not deserve sheer admiration for their selfless sacrifice and bravery in supporting their families? And is it not sheer vulgarity and a disgrace to highlight breast enlargement, as if that is a great issue in India today? The article says that Rs 1.5 to 2.5 lakh is an affordable cost. Has the writer any idea of the skyrocketing prices of foodstuff, medicines, etc? To talk of breast enlargement by surgery is like Marie Antoinette saying that if the people do not have bread, let them eat cake. The lives of most women in India are full of continual, unending labour, a kind of labour that bears the imprint of bondage. IQ tests in modern psychology have shown that the IQ of an average woman is the same as that of an average man. Our Constitution provides for equality between men and women, vide Article 15. But the fact is that the old backward mentality of looking down on women and treating them as objects of men's lust persists. And it is this backward mentality which, no doubt only by insinuation, the article perpetuates and furthers. In these terrible days where 80 per cent of our 120 crore people are poor, our brave women are uncomplainingly toiling day and night to support their families. A large section of our media deliberately diverts attention of the people from the real issues facing the Indian masses, which are socioeconomic, to non-issues like lives of film stars, cricket, astrology--and now, breast enlargement.
JUSTICE MARKANDEY KATJU, Chairman, Press Council of India

35
YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
J U LY 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Film Industry: The Gold Crush
The beautiful people in the Bombay-based film industry are so used to their cops-androbber plots that when a real crisis ambushes them, they can never see things in the proper perspective. The latest flap is the Budget bombshell--the straight 10 per cent ad valorem excise slapped onto film production to their proportionate costs. "With a hammer, the Union Finance Ministry has given ad valorem a completely deadly twist," moaned a special edition of `Trade Guide', the industry's official public relations organ, on June 21. This wouldn't have been funny if it wasn't so serious a matter. The film industry has been agitating for precisely an ad valorem type of excise. Previously the levy rate operated along preferential taxation. Motion picture prints of any picture up to the first 12 prints were free of taxation. In 1976, 530 films were released, out of which 416 were regional films (78 per cent); 254 out of these 416 films did not pay any levy at all under the old taxation system. Again, 114 Hindi films released last year did not pay any levy for the first 12 prints or for overseas prints. Now, all the films, Hindi or regional, will come under the tax net and there is a distinct possibility of regional cinema dying under the new system. by Ashok Row Kavi
BLOCKBUSTERS-- A HARD TIME AHEAD

Desert Storm
Congress obviously stands to gain the most from the infighting within BJP in Rajasthan ("Raje Revolt Relief for Congress", May 21).Vasundhara Raje is a strong contender for the post of chief minister in case BJP returns to power. It is imperative that BJP plays its cards smartly and works as a unit to defeat a

weakening Congress in the next elections, for infighting at this stage will only hurt its own chances.
RAVI RAJ, Ajmer

Unholy Godmen
The recent selection of Nithyananda as the next pontiff of Madurai Adheenam, once considered one of the most holy Saivite seats, is the worst

possible development that could have happened ("God of Controversy", May 21). Appointing a tainted man like him to such a revered and important post will only encourage the unscrupulous practices of the fake godmen who have, of late, proliferated alarmingly in the country.
SMITHA SARIN, Hyderabad

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

JUNE 4, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

