Na tion BIHAR

QUALIFICATION NO BAR
Senior bureaucrat claims Patna University's vice-chancellor is ineligible for the post
rofessor Shambhu Nath Singh had an impressive resume even before Bihar Governor Devanand Konwar appointed him the Vice-Chancellor (VC) of Patna University on August 1, 2011. The IGNOU website--where Singh had been functioning as director and professor at the School of Journalism and New Media Studies (SOJNMS) before taking over as the Patna University VC-- describes him as a "journalist of repute for the last 25 years" and someone known for his "intellectual analyses and commentaries". In May-end, S. Shiv Kumar, principal secretary in the Bihar Higher Education Department wrote to the Principal Accountant General (Audit) (PAG), saying that "Singh lacked the basic qualification for appointment as vice-chancellor according to the Patna University Act, 1976." Kumar, a 1987-batch IAS officer, wrote to the PAG after the auditors found that Singh was appointed in violation of university rules that require a VC candidate to have at least six years of experience in administering a university as an educationist. Alternatively, the act stipulates that a candidate having 10 years of teaching experience in a university or college as principal or head of department can also be considered for the post of the vice-chancellor. The Bihar government is convinced that the Patna University VC does not have either. "I have informed the PAG about government's understanding of the issue. We need vice-chancellors who should be able to inspire students," Kumar told INDIA TODAY on June 26. The PAG, which functions under the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and audits all expenditure and revenue of the Bihar government, has ticked off Governor Konwar, maintaining that an "ineligible applicant"

DIAMONDS

India Shines with China
The two nations become second largest consumer of diamonds, garner 24 per cent share of global trade
ndia has, for the first time ever, become the world's second largest consumer of diamonds, thanks to its domestic demand that is growing annually at 30 per cent. It shares the second spot with neighbour China. In 2011, India also sold diamonds worth Rs 55,000 crore in the local market and shipped abroad diamonds worth Rs 1.54 lakh crore. The burgeoning demand enabled India to import polished and rough diamonds worth $12 billion (Rs 66,000 crore) from Africa, Russia and Belgium in 2011. China's domestic market recorded 13 per cent growth in 2011-12. India and China now have a 24 per cent

P

I

K M KISHAN REUTERS

(Singh), who knew he did not fulfil the eligibility criterion, has been able to obtain the post of vice-chancellor "through the collusion of senior officials of the Governor's secretariat". The PAG's office has asked the Governor's principal secretary to explain why it shouldn't place the payment of Singh's salary since appointment under the audit objection book. Singh, however, is unperturbed. "I don't know why I am being targeted. I fulfil all the criteria required to become the vice-chancellor. I have adequate administrative and teaching experience. Those raising questions should have asked me for my detailed resume," he told INDIA TODAY on June 26. Singh thinks he has done a good job

SHAMBHU NATH SINGH (SECOND FROM LEFT) AT THE PATNA UNIVERSITY

"I fulfil all the conditions required to become the vicechancellor. I have adequate administrative and teaching experience."
SHAMBHU NATH SINGH, Vice Chancellor, Patna University

at Patna University. "Patna University is now the only varsity in Bihar where the semester system has been introduced. Besides, we have also allowed students and their parents to see the answer sheets. This is to ensure transparency," he said. Konwar had appointed VCS for six universities of Bihar on August 1, 2011, which sparked off a controversy, as the Nitish Kumar government said that these were made without consulting the state government. Sources close to the Governor, however, claim that the Bihar University Act allows him (as chancellor) to appoint the VCS and Pro-VCS in consultation with the ruling government, but the rules does not warrant that he abide by the state government's suggestions. Patna Training College Principal Khagendra Kumar says he will move court to question the PAG's mandate to examine the appointment. Kumar says, "Does PAG have the remit to comment on an appointment process as also the policy choices which a governor makes?"
by Amitabh Srivastava

WORKERS AT A DIAMOND PLANT IN SURAT

share of the world diamond market. Global diamond giant De Beers has already forecast that by 2020, the two countries will surpass the US, the world's biggest consumer with a 40 per cent market share. "The advantage lies with us. The US market has not seen any growth in the last three years," says Rajeev Jain, chairman of the Mumbai-based Gems and Jewellery Export Promotion Council (GJEPC), at a global jewellery conference in Las Vegas in May. "The high demand has prompted us to seek direct import opportunities the world over," Jain adds. India annually imports rough diamonds worth Rs 55,000 crore from Africa, which produces 45

per cent of the world's diamonds. At Las Vegas and in Washington DC, which hosted meetings of the Kimberly Process (KP) in June, Indian diamond traders, supported by their Chinese counterparts, argued against a proposal floated by the US to introduce a new definition of `blood diamonds'. KP is an international initiative to prevent the flow of conflict diamonds. Both India and China argued the US-led move will impact their imports that largely depend on supplies from Africa, mainly Zimbabwe. The proposal was floated by the newly elected KP chair from the US, Gillian A. Milovanovic. If agreed upon, the organisation's certification scheme would be modified to cover rough diamonds used to finance or otherwise directly involved with armed conflict or other situations of violence. "KP itself certifies diamonds that come to India and China from Africa. So where is the need for a redefinition?" asks Jain. Milovanovic wanted to include diamond-related violence in rough diamond producing and "trading" areas, which include India and China, to stem the flow of rough diamonds used by rebel movements in Africa. He also wanted to certify that those gems have been legally mined and sold. GJEPC Executive Director Sabyasachi Ray, who represented India at Washington, says the inclusion of the term "violence in places of trading" was extremely contentious. "We don't have riots in Surat. Nor are there any incidents of violence in China or Dubai. The US wants to control the global diamond trade," he says. A similar proposal backed by KP was also mooted in June by members of the World Diamond Council in Vicenza, Italy. It also met with protests from India, China, African nations and Russia.
by Shantanu Guha Ray

42

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

NEW

NEW

