Re ligion

CHURCH

CHURCH CHECKMATES BISHOP
Kerala's largest non-Catholic church accuses one of its 33 bishops of corruption
than a century over spiritual he Jacobite Syrian matters as well as ownership of Christian Church (JSCC) physical assets and, most imhas accused one of its portantly, over the supreme bishops, Kuriackose Mar head of the church. While the Clemis, 45, of financial misapOrthodox group owes allepropriation, "undue" relations giance to its Catholicose based with women, and attempts to in Kottayam, the Jacobites conorganise parallel devotee sider Ignatius Zakka I as their groups. Bishop Clemis, the metsupremo. The 1.5-million ropolitan of JSCC's Idukki diostrong Jacobite faction is financese, hit back by raising serious cially and numerically less allegations against the church powerful than the Orthodox leadership. They include an group whose members include alleged attempt by church authe Kandathil family, which thorities to murder him, makruns the state's largest circuing him pay Rs 3 crore to be lated Malayala Manorama ordained as bishop in 2008 and newspaper, and Chief Minister also efforts to take over assets Oommen Chandy. worth Rs 13 crore he bought for The JSCC leadership said churches under his diocese. "The church leadership the differences with Clemis forcibly locked me up in a room were over the financial dealat the church's headquarters, ings as well as "unacceptable where they tried to kill me by relationships" he maintained sending hoodlums on May 16. with two nuns. "He was buying When I escaped and reached land after taking loans in the home, they sent the killers "The church leadership locked me up in name of the church but he again on June 21. Only my a room at the church's headquarters, was not paying back the loans. complaint made to the police He had run up a debt of " saved my life," Clemis told the where they tried to kill me on May 16. Rs 4.5 crore which he admitmedia on June 24 at Kattapted to us through a signed BISHOP KURIACKOSE MAR CLEMIS pana, the headquarters of his statement," said Thambu diocese. The police confirmed that the supremo, Patriarch Ignatius Zakka I. A George Tukalan, JSCC secretary. bishop had filed a complaint about new diocese was formed with Idukki in According to Chevelier Bibi Kadaattempts to murder him. central Kerala as the base and Clemis vumbhagam, chief editor of Viswasamade its metropolitan. Since he took rakshakan, JSCC's mouthpiece, the JSCC denied all the charges although it admitted having received over, the new bishop began to renovate bishop refused to respond to repeated Rs 5 lakh from Clemis at the time of the 18 churches under his diocese notices sent to him since early 2011. ordaining him as bishop. "We issued a besides buying more land. Some JSCC He was also warned against attempts receipt for it," said Joseph Mar members said the church leadership to formulate devotee groups to conduct Gregorios, JSCC synod secretary. On was initially happy with the bishop's charismatic meditations and also a June 30, JSCC barred the bishop from services, until serious differences nuns' sect. Before he became bishop, carrying out any church-related duty cropped up after Clemis allegedly Clemis was a highly popular leader of pending an ongoing investigation. An refused to hand over the new assets to charismatic meditations during which participants go into spiritual hysteria. eight-member commission has been JSCC and kept them in his name. constituted to decide the future course The Orthodox and Jacobite groups, The devotees he attracted in these of action against the bishop. rival factions in the 3.5-million strong sessions continued to be around him Clemis was ordained as the latest of Syrian Christian Church, Kerala's even after he became a bishop, which largest non-Catholic church, have been the official church did not approve of. JSCC's 33 bishops in 2008 at its global headquarters at Antioch in Syria, by its involved in a bitter mutual war for more by M.G. Radhakrishnan

T

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

49

