AnimPACTreature xx-i

The Kn ow I edse H u b
The state Haryana have opened their doors to an education revolution of sorts with some of the most upcoming private institutions being situated in these areas. These institutions have been conceptuaiized by great minds that are success stories personified and they offer the highest quaiity of education in a somber and placid environment as they are situated far from the hustle and bustle of a busy metropolitan life.

A

lot of private institutions have made a beeline for this lucrative iducational hub of the country. The corporate world has shifted from he nearby metropolis to establish themselves at Haryana and for those that need to be aware of competition in the market, Haryana is a great place to study in. Haryana has been attracting entrepreneurs to establish educational institutes and universities. These private institutions and Universities acquired not only academic but leadership skills to take forward the

nation building movement that started in early 21st Century. Haryana continues to shine as one of the most promising region for quality education in the country. The education infrastructure especially for higher education like Engineering, Management, Fashion or other specialty fields has shown tremendous growth and popularity in the country. With its multi culture environment and geographical spread, students today come to this part of the country and prepare themselves to take the challenges of professional world.

;i

WORLD COLLEGE OF TECHNOLOGY & MANAGEMENT, GURGAON

Inspiring Excellece through Education
orld College of Technology and Management is promoted by a group of ex-IITians with profound international Technical & Management education exposure abroad. World College of Technology and Management is part of group of institutions which have about 12,000 students on their rolls spread across Gurgaon, Jaipur & Bharatpur. World College of Technology and Management (WCTM) approved by AICTE, HRO Ministry, Government of India & Affiliated to MD University, Rohtak, has been established with the sole motive of imparting quality technical and management education. This is one of the rare private institutes, where Chairman besides being M.S., M.Tech and Ph.D from IIT, Delhi & Post Doctorate from University of Leeds, UK an outstanding academician, has vast experience of Technical Education from Universities of America, Austria, Australia and England. The college offers MBA, MCA & B.Tech courses in Computer Science & Engineering (CSE), Information Technology (IT), Electronic & Communication Engineering (ECE), Civil Engineering (CE), Mechanical Engineering (ME) & Electrical Engineering (EE) disciplines. The College has one of the finest infrastructure facilities in the area against a lush green backdrop spread over 18 acres. The Campus comprises i College of Technology & Management (MBA, MCA, M.Tech & B.Tech), World Management College (PGDMJ Post Graduate Management Programme and Oxford College of Education (B.Ed.) WCTM boasts of fully furnished labs and modern infrastructure, State-of-Art computational faculties with Pentium-IV personal computers & servers, 24 hours internet connect with 6 Mbps bandwidth and Wi-Fi Campus, Excellent indoor & outdoi games, Summer training and staff development programmes for facu maintained canteens available in the campus, Excursion trip to various industries & institutes, Centrally Air-cooled separate girls' & Boy's host? 15 acre lush green campus with round the clock security and .power backt
"·"f^^rS^"' f ' ·

W

Fully air conditioned all class -rooms/lecturer theatres, labs.S library,State; '· · of-art library with over 20,000 books & Digital/DELNET &: E-learning .' '· '· Connectivity and above all the college is proud to have 10Q% placement of: ;: :H-; outgoing batch of MBA & PGDM. .;;:: "· \

Utmost efforts are placed t&: "·_ · · '·_::::::::::::::'·'·'·_·_::','.!::;; provide world class teaching: :::::· learning environment with \\\\\'\n pedagogy and most:::::: advanced technical infrastructure.!::: The campus community is:a rich:; · · -*-"" ' life style and

DR.NA
CHAIRMAN'

AnimPACTFeature NIC College of Engineering

AIMING FOR THE TOP
Achieving global standards is the academic agenda at NCCE
oming into existence in 1998 with the vision of being an educational centre that would equip itself with an academic curriculum at par with global standards of education, the NC College of Engineering trains its students to become world class engineers armed with the foresight and the acumen to become solution providers and pioneers in their chosen fields. Approved by the AICTE and accredited by the National Biodiversity Authority (NBA), the NC College of Engineering is an ISO 9001 - 2008 certified institution affiliated to the Kurukshetra University. The College also holds the
',T«W iC*

C

distinction of being the first institution in Haryana to receive autonomy from the state's government. What it effectively means is that while degrees at NCCE will continue to be awarded by Kurukshetra University, the College will have its own curriculum and examination. The curriculum will, of course, be approved by the Kurukshetra University and will give NCCE the opportunity it needs to provide quality education. The College has armed itself with the long-term goal of building a team of academicians and ensuring that students achieve a level of educational excellence that would make them assets not just to the nation but to the world at large.

GITM Group of Institutions

Universal Institute of Technology

A BOUQUET OF ACADEMICS AND OVERALL DEVELOPMENT
Emphasis on developing a mature professional attitude in students is the need of the hour

T

o develop into systematic leader and pivot for excellence in technical education and to catalyse the absorption, innovation, diffusion and transfer of high technology to improve productivity and quality of life was the objective with which the GITM" Group was established in 2005. The group at present has four institutes namely Gurgaon Institute of Technology & Management (GITM), GITM Institute of Technology (GITMIT), Gurgaon College of Engineering (GCE) and Gurgaon College of Engineering for Women (GCEW). All the institutes are approved by AICTE and DTE Haryana and affiliated to MDU Rohtak. The main strength of the group lies in the state of art infrastructure facilities available in its all institutes. "Along with academics the stress is on overall development of every student via personality development programs, mentoring sessions and extracurricular activities," says Vijay Gupta, chairman, Gurgaon College of Engineering. The alumni of GITM Group of Institutions are adding to the success story of many big and small organisations in the country and abroad. More than 50 companies have recruited GITM candidates so far, majority being campus placements. "Our placement success story continues unabated," says Ranjan Agrawal, chairman, Gurgaon Institute of Technology and Management.

niversal Institute of Technology is an upcoming premier institution approved under AICTE, Govt of India. Engineering and technology play a central role in manufacturing, including the manufacturing or processing associated with agro-products. It should also be obvious that engineering proficiency and technology are major contributors to mining, construction, transportation and infrastructure. Universal Institute of Technology is the brain child of Universal Trust for Education and Research. Untiring efforts of this trust have given shape to this veritable institution committed to nurture young talent who in turn can contribute to the nation's growth and development. This institute will be the harbinger of revolution in the country where visionary insights will contribute immensely in chiselling the future of citizens of tomorrow and thereby the whole nation. The institute has been founded under the aegis of Universal Trust for Education & Research, this institution can be seen as a benchmark in imparting technical education and skill sets to thousands of career-centric youths who have a penchant in scientific and technological research and development. Use of existing technologies and formation of new technologies are at the heart of the engineering profession. UIT has determined its exclusivity in order to be an efficient representative of change in engineering education for the 21st century. The University mission consists of three parts, education, research, and services. The institute's dedication is verified by appropriate concern for the intellectual and personal well being of the students. The aim of the institute is develop renowned scientific institution locally and worldwide, contributing to high quality technical education and personnel with a sound background on basic engineering principles, technical and managerial skills, innovative research capabilities and exemplary professional conduct to lead and to use technology for the progress of mankind and adapting them to changing technological environment with the highest moral values as the inner strength The students at UIT are offered a complete learning experience and the industry and government agencies that hire these students will receive the very best quality graduates. UlT's contacts with industry and the college's connections with other educational institutions in the country are evidence to the extent of our institution.

U

SPREADING THE LIGHT OF EDUCATION

The Savera Group of Institutions

GIVING NEW DIMENSION TO TECHNICAL EDUCATION

T

he Savera Educational Trust was established in the year 2007. The Savera Group of Institutions has come a long way since their inception. The Group aims to create future leaders out of today's young generation capable of playing strategic role in nation building and service to humanity and the mission of the Group is the achievement of excellent educational standards through quality teaching methods, modern and innovative procedures in order to attain global recognition at educational horizon. Besides bestowing knowledge, this institution takes upon itself the responsibility of fostering & nurturing the student's dormant faculties and to convert the aspirants into universally acknowledged technocrats and managers. To embark on a journey of success one needs the tools of preparedness, foresight and strategy. These lead to the path of growth. Realizing the responsibility, Savera recruits only the best in their fields as faculty of the institutions. They are committed to sharpen the students' faculties with use of innovative and unique pedagogical tools and systematic and continuous evaluation. The pool of raw

talent is meticulously groomed and rigorously trained in all aspects - toe it academics, extracurricular activities, team dynamics or leadership skills. The curriculum is so framed that it not only focuses on providing technical expertise in theoretical aspects but also emphasizes on ensuring the right corporate and technical exposure. The state of the art infrastructure is uniquely designed to develop engineers/managers who are equipped to tackle the challenges of present and futuristic global environment. The Savera group has established alliances and academic collaborations with many renowned institutes in India as well as abroad for national/ international exposure for the students. The institute provides degrees in B.Tech, M.Tech, B.Architecture and MBA in a wide array of disciplines. The placement cell of the college lends full assistance to the students in their search for suitable placement. It provides help in resume writing, imparting training in interviews, identifying avenues for employability and other related activities.

GLOBAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT, GURGAON

Scaling the Unexplored Heights of Excellence in Education!

T

his is true that every engineering/management aspirant cannot be a part of Ills and NITs and hence many good private institutes plunged into the arena of education. Global Institute is among the best sought after educational institutions. Visionary luminaries, Serene environment for studies, holistic methodology of teaching and learning, state of the art infrastructure, ever ready techno savvy mentors to mould the young saplings into desired directions, happening campus, value added programmes and experiential learning to generate more industry-ready ambassadors are few of the highlights of Global Institute. Established in 2008, to promote quality technical & management education of global standard in a world-class environment. Sprawling over 18 acres of lush green Hi-tech campus, separate and secured hostel facility for Boys and Girls with AC & Non-AC rooms, Air-Conditioned transport facility from Delhi, Gurgaon and NCR and excellent infrastructure are the hallmarks of Global. The institute is approved by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), Govt. of India, Recognised by the Directorate of Technical Education, Govt. of Haryana and is affiliated to Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (Haryana). We have emerged as the prestigious seat of learning dedicated to make India a Knowledge Society by creating intellectual pool of technocrats & managers of crunching capabilities and research potentialities.

Consistent with high standard of excellence pursued by the institute, the Global faculty comprises seasoned, highly qualified and distinguished academicians drawn from institutes of repute like Ills, BITS, NITs, etc., with a proven record of meritorious accomplishments in their respective area of specialization. Apart from the conventional method of 'Chalk & Talk' the institute focuses on a new pedagogy of teaching through modern aids like LCD Projector, Multimedia, OHPs, DVD and Educational Movies to make students more attentive and interactive. The courses at Global are B.Tech. (CSE,IT,ECE,ME, M&AE, and Civil Engg.), B.Tech. (LEET) - Direct 2nd Year, M.Tech.(CSE & ECE), MBA (HR, Marketing, Finance, IT & IB) and BBA. Our emerging profile is a prelude to our ultimate objective to upgrade this institution to a University of excellence. What also sets apart Global Institute is our quality placements by good no. of corporates including the top ranking ones such as Accenture, Wipro, IBM, India Bulls, JBM, Airtel, MSIL so on and so forth, encouraging feedback of our alumni from their employers, top ranking students in the University, strong industry tie up for seminars, guest lectures, industry visits and live projects etc.. Our institute is also ranked as A+ + by Times Business Sphere Magazine. We look forward to continue giving back to society and creating educated, employable and even entrepreneurial youth in India.

,,..3.1.

