Signature
B O T T O M

DHIRAJ NAYYAR

L I N E

THE RIGHTAGENDA
SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

t's just as well for the NDA that its civil war of words on Hindutva versus secularism is playing out now, well before the next General Elections. The people of India have already settled that issue in favour of secularism, a fact that even the hard-line Narendra Modi has tacitly, if not explicitly, accepted. His relentless focus on governance issues in the decade since riotous 2002 is sufficient evidence. The fact is that the next election, whether in 2014 or earlier, will be fought, not on the issue of secularism, but on the twin issues of governance and the economy. If NDA wants a shot at power, it needs to develop a coherent alternative to what the Congress and UPA have offered. It is easy to be complacent. The UPA is paralysed in government and the economy is in a tailspin. The Opposition could quite possibly ride to power on an anti-incumbency vote alone. But that would be taking for granted a highly perceptive electorate. People want to see a coherent governance agenda that can deliver economic growth and prosperity. There certainly is room for one on the centre-right. The Congress, while it is led by the Gandhi family, will be openly populist: In favour of massive redistributive Government-spending schemes in the name of the poor and in favour of a strict leash on private enterprise. NDA must affirm its commitment to free enterprise, domestic and foreign. For this to be credible, NDA may need to support at least some reformist legislation proposed by UPA in the coming months. The NDA must also lay out a clear roadmap for Government spending, particularly subsidies. It shouldn't be too

I

hard to argue the case for withdrawing all subsidies to the rich--a significant contributor to the fiscal deficit--whether urban (on diesel) or rural (on fertilisers). However, the more important part of the alternative agenda has to focus on rethinking government. Nobody can argue that the state has no role to play in India's development. It does, but in a manner that facilitates growth and reduces wastage of public money. The NDA need to look no further than the two protagonists in its internal battle, Nitish Kumar and Narendra Modi, to get inspiration. Modi has showed how governments in India can deliver top-class infrastructure, just like China. He has delivered 24-hour electricity to all of Gujarat even as the rest of India is blacked out. He has invested in irrigation infrastructure. Gujarat's farmers have reaped the benefits of a 10 per cent per annum agricultural growth for a decade. Modi has innovated smartly in public transport to make Gujarat's cities more liveable. Nitish has done his bit for road infrastructure in Bihar but his real achievements are in making government-spending programmes for the poor more efficient in outcomes. His free bicycles scheme for girls has increased female enrolment in schools. His experiment with direct cash transfers to the poor is curbing the waste and corruption of the public distribution system. Any political formation that has workable solutions to India's infrastructure deficit, and waste in government, will appeal to voters. If NDA wants a shot at power, it needs to persuade Modi and Nitish to put down their swords. They need to pen the manifesto instead. 

NOBODY CAN ARGUE THAT THE STATE HAS NO ROLE TO PLAY IN INDIA'S DEVELOPMENT. IT DOES, BUT IN A MANNER THAT FACILITATES GROWTH AND REDUCES WASTAGE OF PUBLIC MONEY.

S I G N P O STS
RELEASED Indian prisoner Surjeet Singh, who spent more than 30 years in Pakistani jail on charges of espionage, from Kot Lakhpat jail. He was handed over to Indian authorities at the Wagah SINGH border.
16
INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

BANNED Five cricketers-- T.P. Sudhindra, Shalabh Srivastava, Amit Yadav, Mohnish Mishra and Abhinav Bali--who were caught in a TV sting operation in May agreeing to spot-fix matches and receiving `under-the-table' payments from franchises. SANCTIONED Setting up of three new Indian

Institutes of Technology (IITs), by the human resource development ministry on public-private partnership model. INCLUDED The eco-sensitive Western Ghats along the west coast of India, in the coveted list of the World Heritage Sites, at a meeting of the World Heritage Committee held in Russia.

DIED Guo Qinglan, wife of legendary Indian physician Dr Dwarkanath QINGLAN Shantaram Kotnis who provided medical assistance in China in the 1930s. Qinglan, 96, has been an honoured guest at many high-level diplomatic functions between China and India.

