Leisure
BOOKS FA S H I O N T R AV E L CINEMA E Y E C AT C H E R S

Kiss and Tell
The kissing scene between Ranbir Kapoor and Ileana D'Cruz in the trailer of Barfi was meant to steal the show. Director Anurag Basu had, however, not anticipated that his lead actor would smooch him as well. Kapoor grabbed Basu for a liplock during the film's promotion, in response to questions about how comfortable he was about kissing his co-star. "As an actor, one has to do one's job. If you believe in the scene, you have to do it," he said. We like that.
KAPOOR KISSING BASU

STROKE OF LUCK
A breakthrough may finally be in sight for Pallavi Sharda, 25. The Indian-Australian Bharatnatyam dancer has bagged a role in Abhinav Kashyap's Besharam alongside Ranbir Kapoor. She entered the film world with a bang in 2010, with Dus Tola, opposite Manoj Bajpayee. Her Hollywood film Walkaway also released that year. However, things went downhill thereafter. Sharda had a tiny role in Love Breakups Zindagi in 2011. So she is understandably nervous. "I don't want to talk about my role right now," she says.

SHARDA

Week Wrap-up
NEWS, VIEWS AND THINGS THAT MATTER
LOOK OF THE WEEK

YOGEN SHAH

Role Reversal
After six months of playing mommy to daughter Saira, Lara Dutta, 34, is ready for more. Thankfully, it's not yet another fitness DVD, but Bejoy Nambiar's trilingual David, alongside actors Vikram, Neil Nitin Mukesh and Tabu. While the director doesn't want to reveal her role, here's hoping he creates a lone spark in her otherwise forgettable film career.
PRIYANKA

DUTTA

French fashion designer Jean Paul Gaultier's spring-summer menswear collection had models walk the ramp in turbans and beards, in typical Sikh style.
MOM OF THE WEEK

Actor Ayesha Dharker and her British husband Robert Taylor had a baby girl in June-end.
STAR OF THE WEEK

Home Sweet Home
Star wives have a way of turning into designers.Clothes,jewellery,homes,they're game for anything.No surprise then that Vivek Oberoi's wife Priyanka, 30,traded her degree in business administration from the Royal Holloway University of London for a shot at doing up her family home.All she now needs is to arrange knick-knacks at a few celebrity homes.She can become a bonafide member of the star-wife interior designers'club.Sweet.


Model Lisa Haydon made it to the front row at the Dior fashion event in Paris, for Belgian fashion designer Raf Simons's debut show as creative head.
PICK OF THE WEEK

FOTOCORP

Actor Richa Chaddha for Mira Nair's short film series set across the world, along with British actor Ben Kingsley.

YOGEN SHAH

Compiled by Nishat Bari

64

Volume XXXVII Number 29; For the week July 10-16, 2012, released on July 9

