Soc iety

TRENDSETTERS

SWIPE TO SAVE TIME
By Aditi Pai

A shoe that guides and a wallet that transfers money. Innovative entrepreneurs are using technology to transform urban living.
A PRABHAKAR RAO/www.indiatodayimages.com

t took only a few minutes for Harsh Reddy, 18, to get admission into a college in Rampachodavaram, over 400 km from Hyderabad. That's possibly only slightly longer than it takes to pronounce the tongue-twisting name. All thanks to Zocampus. The website by tech entrepreneur Sunil Chalamalasetty, 40, brings educational institutes from cities and far-flung towns alike, on one single platform. So, you can check the syllabus, seek admission, pay fees and even learn in an e-classroom, all by logging on to the website. "I always wanted to contribute to wealth creation and education is the biggest wealth," says Hyderabad-based Chalamalasetty. In 2008, after 13 years of corporate globetrotting, he returned home "to do something for the country". In a bid to contribute to public life, he contested the Lok Sabha elections on a Praja

I

Rajyam Party ticket in 2009, but lost. He soon found his purpose-- education. Using his years of technology experience, he started Zocampus in 2011, a platform where people can collaborate for educational purposes. "It's like a social networking platform for education," he says. "The reach of products is poor in the rural areas and some of the higher education books are not available in these places. This will bring education to all," says Chalamalasetty, who had started a successful e-commerce venture in 2001 in London called Eurocallingcards.com, a company that registered a $10 million (Rs 50 crore) turnover within two years of inception. Last year, he sold BANGALORE

HYDERABAD

Hemanth Satyanarayana 29
Came back to India from the US after working in the specialised field of Augmented & Virtual Realityto create Trialar,a digital trial room built in an augmented realityplatform.
ROAD AHEAD He hopes people can try on clothes `virtually'and shop from anywhere.

Richik Nandi 31 and Garima Satija 28
Started Poshvine in 2011 in Bangalore.You can make reservations,redeem vouchers and even win special gifts on this site.
ROAD AHEAD To expand operations across India and include a fun-filled gastronomic tour of cities.

This concept will be welcome in both exclusive boutiques and malls or airports.

We wanted to develop a product that translates passion for food and travel into a successful business.

SANDESH RAVI KUMAR

the company to a London-based group to concentrate on his new venture--Zocampus. Like Chalamalasetty, a number of young Indians are using their interest in technology to start innovative tech ventures. Armed with international degrees and global exposure, these young people are bringing in new ideas and tweaking them to suit the needs of India. From creating educational platforms to a digital trial room and an ewallet, these entrepreneurs are setting in motion a tech revolution. After a decade-long stint in the US, UK and China, Jay Krishna, 38, decided to return to hometown Hyderabad in 2007 to start his own venture in the field of technology. The engineering graduate from BITS, Pilani, zeroed in on what he liked best--using a phone for

HYDERABAD

Anirudh Sharma 25
He gave up his well-paying job as a research consultant to design a shoe called Le Chal meant for the visuallyimpaired.It guides the user with some help from Google Maps.
ROAD AHEAD Is headed for a year-long study programme at MIT.

We are people passionate about design, accessibility, new media and innovation.

money transactions. The "PayPal regular" set up Digitsecure, a company that enables you to make and receive payments on your mobile phone. "Even today, 85 per cent of transactions are cash-on-delivery. With mobile phones being all-pervasive, this technology will bring e-transactions to the masses and will help take cash out of the system," he says. With permissions from the Reserve Bank of India in place, he counts HDFC, American Express, SBI and ICICI among his clients. "It will make purchases and transactions simpler and faster," he says. The engineerturned-tech entrepreneur is now set to launch an e-wallet, a mobile app that will enable you to buy anything from jewellery to burgers with the touch of a key. "There are tremendous opportunities for growth if you bring in a new idea in technology," he says. For Hemanth Satyanarayana, 29, fashion and clothing weren't even remotely on his mind when he returned to Hyderabad in May 2009 after six years of pursuing a dream career in New York. Armed with experience in the fields of virtual reality and augmented reality, he came back "consciously looking for a change" and decided to give his "entrepreneurial dream a serious try" and start Imaginate in 2011. But the desire to pick up an innovative idea and the "many long and often cumbersome" shopping trips with his wife inspired him to create Trialar, a digital trial room built in an augmented reality platform using image processing and `computer vision' technologies. So instead of trying out every dress from your selection of a dozen, simply stand in front of a digital display or an electronic mirror that you can interact with. It then instantaneously gives you an image of how you would look in a particular dress and enables you to see how you look in 20 different changes in just about a minute. "A patent pending feature of this product is virtual collaboration shopping. Which means you can send an image of yourself in a dress to your boyfriend for his opinion, before making up your mind," says Satyanarayana. Trialar is awaiting an August launch and Satyanarayana is confident that the concept will be welcome in

JULY 16, 2012  INDIA TODAY

51

Soc iety

TRENDSETTERS
SRINIVAS

both exclusive boutiques and malls or airports, "where it will be used instead of digital signage. People can check out a dress and see how it looks on them without actually trying them on; swipe their card to buy it while waiting at the airport or some such place". Wanting to bring convenience to the strapped-for-time urban dweller, Richik Nandi, 31, and Garima Satija, 28, started Poshvine in October 2011, a site dedicated to eating out in Bangalore. Besides helping you decide the venue, the site even allows guests to reserve tables and offers several benefits such as discounts, complimentary chef's signature dish, or loyalty points that can be redeemed for exclusive benefits. No vouchers, no explanations, no questions asked. "We want to be the Lonely Planet of dining and culinary experience," says Nandi. He's expanded the concept to recently introducing food-related experiences across the country. With Poshvine, you can go on a bicycle tour of Bangalore followed by breakfast at the popular Koshy's or HYDERABAD

HYDERABAD

Sunil Chalamalasetty 40
After starting successful tech ventures such as Eurocallingcards.com in the UK,he returned to Hyderabad in 2008.He launched Zocampus,a platform for information and access to educational institutes.
ROAD AHEAD Has 70 institutes on board; plans to take the number to 500 by the year-end.

Our aim is to take good education and learning to as many students as we can.

Jay Krishna 38
Returned to India after a decade-long stint in the UK,US and China to start Digitsecure,a companythat designs technologyto enable monetarytransactions through a mobile phone.
ROAD AHEAD Is launching an e-wallet mobile app that makes purchases and money transfer easier.

peep into the kitchen secrets of the top chefs at high-end restaurants and star hotels. "We want to encourage discovering of a city through its food," says Nandi, who used his experience at Microsoft to design the software for his site. While the company hasn't broken even yet, the couple is taking its operations to Chennai and Hyderabad. When Anirudh Sharma, 25, gave up his well-paying job as a research
SRINIVAS

We wanted to develop an e-money solution that works even in rural areas.

consultant at Hewlett Packard, he decided to take the non-commercial route to entrepreneurship. The graduate in informatics engineering from Rajasthan Technical University designed Le Chal--a shoe that guides the visually impaired. It works like this: By providing haptic feedback (a tactile feedback technology), the shoe guides users to their destination by vibrating in the front, back or sides of the shoe, to indicate straight, back, left and right. The shoe is guided by Google Maps that is connected to the user's smartphone. In December 2011, he, along with business partner Krispian Lawrence, 28, started Ducere Technologies in Bangalore that specialises in innovations for the visually impaired. "The main reason I left a corporate to form a startup company was because it is fun to do different things even though it's not as financially secure. We had developed Le Chal and want to develop more cost-effective innovations for the visually impaired," he says. Socially conscious or profitable ventures, it is passion that fuels the dreams of these innovative entrepreneurs who are breaking norms to make everyday reality easier.
with Mona Ramavat, Ayesha Aleem and Lakshmi Kumaraswami

52

INDIA TODAY  JULY 16, 2012

