Na tion

RAJATGUPTA

INDIAN VERDICTIN AMERICA
Rajat Gupta's fall as an Indian icon is offset by the rise of the man who nailed him
GETTY IMAGES AP PHOTO

here could be only one winner, and at the end of the most watched criminal trial in the US this year, pitting two hugely successful Indian-Americans against each other, the hard-charging prosecutor had bested the corporate icon. When a Manhattan jury found former McKinsey CEO and Goldman Sachs board member Rajat Gupta guilty on four out of six counts of insider trading on June 15, it was yet another feather in the cap of Preet Bharara, US Attorney for the Southern District of New York. Even the Indian Government was watching with interest, given Gupta's active involvement with various institutions and charitable activities in the country. While cautioning that it was an internal matter of the US and that Gupta still has an appeals process open to him, External Affairs Minister S.M. Krishna told INDIA TODAY during a visit to Toronto, "We are closely following the developments." As Gupta's wife buried her head in her hands and their four daughters broke down on hearing the verdict in the courtroom, the family faced up to the near certain prospect of jail time for the former executive, even as he remains out on bail until sentencing, scheduled for October 18. Gupta's lawyer Gary Naftalis promptly announced plans to appeal, but legal experts say the prospects for reversal are slim. Richard Holwell, the judge who tried and sentenced hedge fund billionaire Raj Rajaratnam last year, said, "Even if one disagreed with the verdict, one would have to agree that there was enough evidence there that the jury could reasonably have reached a guilty verdict. It will be an uphill battle." Anil Sood, a development professional based near Washington DC, has been a close friend of Gupta's

T

GUPTA (LEFT) AND BHARARA

THE ONLY SURPRISE IN THE WHOLE TRIALWAS GUPTA'S LAST-MINUTE DECISION NOT TO TESTIFY IN HIS DEFENCE.
since their days at New Delhi's Modern School. Sood, who testified as a character witness at the trial, said the family was still in a state of shock at the verdict. "Given the lack of any hard evidence, motive, or profit, it was a shock that the jury came to the view it did," he said. The saving grace for Gupta could be presiding Judge Jed Rakoff's reputation for lighter sentences. A source involved with the prosecution said that given the judge's predilection and Gupta's philanthropic record, a jail sentence of more than two years would be a big surprise, far less than the statutory maximum of 65 years. Gupta will pay a stiff price--in liberty, wealth and reputation--due to his conviction, but the actual tab for his defence has been picked up largely by Goldman Sachs for now. According to The New York Times, the investment bank has paid the bulk of his legal fees, but Gupta would have to pay it back if he loses his appeal. The jury's decision handed Bharara his biggest scalp to date in insider-trading cases. Commenting on the verdict, he said, "Having fallen from respected insider to convicted inside trader, Mr Gupta has now exchanged the lofty boardroom for the prospect of a lowly jail cell." The jury took only two days to reach a verdict in the month-long trial, even though several jurors later said they felt strong sympathy for a man they saw as a living symbol of the American Dream. But they handed him and his family a nightmare with no quick end in sight. by Indira Kannan

48

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

