Mail

35
JUNE 18, 2012

Top Of the Class
The 16th edition of the INDIA TODAY-Nielsen Best Colleges Survey and Rankings introduces five new streams. In the remaining six streams, old rivalries are renewed at the top.

``
Cream of the Crop
It is very important to make the younger generation aware of the fact that there are lucrative prospects in many other professions apart from the conventional ones ("Top of the Class", June 18). By introducing five new streams--mass communication and journalism, fashion design, fine arts, BCA and BBA, INDIA TODAY has successfully shattered the myth that engineering, law and medicine are the only professional courses that are sought-after.
K. CHIDANAND KUMAR, Bangalore

In tune with the times and extremely comprehensive, INDIA TODAY's survey of best colleges is a gem.
S AW A N T S I N G H , A S A N S O L

The wide-ranging annual ranking will surely help students pick the best colleges as per their merit beyond the conventional disciplines of engineering, medicine and law. Problem-solving ability is the need of the hour. It is highly desirable that the Indian institutes achieve higher world rankings, which would enhance India's image in the education sector.
SANJIV GUPTA, Australia ,

The youth, desirous of bringing about a change, is using it as a tool with the intention of disclosing hidden facts and putting an end to corrupt and unethical practices in the country. Every youth aiming for a corruption-free society should start initiating action through this legal, strict and most powerful means of obtaining information.
PRANAY AJMERA, Pune

house. Loopholes in law and blatant misuse of judiciary has made a mockery of economic progress in our country. The governmental apathy towards progress has stemmed the process of growth.
AYESHA HASAN, Bangalore

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
A U G U S T 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

THE GOOD, BAD AND INDIFFERENT
The sporting scene in India today, after 30 years of Independence, is one of unrelieved gloom, with hardly any prospect of better times to come. To the average medal-hungry Indian, ever conscious and concerned about our national "image" in all things, our utter mediocrity in the international context is particularly galling considering the tremendous strides taken by much smaller countries in their quest for world honours. What people interested in sport do not understand is the reason for the steady decline in our fortunes despite the enormous sums of money that the Central and state governments have been spending on the promotion and development of sport. Despite our vast superiority in numbers, we have failed to attain even a semblance of respectability as a sporting nation. Even in the limited sphere of Asian sport, India's standing is unworthy of this country. The unfortunate part of the present situation is not so much our failures in various international competitions, but the sense of fatalism with which we accept our inferiority. Even our sports officials have ceased to hope for better times in the game. After the third position finish at the Munich Olympic Games (1972), the then president of the Indian Olympic Association, Bhalindra Singh, made a trite comment, "India had done as well as was expected."
by Saradindu Sanyal

SHAILESH RAVAL/www.indiatodayimages.com

Trouble at Home for Modi
Though his detractors are busy ensuring that Narendra Modi does not win again in the next Assembly elections, the fact remains that only he can propel BJP to victories at the state and the Centre ("Modi Faces Trouble At Home", June 18). Modi has an impeccable record and enjoys full support from the people of Gujarat.
K.R.SRINIVASAN, Secunderabad

The magazine's exhaustive coverage of a wide variety of issues, pertaining to everyone's interests, is commendable indeed. The list of India's best colleges, a result of

Despite the dissent being faced by Narendra Modi in his state, he has become a force to reckon with by virtue of his consistent performance. He deserves a place at the Centre and in spite of all the odds, he will emerge a winner in the days to come.
V. K. TANGRI, Dehradun

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

NEW

``

Problem Tourists
Indian tourists tend to ignore instructions of guides or wildlife wardens about how to behave with the wild animals and thereby put themselves and the animals at risk (What's Eating the Crocodiles?", June 18). It is unfortunate that a devoted officer like Madan Nayak was beaten to death for doing his duty. It's time Indian tourists learnt to behave and the Government put stricter laws in place.
RANJIT SINHA, Kolkata

Digging Up Truth
Students across India are digging up administrative dirt to look for truth and to ensure justice through the Right to Information Act ("They Ask The Right Questions", June 18). As known, the RTI Act empowers every citizen of the country to ask any question from the Government or seek any information. The best part is that the young RTI activist are asking the most relevant questions.These young activists should be promoted and must be given protection by the Government, for whistleblowers have often been attacked in the past.
BEENA MATHUR, Pune

an excellent collaborative effort between INDIA TODAY and the Nielsen team, is a treasure for the student community in the country and abroad. I congratulate the team and hope they keep producing similar brilliant reports in other sections too in the days to come.
K.K. CHHETRY, Manipur

The notion that RTI is an ultimate tool in the hands of citizens to fight against inexorable corruption is partially true; but the belief that it has enough strength to eradicate corruption replete in the system is absolutely wrong. To fulfil the dream of a corruption-free system, this Act needs amendments with stringent punishment provisions for those who deny divulging correct information or give token answers.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

Correction
The information pertaining to Symbiosis Institute of Media and Communication (SIMC), Pune, was erroneous in the colleges special issue ("Top of the Class", June 18). The correct information is as given below: Director (UG): Anupam Siddhartha Website: Simcug.edu.in Address: Viman Nagar, Pune-411014, Maharashtra, India. We regret the error. The reputation of SIMC as a whole was considered when the article was written.

Currency Crisis
Corruption in India is much more widespread and rampant than in China. China has laws and, more importantly, implements them against the scourge in a strict manner ("Why Can't Rupee Be Like the Yuan", June 18). Our neighbour is focused in its policies and committed in advancing its international influence as an economic power-

Though the list of best colleges was fairly well researched and comprehensive, most of the colleges on the list cater only to the elite and are inaccessible to millions of students from small towns and villages. A detailed survey of colleges in the Tier III and Tier IV cities of the country will go a long way towards helping students from smaller places make the right career choice.
P. ASHISH KUMAR, Kharagpur

In this era of widespread corruption in almost each and every sphere of our nation, RTI is playing a pivotal role in combating it. Every age group suffers due to corruption but the youth is its worst victim.

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

GAVASKAR­INDIVIDUAL BRILLIANCE AGAINST COLLECTIVE MEDIOCRITY

NEW

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

90

