BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

AS A MATTER OF FACT
F
acts come in every shape, size, variety. Their survival is governed by the broad principles of democracy. Confusion is the bridesmaid of change, so after the determined not by value but by how inexplicable they are. The human being has 23,000 genes, only "half as applause died down there was achievement, failure and bemany as a tomato", I am told. But humbling as this forma- wilderment in roughly equal measure. The fault line of tive fact of life might be, it does not quite catch the imagina- democracy is that while it offers equal rights in theory, it tion as much as the perplexity called death, particularly does not guarantee equality in practice. Every vote has the when death escapes the boundaries of reason: A plague dec- same weight, but every voter does not possess equal imates a continent, war murders a generation, or an evil weightage, whether in a municipality or the United Nations. maniac orders a genocide. Statistics distil facts to stark sim- Wealth feeds power and power reinforces wealth, both at plicity. Between September 1939 and August 1945, the pe- the macro and micro levels. In countries like India, the co-existence of democracy riod of the Second World War, 27,000 people were killed each day. (This figure does not include war-related casual- with degrading poverty cannot be easily justified, by ties like the three million-odd Bengalis who died of a famine either idealism or intellect. But poverty is both absolute and comparative. America's poor, famously, are better off than that was a direct consequence of war policy.) There is always enough to be learnt from war, its the middle class in most of the world. However, they do not machines and its machinations. Guess who is the largest compare themselves to sub-Saharan Africa, thank God for buyer of oil in the world? If you thought it was a country, their good fortune, and live happily ever after. They get wrong. The Pentagon. America's military consumes more angry with their president when their comfort zone is oil each year than the whole of Africa. And yet, when you threatened. No child suffers the anguish of malnutrition in think about it, is this very startling? The armies of the Greece, and yet Greek rage at loss of standards of living has British Empire surely drank up more oil than all the colonies boiled over into a volatile crisis. The battles being fought across the world are over inthey ruled. None of us were there to count, and contemporary historians had more delicious details to record, but you equity, a perception of injustice. Democracy does not, uncan safely bet that Rome alone had more chariots than the like socialism, offer economic equality, which is impossible; rest of the Roman Empire. It has always been thus. To the but its spirit does insist on economic equity. When disparvictor goes not only the spoils of war but also the far more ity between the top 5 per cent and bottom 50 per cent besubstantial rewards of its blanket peace: A Pax Romana comes obscene, the deprived do not remain silent forever. The establishment's traditional rethen, a Pax Americana now. SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com sponse has been to blame the vicSo what's the story? The privitim. But democracy permits a leges of power have not changed, victim to scream, and the Greeks but the world has. are doing so pretty loudly. Europe If the ascent of America begins and America are rushing to its with victory in the First World War; help, as they should if they want to. its supremacy after the Second; and It does seem odd, though, that domination after the Third (also India, where 50 times the populaknown as the Cold) War, then many tion of Greece lives below the of today's contradictions also lie in poverty line, should gift $10 billion the liberal ideas that America ento help resolve a problem it did couraged as a template for the funot cause. Till two decades ago, rich ture it hoped to control. America nations still felt some mild moral obsought the rights of power without ligation to reduce poverty through the problems or obvious injustice of aid. They now expect aid from the foreign rule. It tried to fashion, parpoor. Miraculously, they get it. Delhi ticularly after 1992, what might be cannot find Rs 20,000 crore for called the Good Empire as distinct Bengal, but hands over Rs 56,000 from the Evil Empire (Ronald crore for Greece. Bengal's poor can Reagan's description of the Soviet In countries like India, the shout as much as the Greeks. Union). The thesis, broadly, was this: co-existence of democracy with Will India ever get this money All nations would be equal; postdegrading poverty cannot be easily back? Fact from history: Greece is colonial nations would be formed on justified, by either idealism or still waiting for Germany to pay the basis of public will, with claims intellect. But poverty is both what it claimed as reparations after being resolved by plebiscite; the absolute and comparative. the Second World War. world as well as its parts would be 

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

70

