PAKISTAN

COVER STORY Corrupt politicians, obdurate judges and compromised journalists have driven Pakistan's crumbling democracy to despair
SACKED PAKISTAN PRIME MINISTER YOUSUF RAZA GILANI

By Qaswar Abbas in Islamabad and Sandeep Unnithan in New Delhi
DUNYA TV ANCHORS MEHER AND LUQMAN TALK TO RIAZ. MEHER SAYS,"THE QUESTIONS SHOULDN'T SEEM LIKE THEYARE PLANTED."

DESPOTS OF O

MESSPOT
THE TV SHOW THAT BROUGHT DOWN A PRIME MINISTER
18
INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

LUQMAN TELLS MEHER AND RIAZ, "WE HAVE TO CLEAR HAMID MIR'S ALLEGATIONS THAT WE HAVE TAKEN MONEY." HE TELLS RIAZ THEYARE GOING TO ASK WHY HE IS LEVELLING FALSE ACCUSATIONS AGAINST THE CHIEF JUSTICE AND HIS SON. (BELOW) RIAZ SUGGESTS THAT MEHER ASK HIM, "WHYARE YOU IN EVERY DEAL?" SHE SAYS SHE DOESN'T WANT TO. RIAZ INSISTS,"BUT I WANT TO GO INTO THAT AND GET TO THE CHIEF JUSTICE."

n June 14, Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani's downfall became a reality show to beat anything ever shown on Pakistani television. The confrontation between the executive, President Asif Ali Zardari's Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP)-led coalition government, and the judiciary, led by Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, reached a flashpoint. Ever since PPP came to power in 2008, Chaudhry had cornered Zardari on allegations of corruption. He had overturned General Pervez Musharraf's National Reconciliation Ordinance amnesty to over 8,000 people facing graft charges and ordered Zardari's government to probe the allegations against the president. Zardari's response came, albeit after four years. On June 12, the government set up a real estate tycoon to attack the chief justice. Malik Riaz Hussain, 58, the 12th richest man in Pakistan, claimed he had bribed Chaudhry's son Arsalan, 32, with 34.78 crore Pakistani rupees to obtain favourable court verdicts. It was intended as a fatal blow to the crusading chief justice's activist

NEW

NEW

AFP PHOTO/ AAMIR QURESHI

PAKISTAN

COVER STORY The searing summer has seen 20-hour power cuts which have brought Pakistanis out on the streets in protest.
AFP PHOTO/ARIF ALI

SHOOTATSIGHT
Pakistan's electronic media has had many controversies
GEO TV Launched in 2005,it was banned in 2007 by the then president Pervez Musharraf for spreading "negative news".On March 13, 2009,it was again taken off-air as the channel was promoting the `Long March'by lawyers to restore Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry.It was back on air two days later. Owner Mir Shakeel-ur-Rehman,a billionaire media tycoon. Popular shows Capital Talk by Hamid Mir, Aaj Kamran Khan Ke Sath by Kamran Khan. DUNYANEWS Launched in 2008,it was caught in the eye of a storm when an off-air video showing its two star anchors tutoring property tycoon Malik Riaz on how to attack Chief Justice Chaudhrywas uploaded on YouTube.Riaz had accused Chaudhry's son of taking bribes from him on the promise of getting pending cases against him dropped. Owner Mian Amir Mehmood,former mayor of Lahore and owner of the Punjab Group of Colleges. Popular shows Khari Baat by Mubashir Luqman, Cross Fire by Meher Bukhari. Luqman and Meher were involved in the leaked Riazvideo. SAMAATV Launched in 2007, the channel sacked its star anchor Maya Khan in January after she conducted an on-camera `raid'in a public park in Karachi questioning couples about their marital status and whether their parents were aware of their whereabouts. Owner Media baron Zafar Siddiqi. Popular shows Tonight with Jasmeen.

The Supreme Court has not obstructed governance. It has only blocked corrupt deals by the government.
FASIHUR REHMAN KHAN, Journalist, Urdu daily Nai Baat

CHIEF JUSTICE OF PAKISTAN IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY

reputation. But an off-air conversation in the Islamabad studios of Urdu language channel Dunya News, owned by Zardari's friend, Mian Amir Mehmood, showed how Riaz's allegation had been staged. The Dunya Special was meant to be an interrogation of Riaz by two of Pakistan's leading TV anchors, Mubashir Luqman and Meher Bukhari. Instead, the anchors strategised with Riaz on how to embarrass Chaudhry and his son. Luqman spoke on the phone with someone he identified as Abdul Qadir Gilani, 31, son of Prime Minister Gilani and a member of the Punjab Provincial Assembly. When an anchor protested over a hackneyed question that Riaz was prompting them to ask, the tycoon made it clear that he called the shots. "But I want to go into that..." he insisted. "I want to go into that and get to the chief justice..." The `Malik Riaz planted interview leaked video' was uploaded on YouTube on June 14. Within hours of being uploaded, it went viral with over 2,00,000 hits in less than a week. On June 19, Chaudhry hit back with Pakistan's first judicial coup. The chief justice dismissed Prime Minister Gilani for shielding President Zardari in a corruption case. Pakistan was plunged into a fresh political crisis. It couldn't have come at a worse time. Pakistan is wracked by a collapse of governance. The searing summer has seen 20-hour power cuts which have brought Pakistanis out on the streets.

Basic services have collapsed. Violent protests have rocked Gujranwala, Faisalabad, Kasur, Sargodha and Okara. Protesters have clashed with police, ransacked police stations, torched offices of local electricity boards and blocked highways. On June 18, protesters attacked the home of a PPP member of the National Assembly. The same day, protesters burnt three bogeys of a LahoreSialkot passenger train at Gujranwala. Foreign investment is absent, the economy is crawling at an annual growth rate of 3 per cent and money comes in only through the illegal trade of opium and guns. "The only people with access to liquid cash are the Pashtuns who control the opium trade and the arms bazaar of Landi Kotal on the Afghan border," says a member of the National Assembly. Corruption is at unprecedented levels--Transparency International's 2011 Corruption Perceptions Index of 183 countries ranked Pakistan at a lowly 134.

elations with Washington, Islamabad's largest aid donor, have also hit an impasse. US attempts to persuade Pakistan to reopen supply routes into Afghanistan have been stalled. Pakistan wants US to pay $5,000 per truck into Afghanistan. The US is only willing to pay $250 per truck. The routes have remained closed since US helicopter fire mistakenly killed 24 Pakistani soldiers on the

R

Afghan border in November. Sectarian violence has riven the country apart. Nearly a third of the five lakh-strong army is deployed to battle an insurrection in Balochistan and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas. Last year, over 4,400 people were killed in 476 major terrorist strikes. The largest city, Karachi, has turned into a battleground of warring ethnicities in which over 2,000 people have been killed since 2011. Elsewhere, religious extremists continue to extract a deadly toll among a dwindling group of moderates. A tiny consolation for Zardari came when his son, the PPP's nominal chairman, Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, 23, scored a first in his Oxford dissertation but if anyone had to grade Zardari's non-performance, he would clearly be sent down. Pakistan's four estates are at each other's throats. The executive and judiciary are locked in a fight to the finish. The media, once seen as the last bastion against the rise of fundamentalism, has been corroded by fear of reprisals. Since 2000, 39 journalists have been killed for doing their job. If not that, there is always the temptation of money--as Luqman asks Riaz in the off-air comments, "Can I get a villa like the one you gave Hamid Mir?" Ironically, the Pakistan Army, the destabiliser of civilian governments, has stayed aloof in the present crisis. Gilani was living on borrowed time. On April 26, he had been hauled up for contempt by the chief justice and convicted to a symbolic `rising of the court'--a 30-second imprisonment. With his exit, the judiciary's next target is Zardari. Ahmed Rashid, author of a new book Pakistan on the

ANATOMY OF DISASTER
January 10, 2012 Supreme Court says Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani is not an honest man and warns him that he could be removed from office if he does not take action on corruption cases against President Asif Ali Zardari.
20
INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

The confrontation between the executive and judiciary over corruption charges against the president culminated in the disqualification of the prime minister
Constitution provides immunity to the president. The prime minister maintains that he acted to defend the Constitution of Pakistan. February 13, 2012 Supreme Court indicts Gilani for contempt of court for refusing to ask Swiss authorities to reopen graft cases against Zardari. April 26, 2012 Gilani is convicted on charges of contempt of court, becoming the first Pakistani prime minister to receive such a severe verdict from a court while holding office. Gilani decides to appeal and refuses to step down as prime minister. May 28, 2012 Speaker of the National Assembly decides to not send a disqualification reference against Gilani to the Election Commission. Gilani says he won't appeal against the Supreme Court verdict. June 14, 2012 Supreme Court asks the chief law officer to probe property tycoon Malik Riaz Hussain's allegation that Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry's son, Arsalan Iftikhar, took a bribe from Riaz on the promise of dropping cases against him. The same day, a video is uploaded on YouTube showing two anchors of Dunya News tutoring Riaz on how to attack the chief justice in a staged interview. June 19, 2012 The Supreme Court disqualifies Prime Minister Gilani from Parliament.
JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

January 16, 2012 Supreme Court issues a contempt notice to Gilani for not acting against Zardari. January 19, 2012 Gilani appears before the court and reiterates that the

NEW

NEW

21

PAKISTAN

COVER STORY In 1999, a Pakistani court convicted Asif Ali Zardari and his wife to five- year jail terms in absentia. As president, he is protected from prosecution.
REUTERS/OSMAN ORSAL AP PHOTO/B.K. BANGASH

Brink, predicts more bruising conflicts between the courts and Zardari particularly over the so-called Memogate affair. Pakistan's then ambassador to Washington Hussain Haqqani sought US assistance to rein in the Pakistan Army, reportedly at Zardari's behest. "That judgment is now in the hands of the Supreme Court which is likely to send it for a full trial in the weeks ahead. If that happens, the case will also try and implicate Zardari and other government figures for treason. Avoiding such an outcome would be best for everyone and early elections is the only possible way Pakistan could get back on the rails," he says. As president, Zardari is protected from prosecution by Article 248 of the Constitution. Since 2009, the Supreme Court, led by Chaudhry, has pressurised the government to reopen several cases of corruption against Zardari, including two prominent cases of money laundering and kickbacks. In 1999, a Pakistani court convicted Zardari and his wife Benazir Bhutto to five-year jail terms in absentia. Bhutto was then in exile in London and was found guilty of accepting bribes from a Swiss firm hired during her second stint as prime minister. In 2003, a Swiss magistrate convicted Zardari, Bhutto and her mother Nusrat Bhutto for using Swiss bank accounts to launder $11.9 million in alleged bribes paid by companies
GETTY IMAGES

PAKISTAN PRESIDENT ASIF ALI ZARDARI (LEFT); PRIME MINISTERDESIGNATE MAKHDOOM SHAHABUDDIN

THE PRESIDENT'S MEN IN ASHADOWWAR
Riaz and Ijaz are part of the emerging axis of politicians, big business and media which is taking on the chief justice

MALIK RIAZ HUSSAIN, 58

MANSOOR IJAZ, 51

trading with the Pakistan government. On January 10, the court accused Gilani of not being an "honourable man" for refusing to write to the Swiss authorities to reopen these cases. Zardari, who has the dubious reputation of being unable to bring to book the assassins of his wife, has responded with a steady retreat, occasionally sacrificing a loyalist to ensure his political survival. First, long-time confidant Haqqani was removed as US ambassador in November 2011.

When Gilani offended the military in January this year by suggesting they had violated the Constitution by testifying before the Supreme Court in the Memogate case, the judiciary closed ranks with the military. Zardari indicated a willingness to sacrifice his prime minister to placate both. Which is why he has not protested Gilani's dismissal. Instead, a day later, PPP convened with its largest ally, PML(Q), and chose Makhdoom Shahabuddin, 65, a PPP lightweight from Southern Punjab,

as the next prime minister. Shahabuddin's choice is only likely to enrage the mercurial chief justice. In 2011, Chaudhry directed Pakistan's Anti Narcotics Force (ANF) to arrest and question Shahabuddin for approving a 2009 import of nine tonnes of ephedrine as health minister. The drug was imported by two pharmaceutical firms to ties with Gilani's second son Ali Musa, a member of the National Assembly. Ephedrine is not only used to synthesise medicines for

Q& A

IMRAN KHAN

"Zardari must step down, dissolve the Assembly and hold elections"
In an exclusive interview with INDIA TODAY, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf chief Imran Khan welcomed the Supreme Court's decision to disqualify Prime Minister Yousuf Gilani. Q. Should the Pakistan National Assembly be dissolved and elections called? A. In the light of the Supreme Court's decision to disqualify the prime minister, Asif Ali Zardari's government must step down, dissolve the Assembly and hold elections. Let the people of Pakistan decide who they think are the best to run this country. Q. Is the judiciary's action right? A. It was a historic decision and Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf welcomed it. Let me add that the Supreme Court's decision to disqualify the prime minister has come following a petition filed by our party. The judiciary has done a great job. My party will not allow it to be toppled. Q. What about corruption in the media? A. My party believes in rooting out corruption from everywhere, be it government departments or the private sector. Media groups must put their houses in order. I have already asked Malik Riaz Hussain to disclose the names of all generals, politicians, bureaucrats and journalists who benefited from him so that people of Pakistan know who was fooling them. Q. What will be your first priority if voted to power? A. We will make the constitutional institutions stronger, ensure justice and increase spending on education. Q. Do you think the Supreme Court overstepped its mandate? A. No, it did not. Pakistan is lucky to have a fearless and independent judiciary. The allegations levelled against the chief justice were actually a ploy to paralyse the highest court of the country. The entire Supreme Court, not just the chief justice, is the target. My party will stand by it.

Malik Riaz Hussain, one of the richest persons in Pakistan, shocked the nation on June 12 when he told the Supreme Court that he had paid $3.7 million (34.78 crore Pakistani rupees) to Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry's son Arsalan, who had promised to help drop pending cases against the tycoon. Riaz's fortune was made in real estate and his company, Bahria Town, has 13 projects in Islamabad, Lahore and Rawalpindi. He is known to have close ties with President Asif Ali Zardari and the army.The National Accountability Bureau is probing an allegation that Riaz, with the help of the Defence Housing Authority, took over land worth 62 billion Pakistani rupees in Islamabad since 2009 from 1,50,000 people.There are also reports that Riaz has been paying off several top TV anchors and journalists to ensure positive coverage for himself and Bahria Town .

The Tallahassee, Florida-born Mansoor Ijaz is Pakistan's Charlie Wilson, a self-appointed political dilettante and general busybody who divides his time between the US, Europe and West Asia. He attained notoriety in May 2011 when he claimed to have delivered a Pakistan government memo seeking support against a possible military coup, to the then US military chief General Mike Mullen.The memo was allegedly drafted by then Pakistani ambassador to the US, Hussain Haqqani, at the behest of President Asif Ali Zardari. Memogate created a political storm in Pakistan and Haqqani lost his job though the Pakistan government denied the existence of any such memo.A regular on talk shows, he has also written occasional op-ends in international newspapers. According to media reports, he is close to former Pakistan prime minister Nawaz Sharif.
JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

22

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

23

NEW

NEW

PAKISTAN

COVER STORY On June 15, all 16 Supreme Court judges viewed the Riaz video.

WHYPAKISTAN FAILED AS ASTATE
More than political instability, it is its bankrupt economy that defines the country's failure
REUTERS/SHAHID SHINWARI

n annual ranking of failed states published by the Foreign Policy magazine brought bad news for Pakistan on the day that its Supreme Court dismissed Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani. Not only does Pakistan feature on the list, it ranks quite high at 13, behind usual suspects like Somalia, Congo, and Afghanistan. More than politics, it is the bankrupt economy that really defines state failure in Pakistan. Even as the Pakistan Peoples Party dealt with its political crisis, hundreds of violent protests over acute electricity shortages--up to 20 hours a day without power-- have brought normal life to a standstill in Punjab province. According to some estimates, the gap in demand and supply at peak times is as much as 7,500 MW or 40 per cent of the total demand. Acute electricity shortages are only the most visible symptom of a bankrupt economy. Shortly after he presented the country's Budget on June 1, Finance Minister Abdul Hafeez admitted to the press that he is in constant touch with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) because of Pakistan's precarious balance of payments situation.

A

THE SITE OF A BOMB BLAST IN LANDI KOTAL, NORTHWEST PAKISTAN, ON JUNE 16

Pakistan's current account deficit is 1.7 per cent of its GDP or $4 billion. In 2011-12, it received just under $700 million in foreign direct investment. Its only significant foreign inflows come from remittances from overseas workers which was a handsome $13 billion in 2011-12. For now, Pakistan has foreign exchange reserves of just over $16 billion, but these are insufficient to cover a shock, a sharp rise in global oil prices, for example. Pakistan is already on IMF aid, having secured a massive $7.6 billion loan in 2008. It may, however, need a new loan from IMF without having repaid the 2008 one. The most damning evidence of Pakistan's state failure in the economy is its inability to mop up taxes from its citizens. In

2011-12, Pakistan's tax-GDP ratio was just under 10 per cent, significantly below India's 18 per cent and well below America's 28 per cent. With the exception of oil-rich states (which charge no taxes) and a handful of banana republics (which also feature in the top 10 of the failed states list), no country in the world has a tax-GDP ratio as low as Pakistan's. The failure to collect sufficient taxes means that the government is constrained to deliver key public services, whether power, roads, education or healthcare. In 2011-12, Pakistan's Budget deficit was close to 7 per cent, giving no room for further expenditure. At 7 per cent, the deficit is a serious roadblock for growth. The average annual rate of economic growth since 2008 has been just 3 per cent. Inflation has moderated from a high of 25 per cent in 2008 to around 13 per cent in 2012, but is still much above acceptable levels. The rate of investment is only 11 per cent of GDP, about a third of India's. The democratic government of Pakistan has failed its 180 million people's economic aspirations. Political instability triggered by recent events could make things worse. by Dhiraj Nayyar

Zardari wants PPP to lead the next government. But with a loss of credibility and infighting, a defeat seems imminent.
NASIM ZEHRA, Political Analyst

common cold but also to refine heroin. An ANF official said they were facing "bureaucratic hurdles" in arresting and questioning Shahabuddin. Mindful of this controversy, the PPP has also nominated Raja Pervez Ashraf as a back-up candidate. Until recently, Pakistan's vibrant, fast-growing media, led by 15 new

channels, firmly backed the Supreme Court's anti-corruption crusade. But the TV attack against Chaudhry showed that even the fourth estate has been compromised. On June 15, all 16 Supreme Court judges watched the Riaz video. They took strong exception to the conversation and set up a two-judge committee to look into

possible contempt proceedings against the channel. A jubilant Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf chief Imran Khan termed it a historic decision and claimed credit. "The Supreme Court's decision to disqualify the prime minister has come following a petition filed by our party," he told INDIA TODAY. "The judiciary has done a great job. My party will not allow it to be toppled," he said (see box). Zardari's could be Pakistan's first elected government to complete a full term. The president's greed and incompetence, however, have almost ensured it won't get another term. 

24

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

NEW

