Spe cial Report

MULAYAM SINGH YADAV

MULAYAM'S CONTROVERSIALASSETS
FLIP-FLOP-FLIP
Mulayam's fluctuating fortunes Uttar Pradesh Assembly polls are due in April 2007. Supreme Court on March 1, 2007, orders CBI to probe allegations against Mulayam and family. Mulayam lends support to UPA 1 in trust vote on July 22, 2008, over the nuclear deal. On November 7, 2008, solicitor general gives opinion that the case against him be withdrawn. Lok Sabha elections held in May 2009, but by March-end, Congress-Samajwadi Party talks over seat sharing fail. On March 30, 2009, CBI does another U-turn, seeks to register a case against Mulayam. Mulayam extends support to Pranab Mukherjee for presidency on June 15, 2012. Judgment awaited. application in Supreme Court asserting that the agency had concluded its PE and "is approaching this hon'ble court for an order/direction enabling the applicant to proceed further". This was the first of the many unprecedented things that were to follow in the case. CBI has never before gone to a court, seeking directions on what to do next in a case. If a PE throws up enough evidence, CBI registers a case. The autonomous investigation agency does not require permission from anybody to register a case as per its manual. Nearly five years later, CBI is yet to register a case, but Mulayam has not been exonerated either. The case has been used by the Government to arm-twist the Samajwadi Party leader into submission whenever it required the support of his MPs to save the Government, as in the July 22, 2008, trust vote over the Indo-US nuclear deal. And more recently, in the presidential election, Mulayam's volte-face in favour of UPA candidate Pranab Mukherjee after a brief dalliance with Trinamool Congress's Mamata Banerjee, can only be matched by the CBI's about-turns in the case. In return for giving UPA 2 a much-needed facesaver, Mulayam has ensured that the cases against him remain in deep freeze for some more time. "The case is as good as finished. The delay has been fatal for the case. And it definitely is a matter of design," says senior advocate KTS Tulsi, who is representing Vishwanath Chaturvedi, the man behind the PIL that initiated the case against the Yadavs in December 2005. The PIL alleged that Mulayam had misused the office of Uttar Pradesh chief minister and other public positions held by him since 1977 to amass illegal wealth and properties in his own name and that of his family members--Akhilesh, Dimple

(FROM LEFT) DIMPLE, MULAYAM AND AKHILESH DURING AN ELECTION CAMPAIGN
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

The Yadavs are accused of financial misdemeanours that may seem minor but they are enough for the Congress to lean on them for political support at opportune moments
By Bhavna Vij-Aurora

n paper, the case of disproportionate assets (DA) against Samajwadi Party chief Mulayam Singh Yadav and family appears to be, in comparative terms, a minor misdemeanour. He is formally accused of having disproportionate assets worth just Rs 2.63 crore, a gross undervaluation in the age of scams like the Rs 1.76 lakh crore 2G spectrum case or the coal block allocations amount-

O

ing to Rs 10.6 lakh crore. CBI arrived at the figure in its preliminary enquiry (PE), based on information given in income tax returns filed by Mulayam, his son and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh and daughter-in-law and recently elected MP Dimple. CBI, now widely known for its blatant flip-flops in the Mulayam case at the behest of the Congress-led UPA Government, scrutinised the income tax returns of the Yadav family over 12 years, from April 1, 1993, to March 31, 2005. A CBI official involved in the inves-

tigations admits that Mulayam, whose declared assets in 1977 were Rs 77,000, "subsequently acquired assets worth crores". The information in income tax returns was based on gross undervaluation of properties. "The market value of these properties is at least 10 times more than the value mentioned in affidavits and sale deeds," he says. According to CBI, as per the market price prevailing in 2005, the value of Mulayam's assets was Rs 100 crore. It would be substantially more as per the present market value. CBI also

noted in its PE that "Akhilesh, a public servant (then an MP), has not only abetted his father in acquisition of assets but has also acquired assets disproportionate to his known sources of income". The PE findings have never been made public. According to sources, CBI had recommended registering a regular case against Mulayam and his family based on the enquiry, having found commission of offences by the accused. CBI's calculations were simple and based entirely on the income tax filings of the family. They did not take into account the fact that the assets could have a much higher value than what was declared. The assets of Mulayam's family at the beginning of

April 1993 were Rs 18.25 lakh. They rose to Rs 4.59 crore by March 2005. Thus the assets acquired between 1993 and 2005 were Rs 4.41 crore. Over the same period, the family declared an income of Rs 6.23 crore. It also declared an expenditure of Rs 4.45 crore during the 12 years under investigation. The difference between income and expenditure over this period--the savings or assets of the Yadav family--is Rs 1.78 crore. But the Yadavs acquired assets worth Rs 4.41 crore in this period. Therefore, Rs 2.63 crore (4.41 crore minus 1.78 crore) worth of assets are not accounted for by their self-declarations of income and expenditure. On October 26, 2007, CBI filed an

26

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

27

NEW

NEW

Spe cial Report

MULAYAM SINGH YADAV

and his late wife Malti Devi. On March 1, 2007, a Supreme Court bench comprising Justices Altamas Kabir and A.R. Lakshmanan directed CBI to conduct a PE into the allegations. CBI duly registered a PE on March 5, 2007, to ascertain if prima facie there was any substantial evidence in the allegations levelled in the PIL. In the meantime, Akhilesh filed a review petition against the March 1 order. The matter was to come before the same bench on March 16 and dramatic events unfolded that morning. Justice Lakshmanan, set to retire a week later, broke down in court, saying that he could not hear the matter as he had received a "heinous letter" by fax at his house

REALTY COVER-UP
Value of properties quoted by Mulayam and Akhilesh in their income tax returns is far less than the estimated market price

Plot No. 218, Civil Lines, Etawah

5

1 2

Friends' Colony house, Etawah

3 4

Hazratganj house, Lucknow

Rs 10 lakh Market price Rs 7.8 crore
Value quoted

Rs 56,000 Market price Rs 1 crore
Value quoted

Rs 35 lakh Market price Rs 12 crore
Value quoted

Mohalla Ramana Dilkhush, Lucknow

Akhilesh's agricultural land, Saifai

Rs 20 lakh Market price Rs 4 crore
Value quoted

Rs 5.4 lakh Market price Rs 2 crore
Value quoted

6

Chaudhary Charan Singh Degree College, Saifai

7

House in Saifai

Rs 9,000 Market price Rs 50 lakh
Value quoted

Rs 20,000 Market price Rs 10 lakh
Value quoted

Photographs: MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

These are only some of the properties owned by the Yadavs

in the morning. Though he did not reveal the contents of the letter in court, it later emerged that the letter alleged that he had been influenced to favour the Yadavs. K.G. Balakrishnan, the then chief justice, subsequently constituted another bench comprising Justices Kabir and Cyriac Joseph to hear the case. CBI continued with its PE and it is apparent from its October 26, 2007, application that it had found enough prima facie evidence to proceed against the Yadavs and was seeking the Supreme Court's permission to proceed on the sensitive matter.

Cutting to political developments of the day, it was around the same time that the Congress approached Samajwadi Party (SP) with 36 MPs for a political deal. The crisis within UPA 1 was deepening over the Indo-US nuclear deal and the Left parties were threatening to withdraw support. On August 11, 2007, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh dared them to go ahead. As SP dithered, CBI filed another application on March 10, 2008, seeking expeditious disposal of its earlier appeal. The noose around Mulayam was tightening. On July 8, 2008, Left parties withdrew support

CRITICAL OF CBI'S CHANGING STAND IN THE CASE,THE SUPREME COURT SAID ITWOULD NOT LIKE THE AGENCY TO BECOME AN INSTRUMENT OFTHE GOVERNMENT.
28

but on the same day Mulayam announced support to the Government on the nuclear deal. On July 22, 2008, UPA sailed through the trust vote with 275 votes in favour and 256 against. The period of uncertainty prior to the trust vote was also milked by the Yadavs to extract their pound of flesh. On July 14, 2008, Dimple wrote to the Prime Minister, who was also handling the department of personnel and training that oversees CBI, saying that all allegations against her were false and that she filed her income tax returns regularly. She followed up the letter with two more letters in September and October 2008. Burdened by Mulayam's bailout of the Government in the trust vote, CBI referred Dimple's arguments to then solicitor general G.E. Vahanvati for his legal opinion. Vahanvati, cur-

rently the attorney general, gave his opinion on November 7, 2008, saying that the case against Mulayam should be closed since assets of relatives (Akhilesh and Dimple in this case) could not be clubbed with his. And that they all filed individual income tax returns. Armed with the legal opinion, CBI told Supreme Court on December 6, 2008, that they wanted to withdraw their earlier decision to proceed against Mulayam and family as stated in their earlier application of October 26, 2007. "In view of the legal advice and directions of the Union of India, the application filed by CBI may be allowed to be withdrawn," CBI told the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court was livid. In February 2009, the court rapped the investigative agency for "acting at the behest" of the Centre.

The court rebuked CBI for approaching the Centre for advice and asked its counsel, Additional Solicitor General Mohan Parasaran, "Since when has the CBI started taking advice from the Government? Why didn't you come to the court for clarifications?" Critical of CBI's changing stand in the case, the court said it would not like the agency to become an instrument of the Government. On February 10, 2009, the Supreme Court reserved its order on the various applications filed by CBI and it remains so till date. CBI again did a Uturn on March 30, 2009, saying that it stood by its October 26, 2007 application against Mulayam. Justice Joseph retired on January 28, 2012, without giving a judgment. According to advocate Tulsi, an order being reserved for so long is unprecedented. "It is ex-

tremely curious. The Supreme Court has advised all high courts that a judgment must be delivered within three months of the hearing being completed. They are expected to follow their own diktat," he says. The case will now be heard all over again by a new bench. However, Chief Justice S.H. Kapadia has not yet constituted the new bench. "Now who will put a limit to the chief justice? It has to be self-imposed," Tulsi adds. Till then, Mulayam's fate will hang in the balance. The Government, through the flagrant misuse of CBI, has ensured that the political future of Mulayam and family is not irretrievably derailed, providing them relief at opportune times. At the same time, it has left the door open to revive the case to blackmail them another day.
with Shravya Jain

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

29

NEW

NEW

