Sp ort

TENNIS

DOUBLE FAULT
A bitter face-off between former friends and legendary tennis duo Leander Paes and Mahesh Bhupathi threatens to smash India's Olympic dream into the ground
Olympics, set to begin on July 25. "We cannot condone or reward the hen he split from partner drama enacted by Mahesh and Mahesh Bhupathi in Rohan. This would be a bad preceNovember 2011 after dent," wrote Paes in a letter faxed playing together at the to AITA on June 20. The crisis could also affect India's ATP World Tour Finals in London, Leander Paes, 40, said he wanted chances in mixed doubles in London if "younger legs and fast serves". He AITA manages a wild card for Mirza. If was hinting that Bhupathi, a year jun- Bhupathi were to be left out of the ior, was ageing. At No. 7 in the squad, Mirza would have to play Association of Tennis Professionals' mixed doubles with Paes, whom she (ATP) top 10 doubles rankings, Paes teamed with to win the Doha Asiad had the privilege to pick his mate. mixed doubles title in 2006. The Indian tennis fraternity is This was the second time the two were sparring. The first happened stunned. "We all felt Bhupathi, after immediately after the duo won the his French Open win, would fit 2001 French Open doubles. They re- very well into Leander's scheme of united in 2010 after a nine-year gap. things. We are trying to sort out the The All India Tennis Association problems," says Jaideep Mukherjea, (AITA) replaced Bhupathi with 32-year- former Indian player and now a old Rohan Bopanna, ATP ranked No. 12 member of AITA'S Olympic team selecin doubles. But eight months later, on tion committee. June 15, AITA officials AITA President Anil changed their mind and Khanna woke up late to said they wanted Sports ministry the crisis, which has been Bhupathi to partner Paes brewing since the duo, leaves it to in the doubles at the nicknamed the Indian AITA to exercise London Olympics. They Express, derailed. He any option. hoped Paes would be spoke to Paes in London We will speak happy to pair with on June 17 and then called Bhupathi, fresh off a triup Bhupathi and Bopanna to players umph with Sania Mirza at in Mumbai. He pointed out if needed. the French Open mixed that only the Bryan brothAJAY MAKEN doubles tournament. Bhuers of the US (Mike and Sports Minister pathi refused. He wrote to Bob) play together in all tournaments, including AITA that he did not want to the Olympics. "This is the play with Paes. Bopanna Olympics. Do it for the nafollowed suit. tion. Your magic will work As a result, Paes, in London," Khanna India's top-ranked player, pleaded with them. is now without a partner Khanna told both and has threatened to pull Bhupathi and Bopanna out of the London
By Shantanu Guha Ray

THE LAST STRAW, APPARENTLY, WAS THE DAVIS CUP TIE IN UZBEKISTAN IN MARCH. PAES, CLAIMS BHUPATHI, WANTED AITA TO KEEP HIM OUT OF THE INDIAN SQUAD.
that by refusing to play with Paes, they Bhupathi's grievances was a total were violating an AITA agreement-- breakdown in communication bemandatory for all ranked tennis play- tween him and Paes. Bopanna said he ers in India--which commits them to was "shocked and insulted" after "play unconditionally for the coun- Paes badmouthed him following their try". The two did not budge. Worse, Davis Cup doubles loss to Uzbekistan Bhupathi called up Union Sports in March this year. "He screamed at Minister Ajay Maken on June 18 and me in front of everyone in the court. sought his intervention. Maken asked It was very, very insulting. I am comKhanna why he could not send two fortable playing with Mahesh," teams. AITA then thought of selecting Bopanna told Khanna. two doubles teams (BhupathiAITA officials told INDIA TODAY Bopanna and Paes-yet-to-be-decided Bhupathi was livid that Paes had partner) but didn't do so because then asked for Bopanna without his knowlthey would have been compelled to edge at a time--October 2011--when choose either Somdev Dev Varman, they were still playing together. Bopanna relayed the offer from Paes ATP-ranked 259th in singles and recovering from an injury to his right to Bhupathi. Bopanna then sacrificed shoulder, or Yuki Bhambri, ATP- a highly successful association with ranked 218, to partner Paes, the coun- Pakistan's Aisam-ul-Haq Qureshi and try's best player. When Khanna told started playing with Bhupathi. The last straw, apparently, was Maken that it would be an insult to Paes, the minister quickly stepped the Davis Cup tie in Uzbekistan. back, leaving the decision to the ten- Bhupathi claims Paes wanted to keep nis federation. "The sports ministry him out of the Indian squad. AITA leaves it to AITA to exercise any of the dropped Bhupathi to accommodate options in the best national interest. Bhambri, citing Paes' triumph in the We will speak to players if they need Australian Open doubles competition to be spoken to," said Maken. On June with the Czech Republic's Radek 21, AITA finally decided to Stepanek as partner. Bhupathi believes send two doubles teams, that AITA is cut up with one with BhupathiWe all felt Bopana and the other with him because his sports Bhupathi, after Paes and Vishnu Vardhan, company, his French Open management ranked 207 in ATP doubles. Globosport, has been win, would fit successfully organising Paes, a bronze medalinto Leander's list at the 1996 Atlanta ATP and Women's Tennis Olympic Games, merely Association (WTA) events scheme of said he wanted to play in India without involvthings well. with Bopanna for "profesing the tennis associaJAIDEEP sional reasons" and that tion, getting stars such MUKHERJEA the latter had agreed to do as Serena Williams, AITA Selector so in an email sent to him Martina Hingis, Mary on October 18, 2011. But it Pierce and Martina had little effect on June 15. Navratilova to play in Both Bopanna and Bhupathe country. thi listed a string of reaThis may well be the sons, all very personal, for biggest double fault in not wanting to partner the history of Indian Paes. Top of the list of tennis. 

W

``

``

BHUPATHI (IN FRONT) AND PAES AT THE ATP TOUR FINALS IN LONDON IN NOVEMBER 2011, THEIR LAST APPEARANCE TOGETHER

50

AFP

INDIA TODAY  JULY 2, 2012

NEW

NEW

``

``

JULY 2, 2012  INDIA TODAY

51

