NET FLUX
news now

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

viral video

app alert

What caught the attention of people on the World Wide Web Facebook has launched a new feature that allows same-sex couples to declare their marital status,with icons featuring two men (or women). A new version of the Angry Birds game will be launched in December. Pigs, the birds'nemesis, will be able to protect eggs stolen from birds.
MCDONALD CONVERSES WITH HIMSELF

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up has something for podcast lovers, piano players and photographers. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. MarbleCam gives your photographs the appearance that they have been shot through a marble. Piano Dust Buster will improve your pianoplaying skills by hearing you play and telling you if you have gone wrong. Podcast keeps you entertained with the latest podcasts on various topics.

tweet tweet

Best Trends
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on July 9: The death of veteran US actor Ernest Borgnine, 95, topped the trend list, with people tweeting condolences and prayers. The strangest trend had people confessing their deepest secrets--from being scared of the dark to still liking the American boyband Backstreet Boys. Tweets dripping with sarcasm poured in when Narendra Modibaiter Sanjay Joshi wrote to the Centre demanding security and alleged death threats, following his ouster from the BJP national executive. The term `Internet Hindus' spread like fire on Twitter. Some questioned India's secular identity, some claimed they comprised BJP supporters, while others called the term ridiculous and offensive. People prayed for ailing actor Dara Singh's speedy recovery.
#Ernest Borgnine
1,608,611

This week, a video showing the conversation between American actor Jeremiah McDonald, 32, and his former self at the age of 12 by juxtaposing old footage from a video he taped in 1992; a flashmob, with instrumentalists performing Beethoven's 9th Symphony in Spain; and a man performing a fast version of Michael Jackson's `moonwalk' , went viral.
Super moonwalking

1.8 million views
Aconversation with my12-year-old self

4.7 million views
Som Sabadell flashmob

2.3 million views
* Views from when videos were uploaded

smart sheet
An article published in The Guardian on July 9 on the torture and murder of IMROZ Kashmiri civilians by Indian forces has sent shock waves across the Web. The Mass Graves of Kashmir, written by British journalist Cathy Scott-Clark, focuses on Kashmiri human rights lawyer Parvez Imroz's efforts to uncover the truth about the armed forces. His team found more than 6,000 unmarked graves in the state. "When will the world start asking as tough questions of India as it is of Syria? Or are we Kashmiris invisible?"he asked.

RAJA

Word Play

star of the week

In Cold Blood

#50Things About Me
3,90,511

#SanjayJoshi #Internet Hindus
1,50,258 2,36,331

#Dara Singh
60,305

*Figures denote number of followers

A white man delivering actor Kamal Hassan's dialogues from Tamil films such as Indian and Nayagan with panache, has surprised Tamilians around the world. Tamil movie reviewer Review Raja's latest offering dissects the trailer of Hassan's latest flick, Vishwaroopam.The 24-year-old weirdonet business analyst from Toronto Joseph Garner, a 29-year-old American, has an impressive knowledge quit his job and left his family to of Tamil cinema, and gives travel around the US, making money funny and insightful reonly through odd jobs he found on views. Raja, who started Craigslist--the online classified ads site. reviewing films on A video of Anaia Barnes, 5, swimming with sharks YouTube in June, in the Bahamas, has faced criticism. Shockingly, has 80,000 her parents were the ones who recorded the clip. viewers.

web tips
Not only should you protect yourself from the rain, but also your phone. Here are some useful tips: Carry your phone in a plastic zip lock before venturing out in the rain. If your phone gets wet in the rain, keep it in an air-tight box with silica gel strips. Don't use a hair dryer to dry your phone. It will only damage the gadget.

