ACTIVITY

ANIMAL INSTINCT

Onlyfor

Children
It's family fun in London this July as the best gigs come to town
TO U R

POTTER MANIA
The Harry Potter studio tour is a magical experience for those whose dreams inhabit the world of Muggles and Voldemort. The studio tour takes you behind the scenes as you gaze at props, costumes and sets, and understand the animatronics that went into making the films based on J.K. Rowling's books. WHERE At the Warner Bros studio in Leavesden, about 30 km out of London. PRICE Rs 2,408 (16 years and above); Rs 1,806 (5-15 years); free (below five).

Every summer, one of London's many parks is transformed into a circus that your kids can be part of, not as spectators but performers. The famous Gorilla Circus Flying Trapeze school is not for the faint-hearted but is a compelling activity for your child. WHEN On till September 11 at Regent's Park and Battersea Park. PRICE Rs 2,064 onwards.

Head to the largest candy store in the world for a sugar fix. The 35,000 sq ft M&M store is littered with M&M characters and jars filled to the brim with sweet nothings. A super treat for candy lovers, kids and adults alike. WHERE Leicester Square in West End of London.

SHOPPING

BEST BUYS
Make a worthy pilgrimage to Hamleys and prepare to return with an empty wallet. This sprawling toy store allows you to go bananas, irrespective of your age. There are a number of toy and game demonstrations that are the perfect hook for those who are undecided about what to buy. WHERE Take the tube to Oxford Circus or Piccadilly and walk from there to Regent's Street.

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

49

DAY TRIPPIN'
It's not just London. Here's the best of England.
LIVERPOOL A must-do pilgrimage for music lovers who have grown up to the Beatles'tunes.All year through, the Fab Four are being celebrated in Liverpool through a series of events. Getting There It's 2 hours 20 minutes by train from Euston at Rs 1,000 per person one way. Don't Miss Stay at the Hard Day's Night hotel which has rooms reflecting the Beatles'music and magic. BATH One of England's quaintest cities with a UNESCO World Heritage Site tag, it is known for its Roman baths and its long-term association with literary queen Jane Austen. Getting There Take the 90-minute train from London Paddington to Bath Spa. A single ticket in August costs upwards of Rs 1,548. Don't Miss The audio guide Bryson at the Baths by bestselling writer Bill Bryson for a different perspective. LEEDS What's a trip to the UK without a strut around a moat? The 12th century Leeds castle is home to fine memorabilia. Entry to the castle is around Rs 1,700 per adult. Getting There Take the train from London Victoria to Bearsted, roughly 6 km from the castle. Tickets cost upwards of Rs 1,700 per person one way in late July. Don't Miss A hot air balloon ride at the castle grounds. STRATFORD-UPON-AVON A trip to Shakespeare's birthplace is a must. Visit the bard's home and catch a play at the newly reopened Royal Shakespeare Theatre. Getting There Train from Marylebone or Euston to Stratford-upon-Avon. The journey takes 2 hours 30 minutes and cost upwards of Rs 1,200. Don't Miss Shakespeare with an Indian twist in Much Ado About Nothing, directed by Iqbal Khan and starring Meera Syal.
by Prachi Bhuchar

T H E AT R E

THE LION, THE WITCH AND THE WARDROBE
WHAT This new musical traces the journey of Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy through whimsical Narnia. WHERE The ThreeSixty theatre at Kensington Gardens. PRICE Rs 2,600 to Rs 5,600.

MATILDA
WHAT Matilda the musical, based on Roald Dahl's book, has been a runaway success since it began playing. WHERE The Cambridge Theatre. PRICE Upwards of Rs 1,600.

FO O D & D R I N KS

FUN DINING
RAINFOREST CAFE This tropical hideaway, with rainforest sounds and animal movements, is exciting for children, but the food is expensive and a bit bland. PRICE Upwards of Rs 1,000 per person. WHERE Piccadilly Circus. GIRAFFE This one is a winner with grafitti on the wall, crayon sets, games and a kid menu complete with burgers, smoothies and other finger food. PRICE Upwards of Rs 600 per person. WHERE Soho, Spitalfields, Kensington.

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

51

