BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

POLITICS IN THE TIME OF OLYMPICS
hen propaganda works, it becomes conventional wis- and woe behold any heretic who attempts to disturb its sedom fairly quickly. As the Olympic torch fleets from cret society methods of insider trading, as the current Sports hand to heroic hand on its way to the London Games, Minister Ajay Maken discovered when he thought that the we offer it the aura of a tradition stretching back to that hoary Government of India was more important than the Board of past when this event was restricted to a few nude Greek men. Control for Cricket in India (BCCI). The chorus that silenced There is certainly a very pre-electricity touch to this torch him was a formidable all-party alliance. If the alliance that squashed Maken formed a coalition which conjures up visions of an olden golden age. A bit of reflection suggests that a torch could not have been much government in Delhi, it would be the strongest, most use, since the sports were held during daylight. In fact, this stable, policy-focused ruling partnership in Indian history. wheeze was dreamt up by the Nazis for the 1936 Berlin Perhaps Rahul Gandhi should, when he takes effective extravaganza as part of a publicity drive for Hitler's charge of Congress in September, hire Lalit Modi as pseudo-white Aryan maniac delusions. The world destroyed consultant to decipher the BCCI code of management. If Modi is held up in London, there is always Jagmohan Nazis, but kept the torch. Nor did the logo, of five interlinked circles, originate in Dalmiya waiting to serve in Calcutta. Politics, far more than sport, needs the glue of symbols. some great architectural symbol of ancient Greece. It was born in the intelligent imagination of the man who rein- The BJP revived from a near-death experience in the 1984 vented the Olympics, Baron Pierre de Coubertin, when he General Elections by turning a brick into a magnet during its saw a magazine advertisement for Dunlop bicycle tyres with campaign for the construction of a temple at Ayodhya. The a similar display. It might however be the most significant Gandhi cap has rather lost its adhesive quality for the Congress. When its leaders are forced by protocol to wear contribution made by an ad agency to world history. This logo was first revealed in 1914, so in two years it them, they look faintly ridiculous. Moreover, Anna Hazare will reach its centenary moment. Surely this is sufficient has co-opted the cap into his own brand image. A torch could be a good substitute. One can visualise the cause for the advertising and sports industries to pool their considerable talents, and raise sufficient funds to celebrate excitement created by Youth Congress volunteers holding in the manner to which they are accustomed. 1914 also saw aloft the Torch of Reform, as they race from village to village, the advent of the First World War, but no one seems partic- behind a bus with dancing and music on the upper deck. This in turn would ensure TV coverage, ularly eager to recall that first inSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com as news channels need the barest stance of organised, relentless excuse to show free footage of and often pointless carnage on a Hindi film songs. TV would also multinational scale. encourage sponsors to jump in Baron Coubertin became with free packets of sweets for convinced that sport was a better children among the spectators. option than war, and who can Every PCC would send one torch to blame him. But, to succeed, he an AICC session; all of them would argued, sport had to be organised be used to ignite one giant flame on the lines of religion, with its to inaugurate a fiery start. own church, dogma and ritual. Sceptics will always dismiss This profound insight is the basis any revolutionary idea. When of the commercial success of all Baron Coubertin persuaded a contemporary sport. few countries to throw a javelin, Each sport has its own Pope, did he know that one day, more who is infallible as long as he is in than a century later, a blond office. His support system is a mayor of London called Boris cluster of cardinals and a strucJohnson would aspire to become tured order of bishops. This The Gandhi cap has rather lost its Prime Minister of a Great Power should end all questions about why politicians want to be at the adhesive quality for the Congress. When on the strength of his Olympic skills? A sneer is the privilege command centre. It is not the its leaders are forced by protocol to of a pessimist. sport that they love, but the infalwear them, they look faintly ridiculous. The Congress is in obvious libility that they crave. Moreover, Anna Hazare has co-opted need of a strong dose of optiThere is nothing democratic the cap into his own brand image. mism. The Olympic spirit is in the about sports management. Its air. It should breathe deeply. I culture is that of an opaque cabal, A torch could be a good substitute.

W

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

70

