Signature

S. PRASANNARAJAN

L O C O M O T I F

R.I.P. POLITICS OF CHANGE
henever the word "change" occurs in politics, it carries with it a sense of wonderment and greater curiosity, particularly so if the context is historical. For this cliché as old as politics to acquire a semblance of legitimacy, the word requires a speaker who deals in hope on a stage littered with the remnants of grandiloquence. Four years ago, when Barack Obama happened, lighting up the campaign trail with the poetry and prophecy of "change", the moment was the closest to catharsis liberal America experienced in a lifetime. There he was, an African-American freshman senator in his forties, who could tell his own story like a novelist and paraphrase the great tomorrow with the eloquence of an evangelist, selling "change" and "hope" to an America enchanted. The Age of O!-bama lasted till the Election Day. Two years later, across the Atlantic, something similar happened, but on a less historic scale. David Cameron was not exactly Obama in the myth-making politics of change; he sprang from the Conservative establishment. But, it must be said, the young Conservative, just turning forty and already in 10 Downing Street, did not share his political DNA with Lady Thatcher; he was, in many ways, more inspired by the Third Way of Tony Blair. Still, after the cheerless, doctrinaire Gordon Brown, Cameron was pure radicalism. The Cameron beginning did indeed shift the paradigm: If it was market that concentrated the mind of Thatcher, it was society--broken and valueless--that animated Cameron. The change was palpable. Today, Obama and Cameron are united by the redundancy of "change". Obama's each day in office was a quiet repudiation of the political frisson generated by Candidate Obama. Four years ago on the stump, Obama tri-

W

umphed in blending his own life story--his most effective weapon of mass seduction--into the larger national narrative of healing and reconciliation. Now, he is where he likes to be most--on the road. But the Obama seeking reelection is worse than his own parody; he has nothing to tell Americans except that he's better than his Republican challenger. In just four years, the world's most romanced change meister has been reduced to a leftist caricature: Anti-rich, anti-business, and even antiimperialist. The biography can no longer sway the voter. Cameron, though, can't be accused of being remote; his problem is intimacy--with the wrong kind. Still, he may overcome the exaggerated sins of closeness to the Murdoch empire, but he is at the risk of losing the war within his own party for the Conservative soul, the latest backbenchers' revolt over the Lords reform being an ominous warning. Conservatism, blue-blooded Conservatives argue, is being shortchanged by one of them. The much ballyhooed politics of change-- as against politics as usual--is on trial after a blockbuster opening. Don't we know, even if we are not talking about Manmohan Singh? Sometime ago in Uttar Pradesh--ages ago it seems--awestruck headline chasers were singing "change" when they saw Akhilesh Yadav on the stump. A cultural shift from Yadav père, they drooled. Look what we have got in Lucknow today: The same badland variation of family kitsch. That being the sad state of the politics of change, one can only sympathise with the loneliness of Digvijaya Singh, eternally waiting for the change no one else outside the Congress office is seeking. The reluctance of Rahul Gandhi is an expression of modesty--a fair realistic self assessment. I

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

THE MUCH BALLYHOOED POLITICS OF CHANGE IS ON TRIAL AFTER A BLOCKBUSTER OPENING. DON'T WE KNOW, EVEN IF WE ARE NOT TALKING ABOUT MANMOHAN SINGH? ONE CAN ONLY SYMPATHISE WITH THE LONELINESS OF DIGVIJAYA SINGH, ETERNALLY WAITING FOR THE CHANGE NO ONE ELSE OUTSIDE THE CONGRESS OFFICE IS SEEKING.

S I G N P OSTS
NAMED Jaswant Singh, NDA's vice-presidential candidate against UPA nominee Hamid Ansari. L.K. Advani said the NDA was opposing Ansari for his "conduct" in the Rajya Sabha during
SINGH

the Lokpal Bill debate. UPHELD, the life imprisonment given to former Samajwadi Party MLA Amarmani Tripathi, accused in Madhumita Shukla murder case. EXTENDED, ban on the LTTE, by Government

which said the outfit continues to adopt a strong anti-India posture and poses a grave threat. SPACE VOYAGE, by IndianAmerican NASA astronaut Sunita Williams. She becomes the first woman in history to head a space mission.

CHOSEN World champion and Olympic bronze medallist, wrestler Sushil Kumar, as the flag-bearer of the Indian contingent at the opening ceremony of the 2012 London KUMAR Olympics.

16

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

