Mail

The Secret Plot to Blame India
J U LY 1 6, 2 0 1 2

The arrest of Ansari, a Lashkar-e-Toiba terrorist used by Pakistan in the execution of 26/11, exposes Islamabad's agenda of turning the Mumbai attack into an Indian conspiracy.

N . T. P R A S A N N A ,

Kenya

Sinister Plan
That Pakistan is more sophisticated than us in realpolitik ("The Secret Plot to Blame India", July 16) is becoming clear with every episode of their iniquity. We suffer from the further disadvantage of tyranny of political correctness which not only impairs us from recognising that there are some bad fish in our pond but prompts us to undermine and demotivate those whose responsibility it is to cleanse the pond. I feel the plot to blame India is an open secret known to the world. Pakistan is refusing to accept its mistake in spite of India providing clinching evidences against terrorists. Unless India changes its mind on punishing convicted terrorists, it is unlikely to send a strong signal on its determination to defeat them.
BISHAN SAHAI, Jaipur

Hand in Glove
It is obvious that without the involvement of the police department, the type of crime committed in Apna Ghar could not have been continuing for so long ("Haryana's House of Horrors", July 16). It is the duty of the Government to make provisions in the law enabling it to investigate the cases of crime related with children and women directly, using Central investigative agencies like CBI.
MANI SHUKLA, Gurgaon

It is disgusting how such atrocities can be committed. Even worse is the fact that the investigation is so easily hobbled by policemen who appear to not only have known of the vile acts, but also have participated in them. It is imperative that NCPCR do its utmost to ensure that guilty are punished and the victims rehabilitated.
SWEETY CHOPRA, Chandigarh

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N JULY 30, 2012

``

``

With terrorist-friendly public figures and a Government unwilling to act against terror, the major share of the blame lies with us.

MANOJ KUMAR

The Mumbai conspiracy exposed the direct involvement of Pakistan in the attack and also its ulterior motive to blame India. The true face of Pakistan has been revealed before the world. The theory of Hindu militants who were behind the carnage has been proved incorrect. Pakistan should not now say that the evidence is inadequate and should rather exhibit the courage to take blame and responsibility on its head.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

Pakistan should apologise to India for the Mumbai terror attack and render all assistance in handing over the wanted terrorists. India lost 166 lives in the attack and has so far spent substantial money towards investigation, court cases, jail expenses, besides its valuable time. However, we have not been able to

Mail
punish the terrorists who were involved in the attack. The relatives who lost their loved ones are awaiting justice. India, therefore, requires to act fast in the matter.
ANKUSH, Mumbai

35
my heart swells with pride. I wish more and more Indians are involved in such great discoveries.
RAKESH SHARMA, Delhi

In a New Role
Revival of the economy is an interesting and challenging issue for UPA 2 ("Can PM Do What Pranab Could Not?", July 16). The questions now troubling Manmohan Singh are related to high rate of inflation, fiscal deficit, sliding exchange rate of rupee, corruption, unemployment, and worsening situation of agriculture. Now, the question arises: What is the Prime Minister going to do within the 20-month window of opportunity? The expectations of public and corporate India have reached dizzying heights. All want a return of purposeful and good governance.
BEENA MATHUR, Jodhpur

on the General Anti Avoidance Rules. By exhorting to similar viable and appropriate measures, Manmohan Singh may be able to guide the economy back on the growth path.
RAMESH SINHA, Gurgaon

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
S E P T E M B E R 1 -1 5 , 1 9 7 7

The Wages of Politics
Party politics has its own compulsions. After having committed itself in the manifesto to treat bonus as deferred wage, the Janata government was honour-bound to restore the 8.33 per cent minimum bonus, first introduced by the previous regime but abolished during the Emergency. The decision, announced on August 18, is essentially a political one taken apparently with great reluctance, and with a great many ifs and buts. Applicable only for the accounting year beginning on any day in 1976, it covers all establishments irrespective of whether they make a profit or not during the year, subject to a maximum limit of 20 per cent. However, loss-making units can apply for exemption in the case of what are described as "genuine difficulties" although it is doubtful whether the workers can be persuaded to go along with the management in accepting such "genuine" difficulties as bonafide. For all practical purposes, therefore, the Janata government has taken the usual populist way out of its difficulties and made a straight gift of 13 months' wages for 12 months' work, and that too, at a time of serious price inflation. It is surprising that the Janata party chief, Chandra Shekhar, should be a party to the decision, since he went on record, in an interview with INDIA TODAY (issue June 1-15, 1977) against compelling loss-making units to pay minimum bonus.
R. VARMA (LEFT); CHANDRA SHEKHAR

Quantum Leap
In a `quantum' leap in physics, scientists claimed to have spotted a sub-atomic particle consistent with the Higgs boson or God particle, the last piece of an elegant theory of the building blocks of the universe predicted 48 years ago but never seen ("The Hunt for God Particle", July 16). The discovery of the Higgs boson narrows the certainty deficit. There's a saying that if something walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it must be a duck. But that's not the way science advances. We need more evidence to say for certain that this is indeed the Higgs boson of the Standard Model. Meanwhile, the Indian scientist Satyendra Nath Bose, after whom bosons are named, is all but forgotten by the country.
J.S. ACHARYA, Hyderabad

Water Woes
Whoever said that the third World War would be fought over water clearly didn't realise it has already begun in parts of India ("Boiling Point", July 16). While I understand that population pressure and industrial growth require the usage of large quantities of water, there still has to be a solution to this water crisis. It is appalling that despite such scarcity, the Government has not formed a central water policy in a decade. This should be a priority, considering the painfully obvious conclusion that without water there can be nothing but death and decay in the country.
AYESHA AKHTAR, Delhi

The discovery of the God Particle or Higgs boson shows man is capable of achieving anything. It all comes down to his dedication and hard work to unearth these mysteries of science. On hearing of the Indian connect (scientist Satyendra Nath Bose),

For a Government with its back to the wall and pretty much nowhere to go, the Prime Minister is confronted with the difficult task of addressing previous financial distortions. As many as nine important bills returned to Parliament by different select committees add to his misery. He will have to come out with measures to revive investor confidence and monitor RBI to take fresh steps to increase capital flow. With the stock market faring better, he was wise to block the mischievous draft circular

Corrigendum
In our magazine we suggested that Niira Radia had returned to the PR business ("She's Back in the Game", July 16). This is incorrect. Niira Radia has not started a public relations advisory business and is not involved in that capacity with any corporate group, which has been the case since her publicly announced departure from the communications business. The error is regretted.

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

JULY 30, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

