AnimPACTFeatiire

A MAN WITHOUT MISSION, DEVOTED FOR SOCIETY
Acharya Sudarshan
charya Sjdarshan is not only an academician for excellence, but stands on the pinnacle of academia and for last 52 years, he is trying his best to correlate education with life, thus j i making the life more meaningful, a grand ceremony. He is the -A. ^regulator of the movement "Hamein bhi padahao" which attempts to create a passion for life amongyoungsters and thus trying to help them to get rid of all the frustrations. He has authored more than hundred books on different streams. Amongst them the 100 pages musical Ramayana is one. Travelled more than 20 countries, he aired Astha of 1500 episodes, Sanskar, Zee Jagaran. He not only authored more than 200 bhakti songs but A /I L.^L also gave his voice to these songs, which are communicated through CDs courtesy venus, Mumbai. His essays on "Jeeven Jeene ki Vidhi" has been found place in many magazine as well as newspapers. From where should I start writing about Acharya's contribution, who is the sole repository of manifold virtues emanating from different directions impressed by Acharya's manifold persona in the field of religion, sanskar & moral value, the Times of India group has published a voluminous research work titled as " A man without mission: Acharya Sudharshan". It postulates that it is difficult to limit Acharya's role in one rule or principle. He has no single mission but he travels in different directions with various ideologies. He is not a follower of any sant but believes in making his own way. He Says:

"Go where none has gone Do which none has done".
Influenced by this an author stated:

"A legendary profile of a man without mission ; Acharya Sudharshan"
Acharya Sudharshan is not a single human being, but a great institution, who founded more than 40 school in English medium and also established 100 centres "Hamein Bhi Padahao" in different states for poor and neglected children. The CM of Delhi Smt. Sheela Dixit has also requested to open these residential centres "Hamein Bhi Padahao" in slum area of Delhi which is under consideration. Acharya Sudharshan holds degree in MA, Phd, Sahitya ratan, but he never opted for any job. Instead, devoted his life in welfare of the masses. At present, Acharya Sudharshan is a great speaker at national and international level. His speeches on Ram Katha, Geeta and on art of living are being communicated these days. The money received through these speeches are funded in "Humein bhi Padahao" for poorchildren. Acharya Sudharshan Rashtriya Puruskan Acharya Sudharshan has decided that the money received as an alms in Ram Katha or other speeches or earned from any other sources should be Fixed :ed in any nationalised bank whose interest should be at st 5 lakh rupees. The Interest received by these FDs should be given to those persons as an award who do commendable work in the field of art, culture, upliftment of dalits, literatures and science at national level. These prizes should be decided by the persons of the level of vice, chancellors and other distinguished persons, whose decision could not be challenged. Acharya Sudharshan Pratibha Samman: Acharya Sudharshan is an academician so he has decided that five boys and girls should be awarded with medals cash prizes who score best result in both Bihar Board and CBSE Exams.

AnimPACTreatiire

Contribution of Acharya Sudharshan: Acharya Sudharshan has donated all his property in the trust in his on astral village Mubarkpur, Sitamarhi. All this property is owned by trust. The income received through these sources should be used in educating the poor and backward persons, orphanages, collective marriages etc. This Sacrifice of Acharya Sudharshan is the talk of the day in that vicinity. Acharya Sudharshan has purchased 5 acres of land and a "Aatam Kalyan Kendra" has been erected in its part where Yoga, Collective marriages and other welfare programmes for poor have been started. In other 4 acres of land two buildings of 40 rooms have been constructed for imparting education among poor boys and girls. These are fully free & residential. In the other part of Mubarkpur, 20 Acres of land have been purchased with a plan to construct an engineering and medical college. Close to this 20 acres of land a new plot of 5 acres is being purchased, where a residential facility for teaching poor and dalit children would be made. All the expensesfor running these institutions will be incurred from other educational institutions founded by Acharya Sudharshan, Till date more than 100 centres of "Hamein bhi Padahao" has been established. These programmes have been extended in states like Bihar, Jharkhand, Haryana and Delhi.

"Hamein Bhi Padahao" is a free education extension programme for those children who reside in slum, Jhugi-Jhopadi and Remote Rural Areas. Children who have been living in slums, Jhugi-Jhopadi or Plastic roofed cottages and use to collect papers, leafs by road sides or bus stands or railway stations by the side of metropolitan town are taken by the activists of Hamein Bhi Padahao and trained like a human being and given education. This h continuing state like Bihar, Jharkhand, Haryana and Delhi. Efforts are being going on to extend this programme in whole country. More than 100 of "Hamein Bhi Padahao" centres are functioning only in Bihar Jharkhand whose at! expenses are incurred by Acharya Sudarshan Ji. Not a single penny of assistance has been provided by anyone or from any other source in this programme. The Hon'ble chief Minister of Delhi, Smt. Shilla Dlxit has requested to open these "Hamein Bhi Padahao" centres in residential form in Delhi,
Acharya Sudharshan Lions Eye Hospital & research centre, Sitamarhi (Registered): Acharya Sudharshan has donated his costly land on the main road fo Sitamarhi District for this eye hospital. This hospital has started functioning

and free operations of patients are being conducted by distinguish surgeons by using ultra modern machines. All liabilities of this hospital rests on Acharya Sudharshan. The hospital is planned to become the biggest hospital of North Bihar. Aatam Kalyan Kendra (Trust): It is registered trust & its main obejective is to raise consciousness & awareness among youngsters, so that their lives could be made moral & spiritual. Systematic training regarding Yoga, Exercise, Pranayam are imparted to take body and mind healthy. These days' people are highly depressed due to tension, anxiety & other associated reasons. Here training is imparted to get rid of these depressions and one can observe-"Aatma Rakshito Dharam". A Healthy family can make a healthy society. Dr. Y. K. Sudharshan Krishan Singh Educational Foundation Trust: It is registered society which runs 10 + 2 school (co-education) in the head quarters of state. At the same time. " Hamein Bhi Padahao" programme are run by these schools in remote areas. Acharya Sudharshan foundation (Delhi, Patna): It is a registered institutions which runs both 10+2 (co- education) schools in remote rural areas and "Hamein Bhi Padahao" programmes. Krishan Sudharshan Charitable Trust: It is also a registered trust to enlighten the children of forest dwellers with programmes "Hamein Bhi Padahao". Its aim is to open maximum no. of this centre to impart education and Jeevan line Ki Kala. Patna Central School Society: It is a group of schools run through this society which provides coeducation upto class 10 + 2. Residential facility is also provided here. Acharya Sudharshan has purchased 5 acres of land for this, which costs more than 5 crores and he permanently transferred this land to the society. Krishna Niketan Girls School Society: It is another big school like Patna Central School at new by pass road, Kankarbagh in Patna. It is upto 10 + 2 where only girls are educated. Residential facility is also provided here. Acharya Sudharshan has arranged 4 crores for the society of this school. Acharya Sudharshan sports & cultural foundations: Systematic Training regarding games popular in rural areas like kabbadi, kho-kho, wrestling, volley ball, football, Gilli-danda are imparted to local children, so that the identities of these games remained popular at state & national level. For last three years, Tenny Kite, Tennis, Throw Ball competitions have been arranged in Patna by this Society. Maa Jagtarni Shaktipeeth, Mubarkpur. Majorganj: This Shaktipeeth was established for the purpose of women empowerment. This Shaktipeeth attempts to enlighten the future of poor & dalit girls who are often confused about their future. These backward girls are given training of painting, sculpture, making toys, dancing and singing. So that they could be self dependent in days to come. Geetanjali: This Society provides free training of dancing and music to children. The downtrodden child artists of dalit communities are trained in rural music, drama, Alla-Rudal, Rani Saranga, Sheet Basant, Bihula, Barahmasa, Holi, Kajri & Jhoomar. Acharya Sudharshan has written more than 350 songs & music. They are beinggiven training of these music and songs.
www. acharyasudarshanji.com

