Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

`RAOFIDDLEDWHILE AYO DHYABURNED'
A GRAIN OF SAND IN THE HOURGLASS OFTIME: AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY
byARJUN SINGH with ASHOK CHOPRA HayHouse Price: RS 599 Pages: 400 ince his first term as chief minister of Madhya Pradesh in 1980, Arjun Singh was at the centre of much of history as it happened. Whether it was the Bhopal gas tragedy which happened on his watch or the demolition of Babri Masjid which he says he tried his best to prevent, whether it was the historic Longowal accord which finally brought peace to Punjab or the OBC quotas in higher education institutions run by the Central Government, he was always stirring the political pot. A lifelong Nehruvian, he was a great admirer of Indira, Rajiv and Sonia Gandhi. So much so that he could not see much wrong in the `discipline' engendered by the Emergency or even in Rajiv Gandhi's decision to unlock the gates in Ayodhya. He called himself a "humble follower" but as his elegantly written memoir shows, he was also a shaper of much of contemporary history, whether it is in the textbooks rewritten during his tenure as HRD minister or the cultural legacy he left behind in Madhya Pradesh. In this extract from his posthumous memoir, A Grain of Sand in the Hourglass of Time, he writes about his largely confrontational relationship with the late P.V. Narasimha Rao, who became prime minister, a position that could well have gone to Arjun Singh, a man who was much more than the self-proclaimed "grain of sand" in the I "hourglass of time".

A ruthless Arjun Singh in his posthumously published memoirs puts Narasimha Rao on trial
Bush, but in the present context, President Bush would not be able to add anything to our advantage in this situation". I added that "in such matters it is only our strength of commitment to our values and our ideologies that will help us to survive".

S

ARJUN SINGH (LEFT) WITH THEN PRIME MINISTER P.V. NARASIMHA RAO IN 1993

burst out in anger and virtually yelled out words to the effect whether it was essential that the Congress party should be treated like a train where the compartments have to be attached to an engine belonging to the NehruGandhi family or were there other alternatives? I was dumbfounded by Rao's outburst but kept quiet. Kesri, however, pursued the matter further and contended that it would be in the fitness of things if we were to offer the post of Congress president to Sonia Gandhi first. Rao realised that he had perhaps spoken too much too soon and had exposed his anti-Nehru feelings very clearly. He, therefore, thoughtfully queried: "There is no harm in making the suggestion, but will she accept it?" We had no immediate answer to his query except that we would have to approach Sonia Gandhi and seek her reaction.

***
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao was trying to keep everyone happy on the Ayodhya imbroglio. Whenever news of a serious nature came to him, he immediately wanted one of his colleagues to meet someone or the other from the Hindutva brigade in an attempt to smooth ruffled feathers, so much so that, at one stage, he even decided to call on the RSS chief (Madhukar Dattatraya Deoras, also known as Balasaheb Deoras) himself and implore him to relieve the pressure on the government. I took strong objection to this proposed move and pointed out that it would show the government in a very poor light, and instead suggested that the prime minister should ask him to come to his office. Now the differences between the prime minister and me were coming out in the open, but I maintained all the decorum and discipline of a Cabinet colleague, although, at times, it was becoming difficult to do so. I do not know when the files, which contain the proceedings of the CCPA meetings, will be opened to the public, but whenever they are, they will reveal how an erratic government went from pillar to post in an effort to find a way out of Ayodhya. I have never witnessed such a pathetic performance by any other government.

***
I vividly recall the scene at a meeting in early 1992 with Prime Minister Narasimha Rao (at 3, Race Course Road, his residence) after he had returned from the US. Only the two of us were present. He was sitting in an easy chair and airing his views on various domestic issues. Suddenly, he sat up and forcefully asserted: "I am not afraid of anyone as President (George) Bush Senior is now behind me." I was very surprised by this unexpected outburst because the matters we were discussing had no relevance whatsoever to President Bush. It was, in a sense, the inner voice of the prime minister who seemed to have been emboldened after his meeting with President Bush and felt that the latter's support would see him through all difficult situations. I sat quietly for sometime, absorbing the nuances of his statements and then quietly observed that "we are happy that (you have) the support of President

E
n mid-1987, K.C. Singh, who had retired from the Ministry of External Affairs, made a request for an appointment with me, which I granted. When he met me, he came up with what I thought was a cock and bull story that then President, Giani Zail Singh, was about to dismiss Rajiv Gandhi from the office of prime minister. He wanted to know whether I would be ready to replace Rajiv. I told him that I would have nothing to do with this business and that I stood by Rajiv. I then dismissed him rather brusquely, with an admonition. After he left, I took the first opportunity to brief Rajiv personally about this con-

X

C

E

R

P

T

S
stated that a number of senior leaders of the Congress party had already agreed with the president "to act collectively at the appropriate time". All the while, our conversation was being taped by the intelligence agencies. In order to draw him out further, I asked him for the names of the leaders who had agreed to help the president. He mentioned certain names (which I will not disclose). However, in July 1987, there were media reports speculating that President Zail Singh was thinking of dismissing the Rajiv Gandhi government, but did not do so.

I

versation. Rajiv heard me out and observed: "You have done the right thing and in case this gentleman wants to meet you a second time, inform me before you give another appointment." A few days later, I got another request from K.C. Singh for an appointment and informed Rajiv. I had absolutely no inclination to meet him, but was told by the intelligence agencies that I must and draw further details of the conspiracy to oust the prime minister. During our second meeting, he again tried to convince me to accept this offer. I firmly told him that he was wasting his time and mine. But he was not one to be put off. He then

***

Towards the end of May 1991, after Rajiv Gandhi's assassination, the first Congressman whom M.L. Fotedar, Vincent George and I approached was Sitaram Kesri, the treasurer of the All India Congress Committee. Kesri, an old-timer from Bihar, was not surprised at our choice of candidate for party president and agreed to support Sonia Gandhi, although I did discern a faint hesitation in his acceptance. Soon, Kesri, Fotedar and I went to see P.V. Narasimha Rao, a very senior Congressman. It is here that I came face to face with the ugly face of politics and was truly disgusted. On hearing our suggestion, Rao kept quiet for a few minutes with a grave expression on his face. Suddenly, he

***
I reached Delhi on December 4 evening. The next morning I met Narasimha Rao and reported verbatim the details of my conversation with

58

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

59

Leisure
FA S H I O N TELEVISION BOOKS CINEMA REVIEWS E Y E C AT C H E R S

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Kalyan Singh. Rao pretended to be listening attentively, but I got the impression that he was not taking the issue very seriously. It appeared as if I were describing an inconsequential meeting with some minor functionary. When I had finished, the prime minister asked me, "What is your own assessment of the situation?" I replied: "You did not allow me to move out of Lucknow, so what assessment can I give you?" He then tried to probe further: "No, no, I know you have your sources and I want to know what is the shape of things to come." I then told him very frankly that the Babri mosque was going to be demolished. This news definitely shook him and he wanted to dispute my claim, but, on second thoughts, he kept quiet. In a somewhat agitated frame of mind, he started thinking aloud about the repercussions if the mosque were to be brought down. He then suddenly exclaimed that this would have "a very bad impact on the Congress party", which was stating the obvious. At that point, I could not contain myself and told him bluntly that "we have turned a blind eye" to the machinations of the BJP and the other pro-Hindutva outfits. He then queried: "When could this (demolition) happen?" I responded: "This could happen any day." Even I did not realise that the Babri mosque would be demolished the very next day (December 6, 1992). On that crucial day, I had a prior engagement at Muktsar in Punjab, about 380 km from Delhi, organised by Jagmeet Singh Brar, a young Congress MP, and had duly informed the prime minister about it.

I HAD ONCE ENJOYED THE CONFIDENCE OF BOTH INDIRA GANDHI AND RAJIV GANDHI. I WAS UNABLE TO UNDERSTAND WHY I HAD NOT BEEN APPOINTED A MINISTER IN UPA 2. I DECIDED TO FACE THE REALITY IN A STOIC MANNER.

***
Images of the mosque being destroyed flashed across my mind and I felt that consequences of this very tragic event in our nation's history were going to be incalculable. The secular mosaic of India had been seriously damaged. In such a frame of mind, from Muktsar I rang up the prime minister's residence early in the afternoon. I was told that he was

"not available to talk to anyone". I asked the person who had answered my call: "Since when is he incommunicado? Or is he out of Delhi?" He replied: "He is in Delhi, but he has locked himself in his room and our directions are not to disturb him under any circumstances." To my mind, the scene very much resembled the infamous spectacle of Nero fiddling while Rome burnt. I took permission from my host and left for Delhi immediately. On reaching Delhi at 4 p.m., I went straight to the prime minister's residence. Narasimha Rao had not yet opened the door of his room but had instructed his principal secretary to convene an emergency meeting of the Cabinet at 6 p.m. at his residence.

ARJUN SINGH (RIGHT) WITH THEN PRIME MINISTER RAJIV GANDHI IN 1986

***
In the 2009 general elections, the Congress party, along with its coalition partners, acquired a majority in the Lok Sabha. Dr Manmohan Singh

again became prime minister on May 22, 2009, while Sonia Gandhi decided to remain Congress president as well as chairperson of the UPA. After the process for Cabinet formation was over, I was taken aback when I learnt that my name was not on the list of Council of Ministers despite all that I had done for the Congress party as a loyal member for so many decades. Moreover, I had once enjoyed the confidence of both Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi, during whose tenures I had carried out many crucial assignments. Deeply hurt, I was unable to understand why I had not been appointed a minister. I then decided to face the reality in a stoic manner and, after deep self-introspection, came to the conclusion that the older generation had to make way for the youngsters and one could not hope to hold on to office indefinitely. I

60

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

