Inv estigation LAILAKHAN

SEX,SIN AND THE MISSING STARLET
Laila Khan and her family have been missing from Mumbai for over a year. The police in two cities are investigating their disappearances, with no luck so far.
By Sandeep Unnithan in Jammu

rested in Jammu after a three-week operation by the Jammu & Kashmir Police. Police say he was evasive during his interrogation. He claimed not to know the whereabouts of his family and also theorised that they had gone abroad, possibly to Dubai or some African country. "For a smalltown school-dropout, Tak is sly and sharp," says Garib Dass, DIG DodaRamban range. "He isn't telling us everything he knows."

Their story has elements of sex, crime, money, terror and the underworld. The family's disappearance is being tracked by the police of two different states after Laila's father Nadir Shah Patel filed a missing persons complaint in the Oshiwara police station on March 2011. Tak was arrested for cheating and forgery-- police recovered a fake PAN card with Nadir Shah Patel's name, but with Tak's photograph on it.

knocking on his doors. In early 2010, Tak landed at the doorstep of Gurdial Singh, 86, a retired Indian naval officer who lived with his 80-year-old wife in Hoshiarpur. The Singhs had property and their three children were settled in the UK. "He came to us with his wife and two young daughters, claiming to be a Kashmiri refugee. He told me that his family had been wiped out in an attack on his village," Singh
PERVEZ IQBALTAK

HOTPURSUIT
JANUARY 2011
Laila Khan, her mother Shelina, siblings Hashmina, Imran and Zara, and cousin Reshma, leave Mumbai for their farmhouse in Igatpuri.

FEBRUARY 9, 2011
Shelina speaks with her sister Albana Patel and says she is in Chandigarh with her third husband Pervez Iqbal Tak. That is the last contact anyone has with the family.

FEBRUARY 12, 2011
and Kiran Tare in Mumbai Pervez Iqbal Tak and Asif Ahmed check into Asia Hotel in Jammu for four nights. They leave Shelina's white Scorpio near the hotel and disappear.

O

n the night of January 30, 2011, starlet Laila Khan, 29, stepped out of her ground floor flat in Sunshine Apartments in Mumbai's north-western suburb of Oshiwara. She was accompanied by her mother Shelina, 50, older sister Hashmina, 31, twin siblings Imran and Zara, 21, and cousin Reshma, 20. The family drove out of the city in a white Scorpio and a black Mitsubishi Outlander towards their holiday home, a bungalow perched on a hilltop in Igatpuri, 126 km north of Mumbai. They also took with them their pets, an alsatian and two Persian cats. On February 9, 2011, Shelina spoke with her Mumbai-based sister Albana Patel. She told Albana that she was in Chandigarh with her third husband Pervez Iqbal Tak. Then, there was silence. The calls on their mobile phones were answered by strangers. The family vanished without a trace. On June 21, 2012, Tak was ar-

MARCH 2011
Laila Khan's father Nadir Shah Patel registers a missing persons complaint in Oshiwara police station. The case is later transferred to Nashik police in February after the Mumbai Police find the family was last seen there.

SEPTEMBER 2011
Shelina's older sister Meher Akhtar visits the Igatpuri holiday house and finds it burnt down. Watchmen give conflicting reports of fire.

TAK WAS EVASIVE IN HIS INTERROGATION. HE CLAIMED NOTTO KNOWTHE WHEREABOUTS OF HIS FAMILY BUT SAID THEY MIGHT BE IN DUBAI OR AFRICA.
The police's interest was aroused by the recovery of Laila's Mitsubishi Outlander in a garage in Kishtwar, near Jammu, on May 29. Inquiries from locals led to Tak, a small-time timber contractor-turned-politician. He was handsome and extremely ambitious. He borrowed Rs 10 lakh from locals and contested the 2008 Assembly polls from Inderwal constituency in Doda on a ticket from Sharad Pawar's Nationalist Congress Party (NCP). He left Kishtwar later that year when the lenders began says. Tak stayed with the aged couple for over two weeks. He borrowed Rs 2.2 lakh for a hospital he was ostensibly building in his native village and then vanished. Tak then resurfaced in Mumbai in 2010. He was seen at the NCP offices, looking for a break in politics. It is unclear how he met Laila's mother Shelina, but the two made common cause. Shelina was the daughter of a junior artiste from Delhi who came to Mumbai in the late 1950s to try his luck in Bollywood. His only memorable role

MAY 29, 2012
Kishtwar police recover Laila's Mitsubishi Outlander in a garage. Launch hunt for Pervez Iqbal Tak who had brought the vehicle there.

JUNE 21, 2012
Jammu police lure Pervez Iqbal Tak back to Kishtwar and arrest him for cheating and forgery. Tak tells police that Laila and her family have gone abroad, possibly to Dubai or Africa.

LAILA

32

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

33

Final

Final

Inv estigation LAILAKHAN
was the small part of a dying soldier in Reshma Patel and modelled herself Chetan Anand's Haqeeqat in 1964. on Divya Bharti, an incandescent Shelina was the rebel in a conservative 19-year-old Bollywood star who mysPathan Muslim family. In 1979, she teriously fell to her death in 1993. eloped with her lover Nadir Shah Patel, Laila spent hours in front of the TV in a Khoja Ismaili Shia businessman, on the bedroom of their Oshiwara flat, the last day of her SSC exams. A decade copying her idol's histrionics. In 2008, later, she informed her family she she debuted with Wafaa, as the unhad divorced Nadir and married Asif faithful wife of much-older Rajesh Ahmed. She worked as an events Khanna. She signed two more nondemanager and even ran a clothes shop script films with her first director in Andheri and often travelled to South Rakesh Sawant. Laila's career was Africa for shopping. "She was very going nowhere. Yet their income was hi-fi, we are very simple," says her disproportionate. The family had assister Albana, who lives in the distant sets of over Rs 3 crore. Laila's Igatpuri middle-class suburb of Mira Road. bungalow is worth over Rs 70 lakh, "But she was the prettiest among the Oshiwara flat worth over Rs 1.5 us," she adds wistfully. crore, a shop in Andheri's posh When Shelina met Tak, she had Lokhandwala complex worth Rs 40 been with her second husband Asif lakh and a flat at Mira Road worth Ahmed, 50, for 20 years. Relatives Rs 50 lakh. Curiously, all of them were say that she was smitten by Tak's gifted to Shelina and her daughters good looks and often compared him by `benefactors'. The Oshiwara flat to a young Shashi Kapoor. Tak was was gifted to Hashmina aka Afreen, looking for a place to stay and a plat- 31, by an elderly US-based person form for his ambitions. In December when she turned 18. 2010, he married Shelina, 15 years his Officers of the Maharashtra Antisenior. Their neighbours at Oshiwara Terrorism Squad suspect Shelina's say that Shelina used her younger hus- first husband Nadir Shah Patel, a band to run errands and drive her Mumbai-based garment exporter, is family around. The family lived a high- also involved in the case. "Nadir could maintenance lifestyle. Shopping was a have played a major role in their dispriority for Laila, who spent all her appearance to get control of the propmoney buying expensive dresses. erty," says a police officer. Nadir, who But the money only came after a lives with his wife and two children in long struggle. "Shelina struggled to Mira Road, rubbishes this. He says he feed herself. She groomed her daugh- is running from pillar to post in ters to become actors. After acting in search of his children. "The police a few films, they became rich," says are lax and were not interested in Albana. The income, however, was locating my children," he says. in stark contrast with the bit roles On February 26, 2011, a mechanic her daughters got. Shelina joined alerted the Jammu police about a an anti-corruption NGO, Rashtriya white Scorpio with Maharashtra Satyawadi Yuva Manch, as the presi- licence plate. Covered in tarpaulin, the dent of the women's vehicle was parked wing in Mumbai LAILA'S CAREER behind Jammu's region. She got a Asia Hotel for over a small role for her eld- WAS GOING week. The vehicle est daughter Hash- NOWHERE, YET was found to be regmina in the Adam istered in the name Bedi-Negar Khan film THE FAMILY INCOME of Laila's mother Hello? Kaun Hain? in Shelina. Shelina's WAS DISPROPOR2003. In her daughter husbands Tak and Laila, Shelina saw TIONATE.THEY Asif Ahmed had hope of stardom. stayed in the hotel HAD ASSETS OF Laila began her from February 12Bollywood career as OVER RS 3 CRORE. 14, 2011.
CLOCKWISE FROM LEFT: LAILA'S GRANDMOTHER (BEHIND), AUNTS AND COUSIN; NADIR SHAH PATEL; LAILA'S ABANDONED CAR IN KISHTWAR

INVESTIGATORS SAY THEY HAVE NOT FOUND ANY PROOF OFTHE FAMILY'S LINK WITH THE DELHI HIGH COURT BLAST IN SEPTEMBER 2011.
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

SUDARSHAN SHARMA

EXPRESS PHOTO

In September last year, Shelina's elder sister Meher Akhtar visited the Igatpuri bungalow to look for the family. The bungalow was gutted. Shelina's Honda City was still in the compound but furniture from the bungalow was found in tribal homes nearby. The tribals claimed Asif Ahmed had given them the furniture. The two watchmen in the bungalow gave conflicting versions of the fire. One said it occurred 15 days before.

The other said it happened two months before. "We still do not know who started the fire and why," Meher says. "I would be satisfied with a glimpse of my children," says Shelina's mother Kaneez Fatma, 85, who lives in Mumbai. "If you spot Tak anywhere, shoot him," she snarls. Sawant, who directed Laila in Wafaa, is also waiting for her. Laila shot some scenes of his film, Jinnat, and disappeared. He spotted Laila at

an audition in Delhi in 2004. Shortlisted among the top 10 contestants, she breezed through a screen test in Mumbai. "She did not say no to intimate scenes with Rajesh Khanna," Sawant told INDIA TODAY. Laila was `nice, calm and involved' and satisfied with her Rs 3.5 lakh pay for the film. "Shelina was loud and domineering and regularly interfered in Laila's life and work," he adds. Laila was looking at a career in the southern

film industry if she failed to make it big in Mumbai. With her career in films flagging, she started spending time in the company of a mysterious businessman called Afghan Khan, who she had met in a Lokhandwala hookah bar in 2007. Afghan Khan was allegedly in constant touch with Laila and police say they found an SMS from him on her phone, urging her not to leave Mumbai. Sawant says he found some of Laila's contacts suspicious. In December 2009, Laila had invited Sawant to her bungalow at Igatpuri. She introduced him to two Arab investors. "They wanted to invest Rs 15-20 crore in making a film and show the money as mine. I refused as I did not want income tax queries," he says. The discussion ended inconclusively. Sawant lost contact with Laila after February 2011. Sawant says he next heard of Laila while shooting for a music album in Srinagar. A state government official told him that a police team had gone to Mumbai to inquire about the missing starlet. On returning to Mumbai, Sawant filed a missing person complaint in Oshiwara police station in March which he claims the police did not take seriously. Laila's father Nadir Shah Patel had already lodged a complaint. In February 2011, the case was transferred to the Nashik police when it was discovered that the family was last spotted there. Since then, the police have made no headway into the probe. Theories have been floating about the family's link with the Delhi High Court blast in September 2011. Investigators say they have not found any proof. The Jammu & Kashmir Police have two theories that substantiate what the Mumbai Police believe. The first suggests that Shelina, Laila and her siblings did indeed flee from the country, fearing harassment from her friends like Afghan Khan. The second, more disturbing, theory says that the family was wiped out by someone who wanted to grab their property. Laila may never have achieved Divya Bharti's fame, but in her disappearance, she has crafted a mystery as great as the death of her idol. I

34

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

35

NEW

NEW

