The Big Story ECONOMY

9.2
Jan-Mar 2011 Apr-June 2010

8.5 8.2
Oct-Dec 2010

8
Apr-June 2011

7.6
July-Sept 2010

SLIP SLIDING AWAY
GDP has been declining since

April 2010 to alarming levels
*Growth rate. Figures in per cent

6.7
July-Sept 2011

10 9.87

6.1
9.46

Oct-Dec 2011

STUBBORN INFLATION
After a slight decline in late 2011, inflation has begun to rise again
*Inflation rate. Figures in per cent

5.3
Jan-Mar 2012
7.74 7.36 7.69 7.55

Pranab Mukherjee was let down by incompetent bureaucrats, an unfriendly RBI and a divided UPA. Manmohan Singh needs to get his economic policy team on the same page if he is to turn things around.
By Dhiraj Nayyar

7.23 6.89
SEP 2011 OCT2011 NOV2011 DEC 2011 JAN 2012 FEB 2012 MAR 2012 APR 2012 MAY2012

SINKING RUPEE
The Indian currency has hit an all-time low against US dollar
* Rupee-dollar exchange rate this year

57.07

53.14

ostalgia, not economics, was the theme of Pranab Mukherjee's last day in office as finance minister on June 25. He thanked his bureaucrats in private and the media in public before driving out of North Block for the final time in his four-and-a-half-decade-long political career. If he had any views on the precariously perched economy he was leaving behind, he did not express them to anyone. A day earlier, his farewell effort to the sinking rupee turned out to be a damp squib. An astute politician, he understood that the immediate verdict on his performance would be orchestrated by those wanting his job. Union Commerce and Industry Minister Anand Sharma and Rural Development Minister Jairam Ramesh have already declared their candidature with very public suggestions for change in the direction of economic policy. Their open lobbying reflected more ambition than credibility. The Prime Minister took temporary charge of the finance

N

Graphic by SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

Jan 4

Feb 2

Mar 5

Apr 9

May 8

June 8

The Big Story ECONOMY
TARGET PRACTICE?
The PM's top advisers overstated growth in 2011-12
ministry. The emphasis was on change. The sliding rupee is the most potent symbol of an economy lurching into a deep crisis of low growth and high inflation--stagflation. Mukherjee can only be partly blamed. It is a thoroughly indecisive, incompetent and badly split Government that is the real culprit. Those factors will also hobble Prime Minister Manmohan Singh as he takes charge of finance for the first time since 1996. A risk-averse Manmohan may not want to keep the portfolio for longer than a few weeks. Mukherjee was let down badly by incompetent officials and an unfriendly Reserve Bank of India (RBI). The markets genuinely believed that Mukherjee would be generous in departure--both the rupee and the Sensex climbed impressively in the hours before the much-awaited announcement on June 25. And both tumbled the moment the token "reform" measures were announced by RBI--of lifting the foreign investment limit in government bonds from $15 billion (Rs 82,500 crore) to $20 billion (Rs 1.1 lakh crore) and allowing Indian firms to borrow an additional $10 billion (Rs 55,000 crore) from overseas. The mandarins of North Block and RBI had misread the concerns of the market, either in ignorance or by indifference. According to a senior policy official, it was a case of "knowledge" disconnect. Mukherjee's senior bureaucrats believed that these token measures would be enough to shore up the rupee, ignoring the obvious reality that foreign investors were more concerned about the fiscal deficit, GAAR (General Anti Avoidance Rules which would arm-twist foreign institutional investors into the tax net), and policy paralysis than a cap on investment in government bonds. As one business executive wryly put it, "It's like I want to withdraw Rs 100 and you are giving me the chance to put in Rs 200." Mukherjee's officials had already given him one piece of bad advice in March when they told him to go ahead with the retrospective tax amendment on Vodafone, the one serious blot on his time in office as finance minister. For just Rs 11,000 crore in tax revenue, the Government had destroyed the confidence of foreign investors. Perhaps the finance minister believed that RBI would be better counsel. But Governor D. Subbarao seemed reluctant to give his best advice. Mukherjee and Subbarao have a frosty relationship, professionally and personally. Says a senior official, "In the last few months, there has been a complete breakdown in communication between RBI and finance ministry." Mukherjee and Subbarao have consistently disagreed on the correct level of interest rates for over a year. On June 16, just a week before he left office, Mukherjee signalled his desire to see a lower interest rate. "Keeping in view of all current factors, I am confident that the RBI will adjust monetary policy as we are adjusting the fiscal policy," he said at the National Banking and Insurance conference organised by industry body Assocham. Two days later, in his quarterly review of monetary policy, Subbarao, in a direct snub to the finance minister, left interest rates unchanged. He also rubbished Mukherjee's diagnosis and prescriptions for the fiscal deficit. Speaking to the Indian Merchants' Chamber on June 19, Subbarao said the Government needed to "cut spending" to reduce the deficit. He also defended high interest rates and hinted that other factors were responsible for the growth slowdown. "In the high growth years of 2006 to 2008, we had higher rates of interest than those prevailing now but the quantum of investment was so high that the economy was growing at over 9 per cent." It was a thinly veiled attack on the Government's policy paralysis. Sources close to Subbarao say he is not willing to let the Government off the hook in the battle against inflation by lowering interest rates. RBI believes that the UPA Government is doing little to fight inflation, leaving all the work to RBI. For instance, the central bank was displeased at the Government's populist move, on June 14, to raise minimum support prices for key cereals such as wheat and rice in June when food inflation was already running high. The professional distance between Mukherjee and Subbarao was exacerbated by personal tension. Mukherjee told Congress core committee meetings on the economy that Subbarao, appointed by his predecessor P. Chidambaram, was not taking instructions. Mukherjee was in fact keen to re- officials continue to remain in touch place Subbarao with Kaushik Basu in all operational matters," says a when his three-year term ran out in senior bureaucrat. "That was not hapSeptember 2011. An intervention by pening any longer." The departure of Mukherjee may the Prime Minister and the chairman of his council of economic advisers, C. ease the conflict between the finance Rangarajan, Subbarao's mentor in ministry and RBI, the two key hubs of Government, ensured a two-year ex- economic policymaking. If the Prime Minister keeps finance for a tension for Subbarao. lengthy period, or apSubbarao was of4% of GDP is the current points Chidambaram as fended by the fact that account deficit in finance minister, North the finance minister, 2011-12, a similar level Block and Subbarao may in a break from tradition, to the crisis year of 1991. yet come on the same rarely granted him page. If someone else a one-on-one meeting; 20% is the decline takes over the ministry, a according to sources in the value of the rupee working relationship will Mukherjee met him oneagainst the dollar in the need to be built if the on-one just twice in three last 12 months. economy is to be rescued years. "An entire phafrom a swamp. The rupee lanx of finance ministry officials was always present when has declined by 20 per cent against Mukherjee met Subbarao," says an the US dollar in the last one year, as the official. Subbarao repeatedly tried current account deficit (difference to persuade Mukherjee to meet him between exports and imports) has alone but Mukherjee refused. Subba- grown to near 1991 crisis levels. rao was also annoyed by the fact that Foreign capital inflows, necessary to fithe ministry was trying to order the RBI nance the deficit, have dried up bearound with little respect for its auton- cause of a loss in confidence. The rupee omy. The distrust grew over time. The has been the casualty. breakdown in communication bePlenty of red flags have been raised tween the officials of North Block and by the world about the state of Mint Street did not help. "There are al- the economy. On June 18, rating ways differences between the RBI gov- agency Fitch downgraded India's sovernor and finance minister, but their ereign debt rating to BBB--just one

C. Rangarajan Chairman, Prime Minister's Economic Advisory Council August 2011 8. 2% October 2011 7.5-8% January 2012 7-7.25% May 2012 6.9%

Montek Singh Ahluwalia
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission April 2011 Around 9% June 2011 8.25-8.5% November 2011 7-7.5% January 2012 Around 7%

How to the economy

FIX

Deregulate diesel. Fix fiscal deficit. Contain expenditure. Suggestions from state finance ministers.

1 Remove subsidy
SUSHIL KUMAR MODI
DeputyChief Minister and Finance Minister, Bihar

2 Improve infrastructure and streamline the supply chain to give a boost to agricultural produce.

3 Improve tax
structures to increase transparency and efficiency and cut down the leakage.

in an orderly manner; contain expenditure on unsustainable government projects.

4 Take bold decisions to dispel the image of policy paralysis.Take a call on FDI in banking and insurance sectors.

5 Lower repo rate (rate at which banks borrow from RBI) and CRR to infuse positive investment sentiment.

Kaushik Basu
Chief Economic Adviser, Ministry of Finance April 2011 9% October 2011 Around 7.5% January 2012 7-7.5%

1 Address the fiscal
deficit imbalance. If fiscal deficit is fixed, so will term yields, deposit rates, current account and inflation.

2 Check declining GDP
growth. Gross Fixed Capital Formation should be no less than 33.5 per cent of GDP to get back 8 or 9 per cent.

3 Check wholesale
inflation,which, of late, has been creeping up. RBI should cut rates by 25 basis points as that is the key number.

4 Cut the Current
Account Deficit (CAD). Deregulation of diesel and urea will bring down the CAD, and also the subsidy burden.

5 Announce lucrative
packages to revive the mining and telecommunication sectors which are currently in a shambles.

AMIT MITRA
Finance Minister, West Bengal

ACTUAL GROWTH IN 2011-12 6.5 PER CENT

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

29

The Big Story ECONOMY
INDIAN EXPRESS

notch above `junk'. It cited an "awkward combination of slow growth and elevated inflation as well as structural challenges surrounding (India's) investment climate in the form of corruption and inadequate economic reforms" to downgrade its outlook. A week earlier, rating agency Standard & Poor's also put India's rating at BBB and said India would be the first BRIC country to lose investment grade rating. Internationally, India finds itself in the same category as Azerbaijan, Colombia and Iceland--hardly role model economies--and in a lower category than Italy, Ireland and Spain, all three of which are at the heart of the ongoing crisis in the Eurozone. The Government's response has been to shoot the messenger. "It must be pointed out that Fitch has primarily relied on older data, and has ignored the recent positive trends in the Indian economy," Mukherjee said in a statement shortly after the ratings were released. Chief Economic Adviser Kaushik Basu blamed a `herd' mentality among rating agencies. The downgrade of India's ratings has serious consequences. Foreign investors take these ratings seriously and a drying up of inflows will further

How to the economy

FIX

weaken the rupee. It has also become more expensive for both the Government and corporates to borrow overseas; they have to offer higher interest rates to compensate for the perceived higher risk. Corporates are already reeling from a high interest rate regime in India. Even prime borrowers--leading corporates like Tatas and Reliance--have to pay an interest rate of around 14-15 per cent. The Government needs to look inward to end its policy paralysis. The signs are not encouraging. The Congress remains a divided house on what its economic policy should be. The confusion in the ruling party is evident in the comical faux battle for the next finance minister between Anand Sharma and Jairam Ramesh. In the last week of May, Ramesh strayed out of his ministerial turf by saying that petroleum subsidies must be cut down, a key element of reducing the fiscal deficit. In a volte-face from his populist credentials, Ramesh also made a pitch for FDI in retail, a policy that he opposed in Cabinet in November 2011. Anand Sharma responded by occupying the populist corner and rejecting Ramesh's suggestion for subsidy reduction. "We are a country of a large number of unempowered people and weaker sections who need subsidy. People who make an uninformed comments... should do some homework

MANMOHAN SINGH WITH C. RANGARAJAN AND MONTEK SINGH AHLUWALIA

before taking a political position," Sharma said. His attack did not deter Ramesh, who wrote a letter to Congress President Sonia Gandhi and Congress General Secretary Rahul Gandhi, days before Mukherjee quit, outlining the same measures to turn around the economy. The party is divided not just on the

issue of subsidies. On interest rates, there is a section, including the Prime Minister, which supports the high interest rate policy of Governor Subbarao. Others like Anand Sharma have taken the Pranab Mukherjee line. In a statement issued after RBI's decision to hold interest rates at current levels Sharma said, "The RBI's decision, whatever reason they have based it on, is disappointing and will not help in reversing the

India should not pledge Rs 55,000 crore to Eurozone countries, say Odisha and Kerala's finance ministers

1 We need to push
reforms that will help increase foreign investment and clean up PRAFULLA financial uncertainties CHANDRA GHEDAI in the market.
Finance Minister, Odisha

2 Interest rates need
to be cut down. High rates have failed to arrest inflation and has emerged as a roadblock for private investment.

3

GDP growth has

4 Definite austerity
measures are needed. Budget deficit needs to be reined in. Financial packages should not be awarded to any state.

5 Centre should
reduce borrowings and desist from boastful expenditures like pledging Rs 55,000 cr to Eurozone countries.

declined.We need to strengthen our basics, augment agricultural production and facilitate reforms to boost industry.

1 Bring down interest
rates so investment can be facilitated and jobs can be created,which will ensure growth.

2 Implement a comprehensive programme to improve agriculture by modernising it through technology infusion and public investment.

3 Give more incentives to small and medium sector industries to create more jobs, leading to increase in purchasing power.

4 Regulate petroleum 5 A huge grant to
prices.This will check inflation. Do not withdraw subsidy, as it will affect the majority of the population. Eurozone is unwarranted when India is facing a financial crisis. This will not improve India's global ratings.

K.M. MANI
Finance Minister, Kerala

trend when it comes to the core sector mands to devolve more funds to states. manufacturing. I shall definitely be Says a senior official, "Around 75 per writing both to the finance minister and cent of Central aid to states goes throthe RBI governor." Such sharply diver- ugh leaky centrally sponsored schegent views within the Congress need to mes, like NREGA and National Rural be narrowed down by the next finance Health Mission." Planning Commission minister if the derailed economy is to be Deputy Chairman Montek Singh brought back on track. Ahluwalia recently mooted a proposal Senior bureaucrats are not opti- to change this system and allow autonmistic about decisiveness in the omy to state governments to decide on Congress party. A senior secretary to using centrally allocated finances. Government who was present at a According to sources, his suggestion recent inter-ministerial meeting on the was struck down at a meeting of the vexed issue of coal supply for power Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs plants was amazed that three by Health Minister Ghulam Nabi Azad ministers, all from Congress--Power who argued that such a change would Minister Sushilkumar Shinde, Coal mean that schemes would not be Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal and named by the Centre and the Centre Environment Minister Jayanthi would forfeit political gains. Ahluwalia's Natarajan--failed to agree on even one sensible plan stands buried. point listed on the agenda. "Their reThe Prime Minister met officials of spective secretaries gave long the finance ministry on June 27 and exspeeches. Jaiswal and Shinde didn't horted them to revive investor sentieven bother speaking," says the secre- ment and `animal spirits'. Words are not tary. There is a little that enough. He now has a rea new finance minister sponsibility to deliver. can do to solve such Economist Surjit Bhalla Rs 55,000 crore logjams in other parts believes that the UPA can is the amount Manmohan still turn things around. of Government. Singh pledged to the IMF's "They need to cut interThe silver lining in Eurozone bailout fund. est rates, halt the the Fading India story Vodafone tax matter is what is happening and go through with a at the level of the states. Rs 22,000 crore is what Mamata Banerjee couple of reforms like FDI "From Narendra Modi demanded as a waiver of in retail and diesel deto Mamata Banerjee, interest payments on loans. control," he says. every chief minister is If these do happen, getting things done," confidence in the econsays a senior Planning Commission official who interacts reg- omy, and investor interest, could ularly with state governments. Several return. To get these done, the state finance ministers were incensed Government needs a strong political at Prime Minister Singh's decision to push. Sources close to C. Rangarajan give a $10 billion (Rs 55,000 crore) say that he has advised the Prime grant to an IMF bailout fund to stabilise Minister to appoint a politician to North crisis-stricken Eurozone countries, es- Block and not a technocrat. "Rangapecially after the Centre had refused to rajan believes that what needs to be give West Bengal Rs 22,000 crore as done is well known. What remains is a interest waiver on loans. Kerala matter of political implementation," Finance Minister K.M. Mani told INDIA says the source. The Prime Minister and if he chooses to appoint one, the TODAY, "This is unwarranted when India is going through a deep financial next finance minister, need to act. If crisis." Said Orissa Finance Minister they don't, growth would continue to Prafulla Chandra Ghedai, "The fall, perhaps below 5 per cent, and the Government should desist from rupee would slide to well below its boastful expenditures, such as 60. It will be impossible to blame Standard and Poor's for that. pledging Rs 55,000 crore." The Centre continues to resist dewith Rajesh Sharma

30

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

31

