Soc iety DIVORCE

SEPARATE BUT EQUAL
HK RAJESHEKHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

A new bill seeks to give divorced women an equal share of property acquired after marriage. If passed, it could make divorces in India among the most equitable in the world.
By Damayanti Datta

BALAN WITH DAUGHTER KIARA

"My late father fought three wars for India. I told myself, I am his daughter. I will survive."

88%

husbands continue with the same lifestyle after divorce, 77% keep the family car.

2-10%

of the husband's annual income is what judges usually fix as alimony, 46% wives never get it.

63%

women become dependent on parents, 42% have no income and 86% have children to take care of.

88%

live with in-laws and 69% are not given back their wedding jewellery when they leave.

50

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

Source: Economic Research Foundation, Delhi, 2010 and Report of the Working Group Women's Agency and Empowerment for the XII FiveYear Plan, Government of India, 2012

Final

{

he had just Rs 750 on her when kicked out of home. Stripped of all baggage of her two-year-old marriage, the Mumbai housewife sat in a daze outside the unused flat of her deceased parents, rummaging through the mess of personal items in her bag to find the key to the flat and to her security. Her maid rescued her that day. She called a locksmith, ushered her in and took care of her for the next six months, with the affection of a mother and without salary. Eleven years later, Vandana Shah, 39, editor of India's first divorce magazine, Ex Files, coaches others how to survive divorce. How does one survive a divorce? Get out of home and mingle, plan fun activities with friends, take up a new hobby, see a therapist, start dating again, advice divorce survival guides. But the modern pick-me-ups fall flat in the land of Manu, where the consequences of a marital breakup are still not the same for men and women. "Women have very limited economic rights on divorce," says Kirti Singh, Supreme Court advocate and former Law Commission member. In the last six decades, India has widened grounds for divorce. But the fact is that almost all Indian women endure a sharp fall in standard of living on separation and divorce has consistently been ignored by policymakers. But now laws are coming to their rescue: For the first time, the nation is deliberating over legal changes that propose to accord women new equality with men on property rights and lifestyle post-divorce. On March 23, the Union Cabinet approved the Marriage Laws (Amendment)

S

Bill, 2010, giving women the right to an equal share of property acquired after marriage. It has sparked off a nationwide debate, with a war of words in the Rajya Sabha on May 2. The Cabinet has now decided to take on board various views and amend it to provide for a clearly defined 50 per cent claim for a wife in her husband's immovable residential property, acquired even before marriage. Although a wife's share in her husband's other assets is still left to the judge's discretion, the Bill has the poten-

Judy Balan, 31,Chennai Author DAYAFTER Refused alimony out of pride, though the judge asked her to reconsider. AFTER SHOCK All her savings were wiped out by recurrent trips to lawyers and the court. ACTION PLAN Debuted with the book, Two Fates: The Story of My Divorce in 2011.

MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

{

"My lifestyle was zero after the divorce. I took to autos, stopped going to movies or eating out."

tial to make Indian divorces among the most equitable in the world. If passed, the Bill will force Dharmeshbhai Desai, 45, to pay up. Since 2010, he has ignored all court orders to provide maintenance to his estranged wife Hetalben, 38, and their daughter. He owns two large home appliances shops in Surat, but pleads financial hardship every time. He has been hauled up in court for not disclosing his actual wealth: In August last year, the judges of the Gujarat High Court took him to task when they discov-

Vandana Shah, 39,Mumbai Divorce Counsellor DAYAFTER Was told,"You look too rich to get this job," when appearing for her first job interview after the breakup. AFTER SHOCK When her billionaire husband claimed in court that he earned only Rs 48,000 a month. ACTION PLAN Took to divorce counselling in 2002 with support group 360 Degrees Back To Life, and editing India's first divorce magazine, Ex Files.

Soc iety DIVORCE
ered that he had bought a Mahindra Logan car for Rs 7.5 lakh. But in a battlefield called divorce court, there is no room for shame. Hetalben, dependent on retired parents now, can move court. But if Desai is sent to jail for violation of court order, she can forget about the alimony, says Ahmedabad lawyer Dakshesh Mehta, who fought her case: "He will simply say that he has no income and can't pay." Shah is a perfect case study for India's only survey on the economic status of estranged women by the Economic Research Foundation, Delhi, in 2010. Like her, 74 per cent of separated women are full-time homemakers, with no income or job skills. She did have a career before marriage, like 31 per cent of her counterparts. She quit her job as an advertising professional because her husband wanted her to. When she walked out, she wasn't allowed to take her wedding jewellery, a fate shared by 69 per cent of women. The financial devastation she faced post-breakup was her own. It did not affect her crorepati husband's lifestyle: It doesn't for 88 per cent husbands in India, reports the survey. "It is well known that unlike in the West, most divorce petitions in India are filed and initiated by men," says Kirti Singh. About 80 per cent women oppose divorce because they have no other economic alternative outside marriage. "Women, if they can afford to file a case, do so primarily for maintenance and return of stridhan and dowry." But with most courts granting just 2-10 per cent of a man's income after rounds of expensive litigation, women rapidly slide down the economic slope. What does "loss of lifestyle" mean? Theoretically, it ranges from pain and suffering, loss of enjoyment of life, income lost due to interruption of work or being less marketable to potential employers. But in reality it can be far worse: "My in-laws were extremely rich. For me, it was a 90 per cent drop in lifestyle," says Shah. In the case of Chennai-based novelist Judy Balan, 31, who debuted with Two Fates: The Story of My Divorce in 2011, all her savings were wiped out by recurrent trips to

Sarvesh, 36, Delhi
Photographer DAYAFTER With no one to turn to, she took refuge in a shortstay shelter with women's organisation, Saheli. AFTER SHOCK With a paltry maintenance of Rs 350 a month, she did odd jobs and often survived on free gurdwara food. ACTION PLAN She took to photography and won awards for her photos from disaster zones, Kargil to Uttarkashi.

Sudha Setty, 45,Bangalore
Energy Efficiency Consultant DAYAFTER A stroke of luck led her to set up her own business. HARD TRUTH Coping with rejection and rebuilding her confidence, with support from parents and brother. ACTION PLAN Was to be recognised for her own abilities. Proved it as a sought-after professional in the country and the world over.

"A woman with no one by her side is easy prey, especially in the male world of news photography."
CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com SANDESH RAVI KUMAR

"I did very well financially but there was no time to marry again. So at 40, I adopted my little girl, who is six now."

"A wife needs to get her 50 per cent share for her contribution in creating her husband's wealth."
MANDAR DEODHAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

52

INDIA TODAY N JULY 9, 2012

Final

{

lawyers and the court. Unwilling to put pressure on her retired parents, she decided to work double-shifts with two advertising firms to take care of herself and her year-old daughter. "My lifestyle was zero after the divorce," she says, "because babies are expensive, from PediaSure to pre-school. I cut down on social life, commuted by public transport and stopped going to the movies." About 75 per cent women return to parents or live with siblings, dependent and often unwelcome. But Sarvesh, 36, couldn't even depend on her parents. They had arranged her marriage at 17. Like 88 per cent of separated women, she lived with her in-laws. After spending almost a decade hidden behind her pallu, mentally and physically abused by her alcoholic husband, her parents refused to bail her out. "This is your destiny. You have to put up with it", they told her. When Sarvesh left home, she had to take refuge in a short-stay shelter with women's organisation Saheli. With a paltry maintenance of Rs 350 a month, that too after hundreds of trips to the court. She scraped a living from odd jobs, often surviving on free food at gurdwaras, until a friend intro-

Rinki Roy Bhattacharya
70,Mumbai Writer, columnist and documentary filmmaker DAYAFTER The first step was to move quietly into her maid's room, in a bid to escape the marriage. AFTER SHOCK After bitter court wars for a decade, she gave up on alimony and all claims to property. ACTION PLAN Won rights to her father's property, took to writing and set up the Bimal Roy Memorial and Film Society in Mumbai.

duced her to photography. It took her years and a lot of help to realise her dream: Sarvesh is an award-winning photographer today. Getting a divorce coincides with a sudden entry into the job market. Sudha Setty, 45, of Bangalore, had dreamt of a high-flying career in the US. But her arranged marriage, which proved to be a non-starter, and the trauma of divorce clouded her career horizons. It meant returning to India with nothing in hand. Although she refused to take alimony from her husband, the sudden financial dependence on her parents and brother troubled her. "I used to feel selfconscious," she says. The process of rebuilding her life meant changing career interests: "One day before the divorce, I got the opportunity to set up a business." A well-known name in the field of energy efficiency now, Setty feels it took her long to focus on her career. "I did very well financially, but there was no time to marry again." Under the Indian system, a wife has to produce evidence of her spouse's earnings before the court to get alimony. But the wife often does not have access to such papers. Rinki Roy

Final

{

{

Bhattacharya, 70, daughter of legendary filmmaker Bimal Roy and wife of another celebrated filmmaker, Basu Bhattacharya, had put in some money in a house that her husband had once bought. After separation, she wanted one-third of its value. "There was tremendous resistance and I just gave up. My husband was very wealthy but invented excuses to thwart my claim." After almost eight years of constant court battles, she just gave up: "I still don't know if I am legally divorced." Forty-six per cent husbands refuse maintenance, shows the survey. Rinki's was a dramatic love marriage: She had eloped at age 19. It was a marriage, she believes, that made her husband's career as a filmmaker possible. "I helped in set design, took care of the logistics, as well as my family." And that's why she feels strongly that a woman should get her 50 per cent share. "There is a lot of denial and sacrifice involved in being a wife. Her contribution in creating her husband's wealth has to be recognised." It was ultimately the property she inherited from her father years later that allowed her to escape the abusive marriage. She moved out, put her life together, started earning her keep by writing in newspapers. "But there were threats to my life and I lived in fear that my then six-year-old daughter would be kidnapped by my husband." The world has changed since then for women. One-third of India's 480 million jobs are held by them, show an IMRB survey in 2011. About 60 per cent urban women say they are responsible for everything that happens in their life. And they are ambitious, with 86 per cent aspiring to a top job, says a 2011 global survey by Centre for Work-Life Policy. Their income has doubled, especially in the cities, boosting their family's wealth. They buy 80 per cent of household goods, and are targets for half the nation's advertising. They watch their liberated sisters on television and feel good when hair colour companies write pretty slogans for them: "Because you're worth it." Will money make men and women equal at last? Well, in divorce at least, if not in marriage. I

JULY 9, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

53

