NET FLUX
news now

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

app alert

viral video
Celebrities read mean Tweets about themselves

What received attention on the World Wide Web Union Human Resource Development Minister Kapil Sibal launched a 24-hour anti-ragging helpline for students at Antiragging.in. According to research by S.Shyam Sundar,a professor at Pennsylvania State University,children who text with abbreviations like LOL and GR8 will see an eventual decline in their grammar skills.

Top of the Lot
This week's app round-up is for the beauty-conscious, fitness freaks and those who want weather updates. Make your smartphone even smarter with these apps. MySkin assesses your skin based on diet and climate and recommends products that can improve it. Endomondo tracks your fitness routine and gives you audio feedback on your performance. Solar gives you weather patterns in various languages, based on your location.

4.5 million views
Kristen Stewart-Robert Pattinson breakup

1.9 million views

Rowan Atkinson Olympics video

tweet tweet

4,35,022 views
* Views from when videos were uploaded This week, a video montage of celebrities like Justin Bieber and Matt Le Blanc reading out nasty tweets directed at them from haters; a fan of the Twilight series having a breakdown over Kristen Stewart and Robert Pattinson's break-up; and Rowan Atkinson's skit in the Olympics 2012 opening ceremony went viral.

Ruling the Roster
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on July 31 The power crisis affecting millions of people across seven states in north India dominated Twitter trends. Congratulatory messages poured in for shooter Gagan Narang's for winning an Olympic bronze in the 10m Air Rifle event. People tweeted in support of activist Anna Hazare, who is on an indefinite fast to make the Government concede to the Lokpal Bill. Condolences, updates about the tragic fire on the Tamil Nadu Express train swept Twitter. Netizens paid tribute to the 20 most special people in their lives, ranging from their mothers to pop star Lady Gaga.

Tumblr Tales star of the week

Dosa Safari
Pavandeep Singh, Mario Jerome and George Seemon had little in common. Except for one thing--their love for dosa.Well before the South Indian dish made it to The Huffington Post's `Must Try Foods'list, the trio decided to document their mutual passion through a blog and that's how Love, Sex aur Dosa, a Tumblr blog, was created in July.The three scour dosa restaurants around Bangalore and rate them according to taste, ambience and price.Their best dosa eating experience so far? Sri Balaji Dosa Corner in Koramangala, that has 99 varieties of dosas.

MEMBERS OF RAVE iBAND

Music for iAge

#Powercut
48,34,135

#Gagannarang
11,96,894

#Anna
8,86,056

#Tamilnadu express
4,14,583

#20peoplespecial
2,56,272
*Figures denote number of followers

In today's times, it's entirely possible to create music without bulky instruments and Rave iBand does just that.The Bangalore-based band replaced their guitars, pianos and drums with iPads and other tablets. Making their music with apps like Mic, Guitar, Piano and weirdonet Percussion, the five-member A professor at Université Pierre et band--founder and music Marie Curie, Paris, has invented a director Ricky Kej, Riccha device that allows people to write Paul on vocals, Charan Raj and draw by simply using their eyes. on piano and guitar,Vanil Veigas on percussion Diane Hayes from Nebraska put up an ad on and DJ JDee--are eBay to find a suitor for her niece Emilie Rogers, a hit online. 21.The bidding started at $9.99 (Rs 550).About 1,000 men applied before the ad was pulled down.

web tips
Here's how you make a good first impression during Skype interviews and online chats: Always make eye contact with the person at the other end. Place the webcam on a surface that is in line with your forehead so your face looks angular. Make sure you are wellgroomed.A stubble or blemish looks terrible, especially with HD technology.

