UP FRONT

ANVAR ALIKHAN

THE CHHATRAPUR CONNECTION
s someone once observed, in Silicon Valley, if you Turing connection until I told him). Despite this Indian background, Turing himself was throw a stone you'll hit an Indian--plus you'll probably get a second one on the ricochet. India's contribu- born in England (though his biographers tell us he was contion to the development of IT industry is well known. But ceived in Chhatrapur, Odisha, where his father was posted). what is not so well known is the fact that the man who has His mother travelled back to England for the baby's birth, been called `the father of the computer', Alan Turing, had a as was customary at the time, to avoid the social stigma against the "country-born". But when she returned to India, strong Indian connection himself. Turing--who was born exactly 100 years ago, in 1912-- she left the baby with guardians in Sussex. At age 6, the is best known for the key role he played in cracking the `un- young Turing was to return to India with his parents, but for breakable' German Enigma codes in World War II, and health reasons he was kept back. He later went on to pubthereby helping to win the War. But he was also one of the lic school, Cambridge and Princeton's famed Institute of great pioneers of computer science. As Time magazine put it, Advanced Study. And then the War broke out and he was when it named Turing as one of the 100 Most Important recruited for the code-breakers at Bletchley Park. After the War, Turing worked on the development of some People of the 20th Century, "everyone who taps at a keyboard, opening a spreadsheet or a word processing program, is of the world's first functioning computers, as well as on the working on an incarnation of a Turing machine". It all goes concept of artificial intelligence (dreaming of teaching his back to Turing's seminal paper `On Computable Numbers', computers to appreciate the taste of strawberries and cream). written in 1936, when he was only 24. That led directly to the But his life was a tragic one, and he was treated barbarically Colossus computer, built to break the Enigma code. And, ar- by the British system because of his homosexuality, which was guably, every device that has ever come out since then, illegal at the time. In 1952, he was arrested for "gross indewhether from IBM, Apple, BlackBerry or Raspberry Pi, is just cency", and the court gave him two choices: Go to prison, or another expression of that original idea (although credit for submit to being castrated, chemically. He chose the latter. Two years later, aged 42, Turing committed suicide, in Turing's work often goes to John von Neumann, instead). one of the most poignant, romantic Turing's father, Julius Turing, acts of suicide I have come across: was an ICS officer in the Madras presSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Obsessed by Walt Disney's Snow idency. He spoke fluent Tamil and White, he decided, like the princess, Telugu and was posted in a series of to bite into a poisoned apple. One remote places like Parvatipuram, night, he dipped an apple in Anantapur, Srikakulam and Kurnool, cyanide, bit into it, and died, leavbefore being promoted, in 1921, to ing the half-eaten apple by his bedsecretary in charge of agriculture side. In fact, there's an urban and commerce. Even before him, legend that the Apple computer various Turings had lived in India, logo--with the single bite taken out since the 1700s, including Major of it--is a cryptic tribute to Alan John Turing, who took part in the Turing. But when Steve Jobs was fateful Siege of Srirangapatna. asked if it was true, he replied, "No. But Turing's Indian connection But I really wish it was." was from both sides. His mother, What a difference a couple of Sarah Stoney, was a railway girl, her generations makes. In today's father having been chief engineer of world, the 24-year-old Turing would the Madras & South Mahratta have, of course, been pursued by VCs, Railway--a man credited for building the Tungabhadra Bridge, as set up a tech company, launched an well as inventing `Stoney's Patent IPO, had a net worth of $14.9 billion, Silent Punkah-wheel', an innovative and become a gay icon in the barnon-creaking punkah designed to In fact, there's an urban legend that gain. Instead, he dies anonymous, ensure better sleep. Thus Sarah poor, impotent and anguished. As the Apple computer logo--with the Stoney was born in Podanur, and his father might have told him in single bite taken out of it--is a grew up in a house in Coonoor Tamil, "Idhu daan vazhkai, magane cryptic tribute to Alan Turing. But (which has, by freak coincidence, (such is life, my son)." when Steve Jobs was asked if it now been bought by Nandan was true, he replied,"No. But I Nilekani, co-founder of Infosys-- Anvar Alikhan is an advertising really wish it was." although he had no inkling about the professional and social commentator

A

10

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

