LONDON OLYMPICS
AP

THE GAMES VENUE AT GREENWICH PARK

One is Not Enough
New champions are born. Old legends are demolished. India manage to grab a bronze as the nation waits for more.
Beijing, Sania Mirza had taken part in the parade in a pair of jeans because her kit was not quite up to scratch. But as Lord Sebastian Coe, chairman of the London Olympic Games Organising Committee, said, she was an over-enthusiastic member of the opening ceremony cast who had gatecrashed. The Indian Olympic Association did register a protest, but the response was meek. "After three days, we got a letter from the Organising Committee regretting the incident. They, however, did not see it as a security breach," acting chef-de-mission Brigadier P.K. Muralidharan Raja told INDIA TODAY. Until Narang's bronze, the only contribution of the Indian athletes was to complain incessantly about London heat. "Yes, it is a sprawling complex but it's so hot in our rooms," said an Indian hockey player, who was among those who went to the local market to buy pedestal fans to beat the heat. Then there were queues at breakfast in the Games Village. "When you see 10,000 athletes at breakfast together, it is a crowd," tweeted tennis star Mahesh Bhupathi. The athletes have also had to fetch their supply of mineral water from the canteen, not what they had expected after the facilities lavished upon them at the 2010 Commonwealth Games (CWG) in Delhi. Perhaps the archers couldn't adjust. Perhaps it was the viral fever that some contracted in the run-up to the Games, or the shifting winds at Lord's, but the world beaters missed the target. Expectations were fuelled by the silver the women's archery team won at the world championship in Turin in 2011, but India lost to Denmark 210211 in the first round, primarily due to a show of nerves by Chekrovolu Swuro, who shot two poor 6s that undermined her 10s. The male archers also crumbled under pressure, Tarundeep Rai shooting an 8 off his final arrow, letting Japan force shoot-off. The Japanese thrived under pressure, recording two 10s and a 9, while the Indians came up with three 9s. For long, the Indian archers have been asking for the services of a sports psychologist, but the call went unheeded, till Olympic Gold Quest, the foundation started by billiards icon Geet Sethi and badminton legend Prakash Padukone, arranged for Delhi-based sports psychologist Vaibhav Aghase--a former CBI officer--to spend some time with Rai and Rahul Banerjee. Indian archery needs to embrace sports sci-

GAGAN NARANG CELEBRATES AFTER WINNING THE BRONZE MEDAL IN THE 10M AIR RIFLE EVENT

TALKINGPOINT
The high drama in the stadiums is matched by the street buzz
BORIS'S BABES In an article for The Daily Telegraph, London Mayor Boris Johnson talked about 20 reasons to be proud of the Games. No. 19 read, "As I write these words, there are semi-naked women playing beach volleyball in the middle of the Horse Guards Parade immortalised by Canaletto. They are glistening like wet otters. The whole thing is magnificent and bonkers." GIRL POWER With Saudi Arabia entering two female athletes, this is the first time every country has at least one sportswoman participating. DRAMA QUEEN Queen Elizabeth made her acting debut, appearing in a skit with James Bond actor Daniel Craig for the opening ceremony. FLASH PROTEST At Euro 2012 in the Denmark vs Portugal match, Danish footballer Nicklas Bendtner flashed his underwear bearing the name of Irish bookmakers Paddy Power. It prompted calls for underwear checks at the Games. But athlete protests scotched the plan. DRESSED TO THRILL Young NRIs across London have been spotted partying in `bikini saris' that come with a fitted swimsuit body piece. It became a craze after actor Bipasha Basu wore it to the International Indian Film Academy awards at Singapore this year.

By S. Kannan in London

T

he Olympics are all about dreams. Some linger long after they are realised, others are crushed on the biggest stage of them all. Since the Games began on July 27, London has been home to thousands of athletes, whose most cherished hopes are either coming true or being ruthlessly shattered. The world watched as Chinese and American athletes resumed their rivalry for primacy. Indians mattered only to India. There was the affable 29-year-old Gagan Narang, drawn to marksmanship after he shot a few balloons at Chennai's Marina Beach. He secured India's first medal, a bronze in the 10m air rifle event at the Royal Artillery Barracks. In contrast, there was World No. 1 archer Deepika Kumari crashing out in the first round of the women's recurve event. Yet, it was the unknown Madhura Nagendra who hogged the initial headlines, sauntering alongside Indian flagbearer Sushil Kumar during the parade at the 60,000-seater Olympic Stadium. The first thought was that India had stumbled, failing to provide one of its athletes her team colours. After all, in

POTTERING AROUND As Rupert Grint, who plays Ron in the Harry Potter series, ran with the Olympic torch, over 60 college students dressed as Death Eaters stood cheering at Trafalgar Square.
by Sonali Acharjee

LONDON OLYMPICS
AP

BENCH STRENGTH
Mittal to Mohanlal, Team India has solid support in the stands
L.N. MITTAL threw a grand welcome party at the Serpentine Gallery in Hyde Park just before the Games. He funds the Mittal Champions Trust, which nurtures Indian athletes who are Olympic hopefuls. Shooters Ronjan Sodhi and Joydeep Karmakar, track and field star Seema Antil and a few boxers attended. He also invited select journalists for breakfast to Orbit, a restaurant near the Olympic Stadium.

DEEPIKA KUMARI DURING THE ARCHERYTEAM EVENT IN LONDON

LAKSHMI MITTALWATCHES THE MEN'S BASKETBALL GAME BETWEEN USA AND FRANCE, IN LONDON

Malayalam film star MOHANLAL spent a full day at Wimbledon for the tennis events. The actor posted pictures of himself and his wife Suchitra from London on his Twitter page. Business magnate SUBRATA ROY, who funds both Indian cricket and hockey and has a 35,000 sq ft penthouse in London's Imperial Wharf on the Thames, decided to drop in at Games Village and speak to the Indian athletes on July 27. As the official sponsor of the Indian hockey team, he met the team and was taken around by the Indian Olympic Association officials.
by S. Kannan

ence to empower its stars. They don't have to look any further than Narang for evidence. The manner in which he handled pressure in the final of the 10m air rifle event was a clear sign of how he has moved on from his disappointment of missing out on the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna award two years ago, when he had threatened to quit. It was only after being persuaded by friends, media and officials that he competed in the 2010 Delhi CWG, where he won four golds, and at the 2010 Guangzhou Asian Games, where he won two silvers. Narang's self-belief on July 30 was evident as he shot inner 10s with each of his first 26 shots. "I have medals from all the top tournaments in my showcase. The one missing was an Olympics medal. That pressure is off my chest now," he said. "I always knew Gagan had it in him to win an Olympics medal," said Abhinav Bindra, gold medallist at Beijing. He failed to make it to the final, but showed enormous grace in praising his teammate. Rajyavardhan Rathore's silver at Athens in 2004, Bindra's gold in Beijing and Narang's bronze in London have been a shot in the arm of the National Rifle Association of India (NRAI). "This is the beginning," says NRAI President Raninder Singh, while national coach Sunny Thomas points out that there is

a system in place. "People complain that we conduct too many trials before each Games, but the fact is that we pick shooters on form," he says. The Great Indian Hotshot Dream has been fuelled by the sports ministry as well, spending as it did close to Rs 24 crore from Operation Excellence, on the shooters' training for the Games. "India has foreign coaches in rifle, pistol and shotgun events. We have good shooting ranges in Tughlakabad, Hyderabad and Pune," says Moraad Ali Khan, Arjuna Award winner and a government observer. "Unless you spend big bucks, medals will not come." There have been other good performances as well, not in the least shuttler Parupalli Kashyap's victory over Sri Lanka's Niluka Karunaratne at the Wembley Arena to become the first Indian man in history to reach the badminton quarter-finals of the Olympic Games. Boxers Vijender Singh, Jai Bhagwan, Devendro Singh and Manoj Kumar showed good form to win their opening bouts. The Indian men's hockey team were beaten 1-3 by New Zealand, two days after losing to the Netherlands. It might well be that India will manage to improve on its Beijing tally, with one bronze in the bag already. But the Great Indian Question remains: Where will the gold come from? And will it come at all? 

GETTY IMAGES

