LONDON OLYMPICS

OOPS!THEYDID IT
The greatest show on earth also had some bloopers
NOT A SPORT After Swiss football player Michel Morganella's team lost to South Korea, he took out his frustration by tweeting: "Je les tous Defonce Coréens, allez vous tous bruler, bande de trisos." It translates to: "I want to beat up South Koreans. Bunch of mentally handicapped retards." BACKBENCHERS' BANE With 169 steep steps to the last few rows at the London Aquatics Centre, word has it that the seats here are being termed as the worst for view and convenience. NOTHING OFFICIAL ABOUT IT No one from India was present at the opening ceremony in an official capacity. Sports Minister Ajay Maken is in London but not as a state guest. BACKSTAGE BLUNDERS The entire North Korean women's football team stormed off the pitch as the Hampden Park scoreboard displayed the South Korean flag during their match against Colombia. FORGETTABLE MEMORABILIA One of the 2012 Olympic mascots, the 50 mm figurine of Wenlock, a oneeyed stick with no face, has turned out to be very unpopular. A Guardian poll rated it the "worst Olympic memorabilia of 2012" .

of IRONY
By Nirpal Dhaliwal

Many Londoners weren't overjoyed about the city hosting its third Olympics. But now that it's here, they are putting on their best show.

CELEBRATION
L
ike many Londoners, I had not been looking forward to the Olympics. Over the past years, the cost of the project rose to an astronomical £9 billion (Rs 76,500 crore) to be paid from our taxes--at enormous inconvenience to us. Hundreds of thousands of extra visitors will be in our city, adding even more pressure to its groaning transport services and infrastructure, while Soviet-style zili lanes were established to enable chauffeur-driven sporting stars, bureaucrats and elite to be ferried quickly to the venues without being clogged in traffic with the rest of us. To add to the humiliation, we were then informed that ticketing for much of the Games would be monopolised by the suited, soulless, corpulent corporation-wallahs whose logos and branding were splashed all over our capital like a torrent of bird-droppings. Rather than a festival of sport and human endeavour, we braced ourselves for a fortnight's celebration of capitalism. And on top of all that, we've had one of the dreariest, rain-sodden summers in memory. Our fears about the Olympics were perfectly articulated by a friend of mine who described the event as "a long, expensive party we're not invited to, for which we've paid, during which we have to leave our car at home and walk everywhere". And the fears only rose as the Games started. Last week, the North Korean women's football team took to the field as the authorities raised the South Korean flag above them. Surely, there isn't a more sinister faux pas one can make during an international spectacle? This gaffe only made us cringe deeper when, on July 26, our bumbling shaggy-haired mayor, Boris Johnson, took to the stage in Hyde Park to shout banal sub-Obama declarations of "Are we ready? Yes, we are!" And then came the opening ceremony. For all its wonder and anarchic creativity, the greatest miracle it wrought--more splendid than the fiery Olympic rings it forged so magnificently --was that it transformed our souls. Suddenly, confronted by the berserk, magical vision of Danny Boyle, weaving every facet of our history into the greatest show the world has seen, we were shaken out of our dour cynicism. We are, as Boyle held his Olympian mirror to us, an incredible people. The industrial drive of the modern world, the moral ambition of universal suffrage, the mad middle-finger-to-the-world spirit of pop culture--all of this has its origins in our city, capital of a tiny island that has, more than any other in history, punched so mightily above its weight. And we have been inspired because Boyle's ceremony, despite its global audience, spoke specifically to the hearts of one community: we, the people of London--all eight million of us! I cannot begin to list the variety of in-jokes

THE OLYMPICS OPENING CEREMONY IN LONDON

Photographs by AP

that littered his spectacle, lost on the wider world, but which tickled us pink. The most hilarious was the Sex Pistols' rendition of God Save The Queen being played as Her Majesty entered the bowl, stopping a hair's breadth short of the line that excoriates her for heading a "fascist regime". Just as funny was the sight of David Cameron having to wear his proudest smile as the show turned into a paean for the National Health Service and the sort of socialist big-statism that he has long opposed. It was a performance filled with wit and subversion, featured every race and colour of our capital's populace, gave prime billing to the young black rapper, Dizzee Rascal, a working-class youth icon, who sang his aptly-titled anthem,

SORRY STORY American wrestler Stephany Lee, 27, might have qualified for the Olympics, but she forgot to stop smoking weed in time to provide a clean urine sample at the Olympic trials in April. DEAD DESIGNS Hockey player Sandeep Singh was seen wearing shorts that were torn at the seams. There's an outcry on Twitter against Dida Sportswear, which won the Rs 50-lakh contract to become the Indian team designer. BEST FACE Bangalore girl Madhura Nagendra was the `mystery girl' who was seen walking with the Indian contingent at the opening ceremony. She is a student who was involved in Danny Boyle's opening extravaganza.

by Sonali Acharjee, Sowmya Aji and S. Kannan

LONDON OLYMPICS
Bonkers, interspersed with a Punjabi song by A.R. Rahman. Yes, the expense of the Olympics is extortionate. It was foisted on us without any consultation. Then again, we never chose to fight Hitler either. But when he brought his bombs to London, the world saw what mettle and love for life we have. And now that the Olympics are here up and running, we're behind it as if we have mortgaged our homes to bet on every race, leap, toss and flip that's part of this whole shebang. My friend Fleur Emery, a dynamic businesswoman, between cutting deals and chasing money, is sharing every detail of the women's diving contest on Facebook. "Thanks to the BBC," she's declared, "I now know exactly how to do a flunge." Yesterday, her obsession was with women's cycling and now, via Facebook, her friends can also discuss the merits of a well-executed peloton (it's a huddle of riders in team cycling), as if we had been lifelong enthusiasts. She's not the only one. The wheels of global capitalism are turning slower for these two weeks as London's workers and entrepreneurs are skipping mornings, even days, off work to partake of such sporting acana as men's team archery and women's powerlifting. But while we may be skiving off, the merchants of west London are reeling with joy as affluent, middle-aged tourists from across the world are heaving in to shop any piece of ridiculously overpriced tat that a Chinese sweatshop can produce. But it's sold in Britain, and has the Union Jack emblazoned on it, so shall more than suffice as an `authentic' memento of a wonderful Olympics. These shoppers could not have come at a better time. The Chancellor, George Osborne, must have been fingering his phial of cyanide when latest figures showed that Britain's recession is actually three times worse than had been predicted. But the savings of the global middle classes are currently flooding here for a fortnight, so he can breathe easy for a week or two at least. What greater respect could be paid to the copulation of sport and capitalism, than the fact that McDonald's has introduced a new uniform for the Olympics, replete with athletic hoodies and tennis

NUMBERSGAME
Guts, glory and gold come at a steep price tag at the Games

101 per cent is the cost
over-run for the $15 billion (Rs 82,500 crore) 2012 Games. This makes it the most expensive taxpayer-funded event in the history of the UK.

£2,000 (Rs 1,70,000) apiece was the price of the costliest seat for the Olympics opening ceremony. That's four times the price of the most expensive seat at the Beijing 2008 opening night. 36 kg of gold, worth more than $1,93,250 (Rs 1.07 crore), is said to have been used to plate medals that will be awarded to winners at the Games. £1 is what former Beatles star
Paul McCartney received as payment for his performance at the Olympics opening ceremony. McCartney sang the iconic Hey Jude to bring the curtains down on the opening gala.

£85 (Rs 7,400) is what spectators need to pay for a bird's-eye view of the Olympics from special VIP flights by London Helicopters Service. The choppers take off from Essex, encircle the Games village and Alexandra Palace before returning to base. 83 is the number of athletes in
Team India's contingent for London 2012, making it the largest ever. In Beijing 2008, India had 56 athletes and 42 officials as support staff.

1,20,000 seats went empty
on the first two days of the Games. After a public furore, the organisers have begun reselling tickets.

collars. The world's foremost purveyors of cholesterol, which underpins the obesity epidemic of the West, are the standard bearers of human excellence. In this time of recession and blamemongering, the Olympics is the only thing in Britain that has universal political support. The Labour Party under Tony Blair won the bid to become hosts seven years ago, while the Tories have thrown their weight behind it since taking over the government. It was one of the more exquisite ironies of the night, that David Cameron had actually raised the budget of the opening ceremony to £27 million (Rs 229.50 crore) --only to then see it made into a showcase for Boyle's left-wing politics. But even I raised an eyebrow at the scene of a bucolic pre-industrial England, peopled with so many black and brown people. The only protests thus far have been to decry the empty seats, as various federations failed to use their quotas. Londoners are livid at seeing gaps in the crowd, after so many had failed to get tickets through the labyrinthine of-

ficial process. These will soon be filled, it seems, by the military and students. The Games are also brimming with simmering tensions and sporting rivalries. Not least among British athletes themselves. Several non-English players in the British football team have refused to sing the national anthem before matches (It's also the English anthem. The Scots, Welsh and Northern Irish have their own). Possibly the biggest rivalry during the Games has been between Ralph Lauren, designer of the US team's outfits, and Stella McCartney, who designed Britain's. While the stylish, preppie look of the US team has been widely admired, McCartney's creation has been derided for its glitz, hoodies and cut-off shorts. Many people think

it makes our team look like `chavs'-- members of the sportswear-clad urban underclass. For us fashion-conscious Brits, Usain Bolt's quest for gold against Yohan Blake is, by comparison, a mere sideshow. India's role at the Olympics will pass most Londoners by, given that events Indians excel at are not the most high profile over here. But the lady who had the gall to walk alongside the team during the opening ceremony is admired for her temerity. Gatecrashing is an art form to the British, and she is walking in the footsteps of Karl Power, a national hero who has inveigled himself into English rugby and cricket team photos, as well as with Manchester United in a Champions League final. She could indeed become another

(CLOCKWISE FROM FAR LEFT) US SWIMMER RYAN LOCHTE IN THE MEN'S 200M BACKSTROKE EVENT AT THE AQUATICS CENTRE; KATE MIDDLETON AND PRINCE WILLIAM AT AN EQUESTRIAN EVENT; MICHELLE OBAMA HUGS BASKETBALL STAR KOBE BRYANT AFTER USA DEFEATED FRANCE IN A PRELIMINARY GAME

British oddball hero, like the volunteer who has become a YouTube sensation after her cheeky quips on a megaphone, telling those without tickets how they will one day tell their grandchildren how lucky they were to "hear the Olympics", got uploaded. Londoners as a whole have finally warmed to the Olympics. We didn't want it, and we groaned at the thought of it. But now that it's begun, we will show the world what sports we are.
The author is a freelance writer and journalist

48

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 13, 2012

