AnimPACTpeature
dorably called the "heart of Incredible India," Madhya Pradesh serves you straight from the heart, every time you visit the state to explore its diverse offerings. True to its slogan, "MP Ajab Hai Sabse Gajab Hai," the state has come to occupy a pride of ilace when it comes to wondrous tourist destinations. In terms of sheer diversity and richness, the range of experiences that Madhya Pradesh offers is awesome. There is something for every mood, taste and desire. If you love the finer things of life, the state will dazzle you with its arts and crafts. If festivals enchant you, there are a plenty in this state throughout the year. Nature lovers can revel in the bouquet of natural wonders that the state offers. And, if you want a tryst with history, Madhya Pradesh will never let you down, with its enchanting mix of palaces, forts and exquisite temples. The ancient forts and palaces, now mostly under private ownership, offer immense potential for heritage tourism. And, with three World Heritage Sites already under its belt-- Khajuraho, Sanchi and Bhimbetka--Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation Limited is setting things right by embracing initiatives to promote the state as a promising heritage destination. A glimpse on some of the places that stand out as heritage landmarks: KHAJURAHO: CAPTURING LIFE IN STONE The temples of Khajuraho will transport you to that glorious past of Madhya Pradesh that showcases different shades and colours of life. From love to joy to passion to eroticism, the sandstone sculptures here capture various facets, moods and emotions of life. Built by the Chandela Rajputs in a short span of 100 years (950-1050 AD), only 22 of the 85 original temples have survived the ravages of time. Not following the architectural prototype of the temples built during the period, the temples of Khajuraho stand on a high masonry platform, and not within the customary enclosure. Designated by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site, the group of temples can capture anybody's imagination with their exquisite and intricate sculptures depicting numerous deities, their attendants and celestial maidens. Broadly, the temples of Khajuraho are divided into three geographical groups--the Western, Eastern and Southern. Of all the three, the most visited is the Western group of temples, which comprises the largest of Khajuraho temples--Kandariya Mahadev and the oldest--Chaunsath Yogini. At Kandariya Mahadev, you'll find yourself amidst the dizzying heights of the temple towers rising in a succession like a range of mountains. Dedicated to Lord Shiva, the temple has the most elegant ornamented basement of all the Kbajuraho temples. As many as 900 sensuous and vibrantly alive figurines depicting dancers, musicians and erotic groupings adorn the intricately-carved temple. Equally charming is Chaunsath Yogini--the only granite temple of the group--which manifests various yoginis (ascetic attendants) of _j goddess Kali. It has shrines clustered around an open-air quadrangle. Another magnificent temple that draws tourists in large numbers is Chitragupta. The temple, dedicated to Sun God, is embellished with sculptures, reflecting the lavish lifestyle of the Chandela courts. Standing tall as one of the finest examples of the distinct architecture of Khajuraho temples, the Vishwanath Temple--dedicated to Lord Shiva--also stores immense sculptural wealth. Particularly noteworthy are its graceful female figures. Yet

The heart of

Incredible India

WELL-KEPT

SECRETS
Walk through the corridors of history, stare at the imperial valour and glory, or lose yourself to the stunning beauty captured in stone... Madhya Pradesh will leave you awestruck with its heritage landmarks

Kandariya Mahadev (Western Group), Khajuraho

another finely-carved temple of the Western group is the Lakshmana Temple, which projects the trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva-through its lintel over the entrance. Situated outside the premises of the Western group, Matangeswara Temple has its main attraction in the form of the daunting, eight-feet-high lingam. Jagadambi is another finely decorated temple of the Western group. The temples of the Eastern group also leave visitors awestruck and spellbound with their fine craftsmanship. Three Hindu temples--Brahma, Vamana and Javari--and three Jain temples--Ghantai, Adinath and Parsvanath--make for the Eastern group of Khajuraho temples. The Southern group is represented by just two conserved temples--Duladeo and Chaturbhuj. While flying celestials are the main attractions of the Duladeo Temple, the Chaturbhuj Temple--which doesn't have a single erotic sculpture like other Khajuraho temples-- enchants tourists with its massive intricately carved image of Lord Vishnu. Getting to Khajuraho By Air: Khajuraho is well connected to Delhi and Varanasi with regular flights. By Rail: Khajuraho has its own railway station. Other nearest railheads are Mahoba, Harpalpur, Jhansi and Satna. By Road: Khajuraho is well-connected by regular bus service to Satna, Harpalpur, Jhansi and Mahoba. INDORE: BLENDING ARCHITECTURAL STYLES Steeped in history, Indore--situated along the banks of rivers Saraswati and Khan--showcases the chequered culture of Madhya Pradesh through its innumerable monuments and antique temples. Rajwada, the mammoth sevenstoried palace, leaves you awestruck by fusing three distinct architectural styles: Maratha, Mughal and French. Recently renovated, the palace has its lower three floors made of wood. Indore's another architectural marvel is Town Hall, which was renamed Mahatma Gandhi Hall in 1948. Depicting the IndoGothic architectural style, its imposing domes and staples are a landmark of Indore. Other than a prime tourist centre, Town Hall, today, doubles up as an

important venue for various exhibitions. If you love the corrfpany of books, you . can head to the library of Town Hall. Aesthetically pleasing is the Annapurna Temple, which is inspired by the architecture of the Meenakshi Temple of Madurai. Intricate sculptures and ornate towers of the Annapurna Temple mesmerise visitors from around the globe. Close to Annapurna Temple, stands Indore's another architectural masterpiece-Lai Bagh Palace. Transporting visitors to the regal era, with its prehistoric artifacts, grand chandeliers and other magnificent displays, Lai Bagh Palace reflects the grandeur and lifestyle of the Holkar dynasty rulers. Spread across a 28-hectare campus, the palace once boasted of the best rose gardens in India. Not to be missed during your Indore visit are Royal Chhatris--beautiful monuments with soaring towers, with their walls adorned with breathtaking sculptures. Kanch Mandir, a Jain Temple, is also worth visiting. It catches the fancy of visitors, with its stunning walls, ceilings, pillars and door knobs--all entirely inlaid with glass. Even paintings of the Kanch Mandir are done in glass. Do ensure to include Bada Ganapati Temple in your itinerary, if you want to get up close with the world's largest Ganesha idol. Gems, limestone, fenugreek, jaggery and a lot of other items have gone into the making of the idol, which measures 25 feet from the head to the toe. You can step back in time and find yourself amidst historical treasures at Central Museum, which houses the finest collection of Parmar sculptures, ancient coins, weapons and armour. Getting to Indore By Air: Indore has its own airport--Devi Ahilya Bai International Airport. By Rail: Indore is on the western railway and well connected with major Indian cities. By Road: Situated at the confluence of two national highways (NH-3 and NH59), Indore is well-linked to major Indian cities. ORCHHA: A REGAL LANDSCAPE For all those who want to witness the royalty and legacy of the yesteryear's, Orchha, founded in the 16th century, is a must-visit destination. Stunning temples, magnificent forts and majestic palaces, all abound in Orchha. One of the most admired heritage sites is the Jehangir Mahal, built by Raja Bir Singh Ju Deo. Exquisitely carved and crowned by graceful cftftafr/s (cenotaphs), the palace offers spectacular views of soaring temple spires and other monuments. Another impressive construction in Orchha is Ram Raja Temple. With its towering spires and palatial architecture, the temple is one of the most unusual in India, as Lord Rama is worshipped here as a king. A flagstone path links this temple with Laxmi Narayan Temple, whose architecture depicts an interesting synthesis of fort and temple moulds. Some of the finest forms of the paintings of Bundela School adorn the temple walls. Vibrant murals, particularly based on religious and secular themes, bring the walls and ceilings to rich life. Laid out in the form of a cross--a symbolic representation of the four-armed Lord Krishna, the Chaturbhuj Temple, largest in the region, dominates Orchha's landscape. Its triple-arched gate and carved balconies enhance the beauty of the temple. Opulent royal quarters, raised balconies and interlocking walkways in symmetrical tiers are some of the prominent features of Raja Mahal, which was

AnimPACTreature
cemetery of the church has graves dating back from 1859 to World War I and II. Equally stunning is Christ Church, which features a hemispherical dome on the top, bearing faces of angels. The stained glass panes adorning the walls and rear of the altar present a mesmerising view when the sun rays pass through them. Another impressive feature of the church is its nave that doesn't have even a single pillar for support. Bison Lodge, the oldest house in Pachmarhi, serves as a museum, which exhibits the best of flora and fauna of the region. Getting to Pachmarhi By Air: The nearest airport is Bhopal. By Rail: Pipariya, on Mumbai-Howrah mainline, is the most convenient railhead. By Road: Pachmarhi is well-connected by road to major Indian cities. SON-ET-LUMIERE: RECREATING HISTORY If you want to experience the imperial past of Madhya Pradesh in an entertaining way, reserve your seat for the fascinating Sound and Light Show (Son-et-Lumiere) that is organised in Gwalior, Khajuraho and Orchha. In Gwalior, the Sound and Light Show is held at Man Mandir Palace of Gwalior Fort. During the show, which gives you a glimpse of the glorious and eventful past of Gwalior, the entire Man Mandir Palace wears a bridal look, with red-gold and blue-green lights illuminating its nook and corner. Man Mandir Palace, which once guided the destiny of Hindustan, was described by Babur as a "pearl amongst the fortresses of Hind." During the show, the story of the "pearl" begins with the sonorous and eloquent narration by Bollywood superstar Amitabh Bachchan. The Son-et-Lumiere vividly reconstructs the Mughal rule, depicting the time when the fort had transformed into a royal prison. Turkish invasions, Rajput defeats, "Jauhar" (scenes depicting Rajput women immolating themselves) and other incidents of historic importance are realistically created by Son-et-Lumiere. Likewise, at the Western group of Khajuraho temples, the Light and Sound evokes the life and times of the great Chandela Kings and traces the story of the unique temples that today constitute one of the world's great artistic wonders. Here also, Amitabh Bachchan lends his baritone voice to narrate the story, which focuses on the magnificent temples that could not be discovered for centuries after the fall of the Chandelas. The show is not only entertaining, but also quite informative. The Sound and Light Show at Orchha narrates the discovery of the medieval city by a king. The mesmerising programme takes place at various locales in Orchha, like Chaturbhuj Temple, Jehangir Mahal, Raj Mahal, etc. Exciting tales of defiance, loyalty and ambition are the main highlights of the show, which also deals with stories of saintly queens. The show also gives an insight into the architecture, wall paintings and culture of Bundelkhand.

constructed by Madhukar Shah, the deeply religious predecessor of Bir Singh Ju Deo. Enthralling visitors with its octagonal flowerbeds and landscaped gardens, there's Rai Praveen Mahal--a low, two-storied palace that matches the height of the trees in its beautiful surroundings. Skillfully carved niches allow light into the palace, which comprises mainly of a central hall and several small chambers. The refined aesthetic sense of Bundelas can well be witnessed at Phool Bagh, where a central row of fountains greets you and culminates in an eight-pillared palace-pavilion. If you are interested in a walking trail to do a recce of other historical sites, participate in the heritage walk. During the journey, you will explore several monuments like Raiman Dauji ki Kothi, Purushottam Das ki Haveli, Daroga ki Kothi, Siddh baba ki gufa, Wind Tower, Gundrai Darwaza, Narayan Das Khare ki Kothi, Kriparam Gaur ki Haveli, Taksal Bhavan, Bhagvant Rai ki Haveli, Palki Mahal, etc. Getting to Orchha By Air: The nearest airport is at Gwalior. By Rail: The nearest railhead is at Jhansi. By Road: Regular bus services connect Orchha with Jhansi. PACHMARHh MP'S 'VINTAGE1 POINT Even as Pachmarhi is famous for its picturesque surroundings, spectacular waterfalls and soulful tranquillity, there's no dearth of heritage sites here. Some of them include Catholic Church, Christ Church and Bison Lodge. A perfect blend of French and Irish architecture, the Catholic Church was built in 1892 by the British. Owing to its slim lancet windows, flying buttresses and pointed arches, many people find the Church replicating the architectural style of the early English period. The Belgian stained-glass windows enhance the beauty of the well-maintained stone church, manifold. The most striking feature of the church is a marble sculpture depicting Jesus Christ being baptised. The

Ater Fort, Bhind

