BedabrataPain
GUEST COLUMN
The writer was a scientist with NASA, before he turned filmmaker. His debut film Chittagong is slated for release this October.

Curiosity Saves Science
NASA'S Mars Science Laboratory mission seeks to answer man's eternal

questions: Is earth a lonely planet? Is there anyone out there?
pare a thought for what NASA engineers achieved. there are good reasons to bet on carbon--its bond energy is Landing an SUV-sized 5,000-kg rover on a planet in the right level to allow formation of stable and complex some 300 million miles away with pinpoint accu- molecules. Now the problem simplifies to searching for difracy--and that too entirely on its own--is no mean ferent kinds of organic molecules, water (one of the best solfeat. Specially when two out of three missions to Mars have vents), and sources of energy. Needless to say, `Follow the ended in failure. And what was being `downloaded' was the water trail' becomes a viable search strategy. In our neighbourhood, Mars is the only planet (aside from largest, most expensive, most complicated and most intelligent machine humans have sent to another planet. So, after Europa, one of Jupiter's moons) that appears to have had a solitary eight-month-long journey to our neighbouring conditions suitable for life. Surveyor pictures have repeatplanet, when Curiosity touched down on the Gale Crater edly shown indications of now dried-up but once flowing using a never-tried-before `soft-landing' method involving water beds. The temperature and pressure on Mars today a sky-crane contraption, it was truly a jubilant moment. US are far too low to allow water in liquid form to exist, but all President Barack Obama rightly called it "an unprece- indications are of a warmer and wetter past. In 1970s, the Viking Mission by NASA tried to directly dedented feat of technology". However, Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission is not tect dormant life by watering and fertilising the soil and just about celebrating a stupendous technical achievement. looking for carbon dioxide emissions. The results were starIts science goal is equally intriguing. It is to do with explo- tling but ambiguous, and with limited utility. MSL undertook ration for conditions for life--finding out if Mars did (and a more prudent and less populist endeavour. It concerned still does) support life. Is earth a lonely planet? Are we itself with the aim of finding the conditions of life and exalone? These questions have stirred the fancies of many a ploring areas that could have been life-friendly--past or generation, and given rise to many a myth and legend at the present. And perhaps, scientifically and philosophically, this hands of Hollywood and conspiracy theorists. But beyond is a more important question to investigate. Our material the horizon of science fiction lurks science reality as well-- and social world is replete with evidence that every phewith well thought-out questions, painstaking research, and nomenon requires the right conditions to unfold and floursometimes, intriguing answers. Search for life outside earth ish. Until you have the right conditions, no matter how noble has essentially taken three distinct paths--scouring our your intentions are, you cannot make headway. planetary neighbourhood, searching for earth-like planets Curiosity houses 10 instruments that can collect Martian (about half to 10 times the size and approximately same dis- soil sample and analyse it, as well as analyse surrounding tance from the parent star), and Martian atmosphere. It is armed cosmic `wire-tapping' consisting of with drilling tools that will drill THE MARTIAN HORIZON, CAPTURED BY CAMERAS ABOARD THE CURIOSITY ROVER searching for synthetic radio frethrough rock, grind them to dust AP quency signals from distant stars in and deliver the samples to different hopes of picking up the static from instruments for investigation. MSL an intelligent civilisation. hopes to detect biosignatures that Aptly named Curiosity, the MSL are different from what may be produced by pure physical processes. rover has gone to one of the most All these experiments will perhaps promising hunting grounds for life-- tell us more about the planet than Mars. But how do you hunt for life? we have learnt in the last 40 years. What defines a living creature? To In the next couple of years, Curiosity, keep the problem to manageable despite its limited aims, might add limits, an astrobiologist today searches for life-forms based on carbon new fuel to the fire of our eternal cuchemistries, like all life-forms on riosity about how life comes into mother earth. Chemically speaking, being and is sustained. I

S

AUGUST 20, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

145

