Mail

Pawar Play in Delhi
AUGUST 6, 2012

The NCP supremo may have agreed to a ceasefire but the UPA Government is feeling the heat from aggrieved allies just when it is all set for a leadership transition

V I J AY VA L L U R I ,

Mumbai

Give Him His Due
Sharad Pawar's Nationalist Congress Party might have only a few MPs in Parliament, but he has a far bigger clout ("The New Opposition", August 6). Congress would do well not to underestimate him. Also, because of his sheer proximity to the Thackerays, he holds more cards in Maharashtra politics than Prithviraj Chavan, at present. He has also been the most consistent ally of Congress. If the Government wants to have a smooth run, without ruffling too many feathers, it would be better to keep Pawar in good humour.
BAL GOVIND, Noida

In Deep Waters
Violence at Maruti Suzuki's Manesar plant is a very unfortunate incident ("End of a Dream Run", August 6). It could have been averted had the grievances of the workers been redressed on time. The Government's passive role in the matter is also a matter of grave concern. The incident will send wrong signals to foreign investors planning to invest in India, especially Haryana.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun

smart enough to change the political currents in Maharashtra, given his excellent rapport across party lines. He is a powerful force for the Congress, but its electoral compass in the state does not show a clear direction. Congress needs to handle Maharashtra politics with greater political finesse and understanding.
GAYATRI TANDON, Bangalore

Sharad Pawar is demanding his pound of flesh from UPA 2. The allies are unhappy with Congress for sidelining them. The Maratha strongman is

Haryana, which projects itself as an attractive investment destination, is fast acquiring a reputation for violent labour unrest. Foreign investors may be wary about states offering insufficient security and protection. Not just Haryana, the conditions in several other industrial states are similar and these problems need to be addressed immediately.
RAMESH SINHA, Gurgaon

Ever since UPA 2 came to power, it has been observed that Congress has not taken its allies into confidence on major policyrelated matters. Sharad Pawar's claim to seniority in the Government cannot be ignored. Congress must realise that in a coalition, every partner is important. Lack of coordination can lead to misgovernance and non-implementation of various welfare schemes.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N AUGUST 20, 2012

``

``

Sharad Pawar is traditionally a Congressman at heart. He may not upset the UPA 2 apple-cart unless pushed to the wall. He is still a powerful force to reckon with.

Mail
Spirit Forever
Lakshmi Sehgal is a role model like no other, and our country desperately needs more individuals like her ("The First Lady of Revolution", August 6). India's legendary woman freedom fighter made the liberation of poor her life's work. Sehgal was a great source of inspiration for many. She was truly a forward-thinking woman of her time, whose views were revolutionary. Her attempts at ensuring equality among the people continues to be a beacon of hope for the poor.
NALINI SINGHANIA, Amritsar

35
to be looked into.
RANJAN SEAL, Kolkata

New Lease of Life
Manoj Bajpayee is a very versatile actor ("The Sardar of Wasseypur", August 6). However, his talent never really came to the fore because of the less challenging roles offered to him. Although it may seem otherwise, it appears that Bajpayee has always had to take the hard route and has the same concerns as the common man, about when he will find work again. Gangs of Wasseypur is a turning point in his acting career, and hopefully would bring him the recognition he truly deserves.
NARAYAN KUMAR, Jamshedpur

of these adverse circumstances, Modi still has a chance to redeem himself by ensuring that the drought, if it arrives, is tackled efficiently and successfully.
G.K MOHAN, Lucknow

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
S E P T E M B E R 1 6 - 3 0, 1 9 7 7

King of Melody
Even when Indo-Pakistan relations were at their worst, the voice of Mehdi Hasan--the great Pakistani ghazal singer--came clearly over. Through two wars and more than a decade of strained relations, the Mehdi Hasan following in India has steadily grown. It was common knowledge some years ago that smuggled recordings of his songs were sold at exorbitant prices in cities in India, just as it was widely known that Indian films were secretly screened in Karachi and Lahore cinemas for more than Rs 50 a seat. The 44-year-old Mehdi Hasan, better known as the "Shahenshah-e-Ghazal", has been something more than a myth in India for years, although there are few Indians who have seen him perform in real life. In fact, there can be little doubt that his voice and the stylisation he has brought to rendering a ghazal has done more for the Pakistani image in India than the influence of political propaganda and prePartition personalities put together. The singer, who is the father of 13 children from his two wives, was born in 1933 in Jaipur district of Rajasthan. Few know that before he made his debut as a singing star in 1952 in films, he was a tractor mechanic. In fact, he still proudly shows off his diploma from the tractor manufacturing company of Ferguson. Mehdi now travels the world over to music concerts and strongly believes in the healing power of classical music that has been known to cure serious physical by Qutubuddin afflictions.
MEHDI HASAN--THE VOICE COMES OVER, BUT THE HEART LONGS FOR MUCH MORE

Peace Interrupted
Once again Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi has shown that he is incapable of ensuring peace in the state ("Bodo, Immigrant Violence Shakes Assam", August 6). This precarious situation needs immediate attention if innocent civilians are to be saved. If the displacement of over 4,00,000 people is not enough to persuade the government to take action, then the future looks ominous. This divide between the Bodos and the Muslims is fierce and shows no signs of ebbing. If anything, tensions will only rise, unless Gogoi and his ministers take the situation seriously and pledge their support to all the inhabitants, regardless of their ethnicity.
KALRA CHOWDHARY, Hyderabad

Skewed Priorities
Civil Aviation Minister Ajit Singh speaks ambiguously and does not hold Kingfisher to account for not paying its staff ("`Lost Note' Could Have Grounded Kingfisher", August 6). This is a criminal offence and a safety hazard. Therefore, by taking a relaxed stance on this issue, the Government will not be looked upon favourably by the electorate. Bharat Bhushan's missing note reeks of a cover-up, casting further doubts on the ministry's stand. The company's future does not look bright, and if it continues to operate in this manner, its exit will be far from gracious. Moreover, the allegations against the Government, for its involvement in the private company, need

Raining Trouble
The monsoons appear to have abandoned India this year ("Modi Faces Political Drought", August 6). For farmers throughout the country, and especially in Gujarat, the lack of rain is causing huge damage to their crops. Although the weather is not in Narendra Modi's control, the fate of his state is. Modi is at a disadvantage because a majority of his ministers are from urban areas and at present, he needs ministers with a sound understanding of rural areas who know how to pacify the farmers. Modi's opponents are attacking him and his ministers mercilessly, while discontent in areas such as Saurashtra is rising. Inspite

Steady Slowdown
The slowdown in the economy is a cause of concern for everyone. ("India Inc Loses Faith", August 6). Although it may not affect day-to-day life, the ramifications will be grave if the economy does not start growing again. The Government, however, does not seem capable of salvaging the situation.
SUJATA CHANDRA, Dehradun

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

AUGUST 20, 2012 N INDIA TODAY

90

