BYWORD

M.J. AKBAR

FREEDOM IN CAPITAL LETTERS
e mere nationals have long learnt that the safest away. If Hitler had not turned out to be a completely homiway to deal with multinationals is to bow in homage cidal maniac, Britain's powerful appeasement lobby might and get out of the way. Ever since I learnt, while have kept Britain out of conflict. Hitler had no quarrel with doing a bit of research on one of the great architects of India's British rule in India; he supported it with almost as much eafreedom, Subhas Chandra Bose, that the Ford Motor gerness as he dreamt of German rule over Britain. In the long Company offered the freebie of its new V-8 cars for the use term, no force could have prevented Indian independence, of Congress ministers at the 1938 Haripura session, rever- but it would have been a more violent, lengthy process had Hitler not exhausted Britain. In one of the great ironies of ence has deepened into total awe. Henry Ford, the eponymous pioneer of the American history, Germany recovered from defeat in 1945 but the automobile industry, is famous for his assembly line; but British Empire never recovered from victory. There is some irony then in the fact that Bose, radical and this was a stroke of genius as an investment in goodwill. He got cushions in place early and firmly under the broad pos- pugnacious as ever, chose in his Haripura presidential address to castigate capitalism: "There is an inseparable connection terior of the future of India. This nugget came from Mihir Bose's biography of Subhas between the capitalist ruling classes in Great Britain and the Bose. Searching for confirmation of Ford's imaginative seduc- colonies abroad." Surely Bose did not think American capitaltion in Leonard Gordon's magisterial work on the Boses, ists were exempt. In another fascinating aside, Bose told whoBrothers Against the Raj, I learnt that Bose was actually ever was ready to listen that he would not permit Japanese driven to the Congress camp city in a chariot donated by a multinationals in free India, even when he was marching local worthy, harnessed to "51 lusty bulls". The trademark alongside Japanese forces to liberate his motherland. The Congress vehicle in those days was the peasant's bullock cart; Japanese, more focused on the immediate, said nothing. The conflict between the ideal and the practical is at least it would also serve as the Congress election symbol after 1952. But such symbolism, lusty bulls included, was reserved as old as the germination of ideas of what modern India for the last mile. Bose arrived at Haripura, a small and till should become. Six decades later, we both revere Subhas then largely inaccessible village on the banks of the river Tapti Bose and drive around in nifty Japanese cars, thinly disguised in Gujarat, at the session hosted by Sardar Patel, by car. by an Indian pseudonym, Maruti. It is a very Indian comproGordon does not state whether this car was a Ford V-8 or not. mise. We are very good at putting idealism in a framed Old Henry Ford, or his executives, knew in 1938 what the photograph on the wall and getting on with life and chasing its pragmatic opportunities. mighty British Raj could not fathom; SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com Multinationals are cool, rethat power was shifting from one morseless and concentrated on the fulcrum to another, and the age of profit margin. Politicians fulmiempire was on the verge of surrennate; commentators sermonise. der to egalitarian nationalism. Ford Everyone with a voice had somewas investing in a relationship with thing to say about the ghastly erupCongress ministers through the irtion of violence at the Maruti resistible combination of comfort factory in Haryana; its Japanese justified by convenience. owners kept verbal intervention to By 1938, Congress had already a minimum, and spoke through tasted power, although it was no an Indian when they had to. They more than a desultory sip. Congress read chapter and verse from the had been elected in more than half factory rule book, demanded aca dozen British provinces after the countability for death, and got on 1937 polls, but it was still a long way with life. Impressive. from jumped-up municipal authorThis column is not a plea for ity in Lucknow to an independent Ikea furniture in every Indian vilgovernment in Delhi. Anyone who Old Henry Ford, or his executives, lage in place of the charpoy. This is believed at Haripura in February wistful envy on Independence Day, 1938 that India would be free in knew in 1938 what the mighty tinged with the hope that one day nine years was thinking with his British Raj could not fathom; that heart, not his mind. power was shifting from one fulcrum Indian businessmen, strengthened by a cold smile, bereft of self-pity, It took a devastating world war to another, and the age of empire denied their divine right to waffle, for British resolve to crumble bewas on the verge of surrender to will do unto others what some yond restoration; and this war others have done unto us. against Hitler was still 18 months  egalitarian nationalism.

W

AUGUST 27, 2012  INDIA TODAY

50

