Mail

The Bloodlands of Assam
AUGUST 13, 2012

Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi is an impotent spectator as Bodo terror confronts radicalised immigrants. Over 70 people are dead and 400,000 have been displaced.

The bloodshed in Assam is unfortunate, but the real problem lies in the perennial poverty of the region, which often leads to friction among different ethnic groups.
V. K . T A N G R I ,
Dehradun

Inked in Red
The Assam violence reflects the increasing resentment against immigrants from Bangladesh. Politicians, who extend a helping hand to those from across the border, are equally to blame ("The Bloodlands of Assam", August 13). It is a sad commentary on the affairs of the state that migrants stay permanently in India, primarily because they form a formidable vote bank for the party which helps them. India now faces the challenge of sending Bangladeshis back.
MAHESH KUMAR, Ambala

Dark Days
Alliance compulsions, ineffective regulatory mechanism, unrealistic environmental conditions and unprofessional tackling of problems led to the complete blackout for over 16 hours in the last two days of July, across north and east India ("India's Darkest Hour", August 13). To tackle extensive power cuts, a no-nonsense approach is required. Citizens need to remember the trauma of the two consecutive days of power outage till the next elections, and make a well-informed decision.
AMITABH NIGAM, Lucknow

Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi is an incapacitated chief who is not getting enough support from the Centre to stop immigration and also does not have the power to send back the displaced migrants from

Hours after Union power minister Sushilkumar Shinde presided over the most extensive power cuts in Indian history, he was promoted to the coveted job of Union home minister. Both the Centre as well as the states are responsible for the crisis. It's time to arrest these problems, or there will be darker days ahead.
SANYA BAKSHI, Kanpur

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

06

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012

``

``

the camps to their native lands. Significantly, Gogoi has also lost his party its main poll plank of peace and normalcy. Crime rates have doubled over a decade, topped recently by the molestation case in Guwahati. It is unfortunate that many innocent people were killed by miscreants and the Assam government failed to take preventive measures on time.
MANJU PAL, Delhi

The violence in Assam is the consequence of the flawed tactics of politicians, who indulge in vote-bank politics. This kind of barbarism, arson and carnage is a smudge on the country's reputation. Policies of the Government should be properly looked into. Responsibilities must be fixed and those found guilty should be severely punished, if the Centre and the

Mail
state governments want to prevent the recurrence of such incidents in the future. Otherwise the country will be in deep waters.
INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

35
international awards, he chose to do his research from Harish-Chandra Research Institute in Jhusi, in a remote corner of Uttar Pradesh, which has also been his home. His passion for his work is clearly visible and the fruits of his labour may be validated in a laboratory one day.
SOMA NANDI, Kolkata

Miles to Go
Akhilesh Yadav's performance has disappointed the people who had pinned great hopes on him in the current political scenario ("Cracks in the Citadel", August 13). Yadav doesn't seem to have succeeded in arresting the deteriorating law and order condition in Uttar Pradesh. Moreover, he is yet to show his dynamism and leadership potential and has even gone back on some of his decisions. The unemployed youth are still looking up to him to fulfil those tall promises made before the state elections. Disgruntled Muslims can turn the tables on the Samajwadi Party if their needs are not met. It is essential for Yadav and his partymen to swing into action to win over people's trust and support if they want to fare well in the 2014 elections.
SAGARIKA SINGH, Surat

Musical Chairs
The Cabinet reshuffle is unwarranted ("The Tested and Tired", August 13). The choice of ministers is also inappropriate. Even though India is under the grip of the biggest power breakdown, power minister Sushilkumar Shinde was elevated to the position of home minister, while P. Chidambaram went back to finance. Corporate Affairs Minister Veerappa Moily is saddled with additional charge of power. There's also a buzz in the Congress that Rahul Gandhi will not be joining the Government. Hopefully, they have the magic formula for success.
NARAYAN KUMAR, Jamshedpur

astrologers were consulted. The gender of the child would be clear by just hearing the name. But the traditional is slowly becoming redundant. The current trend is Arabic words, an amalgam of parents' names or even names borrowed from celebrities. People believe in being unconventional. With names such as Sputnik, Devaditya, Kian and Alekhya becoming popular, we have to just wait and see what the next generation will be called.
KAMLA CHATURVEDI, Mangalore

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
O CT O B E R 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Ashes of the Phoenix
In a matter of three hours it was over--one of Bombay's oldest mills at Lower Parel, the Phoenix mills, set up over 90 years ago, was reduced to smouldering ashes on September 22. Over a 100 firemen who smashed rooftops to gain entry, fought one of their toughest battles, only to finally bow to the wrath of the flames. Unofficial estimates of the loss in the insured mill has been put at Rs 5 crore. With the shutting of the mill a certainty, at least for a few weeks, over 6,000 workers have been laid off overnight. The blaze was reported at about 11.52 a.m. in the spinning section and started spreading rapidly. Luckily, it was recess hour and no one was trapped. Firemen who arrived minutes later had to waste precious seconds trying to break down a section of the entrance as it was too low for their vans to enter. When the firemen entered, they could not locate the origin of the flames--all they could see was a thick pall of smoke which blinded them completely. Strangely, the fire sprinklers refused to work. The Fire Brigade is inquiring into the cause of the fire, but insiders point out that nothing may come out of it. "There has been such a massive burnout that we won't have any worthwhile technical evidence," said a Fire Brigade official. The Phoenix fire is not an isolated mill fire. In the past one year, there has been at least one mill fire every month but all of them have been controlled well in time. In the Phoenix mills, the loss is said to be running into several crores of rupees.
PHOENIX MILLS--GUTTED BY FIRE

Pricey Deal
Then home minister P. Chidambaram's statement about the Indian middle class willing to pay Rs 15 for ice cream, yet not willing to pay Re 1 more for a kilo of rice, is insensitive ("Glass House", July 23). It's a pity that he can't see the difference in the impact of these two items of expenditure.
KUMAR, Dehradun

Corrigendum
In our August 13 issue ("Tube Wars", Glass House), it was erroneously mentioned that on July 26, a law and order meeting was deferred by Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi to discuss the strategy of a TV channel reportedly bought in the name of his friend. Though the report came from a top police source, our independent probe could not verify the facts. We regret the error.

Feather on the Cap
It is a great achievement for string theorist Ashoke Sen to have won a $3 million (Rs 16.6 crore) international physics award for his work on the mysteries of the universe ("Universe on a Rubber Band", August 13). Even though he has won several national and

Name Calling
Contemporary names have become a rage ("Call Me Kian", August 13). Different generations have different preferences. For today's parents, everything is in a name. Till a few decades ago, when a child was born, he or she was named after her parents, grandparents, gods, and sometimes even

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

08

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012

