GLASS HOUSE

by KAVEREE BAMZAI
REDDY

B K RAMESH

BROTHERS IN DISTRESS
t a book release in Kolkata on August 11, ousted minister of railways Dinesh Trivedi compared himself to Shashi Tharoor, former Union minister who lost his job during UPA 1. As Tharoor looked on, Trivedi said, "You know both Shashi and I have something in common. Both of us were playing well and there was applause too about our batting. But all of a sudden our captains asked the umpire to declare us out. Both of us were out and we didn't know the reasons behind it." While Mamata Banerjee asked Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to drop Trivedi in March after he presented a rail budget that didn't suit her politics, Tharoor was sacked because of his controversial link to IPL's now defunct Team Kochi through his wife, Sunanda Pushkar. Tharoor's metaphors are even more curious. At the Lakme India Fashion

A

Week in Delhi recently, he compared himself to his wife's handbag. "I'm here purely as an accessory," he said. Is that also the state of his political career?

MAKE ME CM!

T
SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

he intrigue in Andhra Pradesh politics often seems surreal. At least one filmmaker, Natti Kumar, believes it is worthy of the screen. He is making a Rs 4-crore movie on the jockeying in the Andhra Congress for the position of chief minister. What's more, the state Law and Jails Minister Earasu Prathap Reddy, 62, plays chief minister. The first scene of the film was shot at Prathap Reddy's house on August 9. Any message here for the high command?
GETTY IMAGES

TAMIL BATTLE
his is one battle in which Jaya Bachchan has won over Rekha. Jaya was much discomfited when Rekha made a high-profile entry to the Rajya Sabha. But now it seems Jaya has a new fan club. Cutting across party lines, Tamil MPs in the Rajya Sabha are very disappointed with Rekha's halting proficiency in Tamil. A Left MP pointed out,"Jaya can churn out quite a few phrases in Tamil." Hema Malini, Jayaprada and Vijayashanti showcased their proficiency in Tamil when in the Rajya Sabha. Rekha needs to catch up.

RBI GOVERNOR IN WAITING
aghuram Rajan, professor at Chicago's Booth School of Business and a former chief economist at IMF, hopes the position of chief economic adviser will be a stepping stone to greater things. He had turned down the Government's efforts to rope him in as deputy governor of RBI. He wanted to be RBI governor, but the Government hinted that he would not be considered for that job without a stint as either RBI deputy governor or in the finance ministry. Rajan must now hope he will be luckier than predecessor Kaushik Basu who was denied an elevation to RBI governor at the last minute.

T

R

PTI

RAJAN

GEHLOT'S DOG DAYS
ajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot is facing trouble at home. State Parliamentary Secretary R.S. Bidhuri said Gehlot was preventing the arrest of an allegedly corrupt pradhan of Begu village, Rukma Devi. "I am loyal only to Sonia and Rahul Gandhi. Mein kisi neta ka thela uthane wala aur charon aur dum hilaate ghoomne walon mein se nahin hoon (I am not among those who carry the bag of any leader or circle around him like a dog)," Bidhuri said on August 13, after a CD appeared of Devi accepting bribe. On August 9, her husband was arrested for taking Rs 20,000 as bribe. Quite a couple.

R

REKHA

BIDHURI

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

NEW

GLASS HOUSE
PINAKI IS NEW FAVOURITE RELIEF CAMP
VICTORY PARTY
arnataka Congress leaders have begun sensing victory in the next polls and what better way to celebrate than printing posters. On August 12, Bangalore was plastered with

T

he buzz in Odisha is that after Pyarimohan Mohapatra has fallen out with Naveen Patnaik, Pinaki Misra has emerged as the Chief Minister's favourite man Friday. Although a newcomer to BJD, the acidtongued lawyer has wasted no time in making his presence felt in the party. He is often seen in TV studios holding forth on national issues. As for Mohapatra, the man who knew all of Patnaik's moves now asks Mr Patnaik who? This was his response in Parliament on August 14 when a journalist asked him for details of Patnaik's forthcoming visit to Delhi. Mohapatra was suspended from BJD in June for attempting to stage a coup against Patnaik, so there's no surprise.

T

SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com

here's some relief for Tarun Gogoi. The beleaguered Assam Chief Minister received a spirit-bolstering pat from Congress President Sonia Gandhi. During her visit to Kokrajhar and Dhubri on August 13, Sonia expressed satisfaction over the management of relief camps set up by the state governemnt."Once feelings are assuaged, the Chief Minister and others will make sure that they (refugees) are able to go home," she said. Enough to gladden the chief minister's glum heart.

K

B K RAMESH

A POSTER WISHING SIDDARAMAIAH

OF THE WEEK

JOKE

Mamata Banerjee walks into a bar. If you think this is funny, you are going to jail.
YASWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

RAMDEV PRAISES SHINDE

N

ew Home Minister Sushilkumar Shinde got praise from unexpected quarters on August 13. Having laid siege at Ramlila Maidan, Baba Ramdev's supporters feared an unceremonious removal like the last time when Delhi Police had used force, raining lathis and teargas shells. This time around, Ramdev found the police to be much more polite. Former home minister P. Chidambaram, Ramdev told his supporters, was "kroor aur atyachaari (cruel and tormenting)", while Shinde is "susheel (virtuous)".
SHINDE

posters of Congress chief minister-hopeful Siddaramaiah wishing him a happy 65th birthday.Those with a long memory recall that when he was deputy chief minister in 1996, he told his followers to not celebrate that day. He explained to the media then: "My parents had no idea when I was born, so that date is not even my birthday. It is just the day someone put on my certificates." How things change.

"Mamata is totally undeserving to be a political leader in a democratic country . She is totally dictatorial, intolerant, and whimsical in her behaviour."
MARKANDEY KATJU

Press Council of India chief
MANEESH AGNIHOTRI/ www.indiatodayimages.com

"Sorry I am bringing back a small medal."
M.C. MARY KOM after winning a

"If you work hard, you can steal a little."
SHIVPAL YADAV Uttar Pradesh PWD

bronze medal at 2012 Olympics

minister to bureaucrats
YADAV

with PRIYA SAHGAL, BHAVNA VIJ-AURORA, ROHIT PARIHAR, DHIRAJ NAYYAR, AMARNATH K. MENON, KAUSHIK DEKA

18

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 27, 2012

NEW

