Mail

The Pursuit of Appiness
J U LY 2 3, 2 0 1 2

``
Age of the Apps
The cover story has brought into focus how the mobile revolution is touching every walk of life from childhood to old age. The control is within one's palm. Mobile applications and its upgradations seem to be fascinating and virtually endless ("Planet of the Apps", July 23). There is no telling on the future uses of the mobile phone that are to unfold. The personal computer and mobile phone is witnessing an era of perpetual innovation, to which the new generation is attracted. Apps surely improve and enhance the quality of our life, but there is a need to draw a line. One must realise that life doesn't begin or end with electronic gadgets. One has to be careful about the `other' side of mobile apps.
K.V. RAGHURAM, Wayanad

It's not about reliance on technology but about learning from it. It's our generation's stamp on history.
RAJIV SEN,
Kolkata

PURUSHOTTAM DIWAKAR/ www.indiatodayimages.com

In Unsafe Hands
Nurses with fake certificates from non-existent nursing schools, combined with the recent spate of revelations about sweepers and other unqualified staff administering injections and medicines, makes one extremely wary of hospitals ("Degrees of Guilt", July 23). Our ailing economy will probably soon be able to kiss the medical tourism sector goodbye if such incidents continue.
RIDHIMA KHANNA, Chandigarh

When regulatory bodies in charge of critical professions can fall into the trap of corruption, bribery and lazy bureaucracy, what hope can those related to mere politics have in our nation? Such cases of neglect and greed have surely pushed our administrative officers to a new rock bottom.
AYUSHEE BHARDWAJ, Jaipur

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

10

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 6, 2012

``
Trendy, user-friendly mobile apps are fascinating. Undoubtedly, they are ushering in a revolution in the digital world and, thus, enriching our lives in a multi-faceted manner. Apart from personal use, can we imagine today's apps serving as a beacon for further innovation by contributing towards the national cause? Fictional or preposterous one may call, inventing apps for devising national policies, reducing disparity between rich and poor or a smart app operating effectively in the system to hunt scams are just few examples. Evolving but enabling apps can assist the nation purposefully.
SANJIV GUPTA, Australia

From virtual kissing to guitar tuning, smartphones are making it easier for urban Indians to live, work and play.

Information technology has been undergoing a seachange ever since its inception. All the information one looks for is available at

Mail
the click of a button fixed on a palm-sized gadget like a smartphone or a tablet. Now lame excuses like lack of availability of information can't pass for lack of effort on the part of a person. If you can put in your best efforts, sky is the limit of what one can achieve.
V.K.TANGRI, Dehradun

35
ion and all too often demanding their pound of flesh.The members of the Cabinet have not been pulling together. Hardly a day passes without a serious financial scam hitting the media headlines.
KUSUM VATS, Bangalore

Ecology in Danger
The Karnataka government is rejecting UNESCO's heritage tag for the Western Ghats (States Vote for Growth", July 23). It is strange that the environment ministry has set up another committee to review the report of the Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel. It seems that the issue has become mired in power politics. Western Ghats are ecologically sensitive, and therefore, mining and polluting industries need to be stopped. The attempts to destroy our great treasure should be avoided at any cost.
PRAKHAR, www.intoday.com

YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
S E P T E M B E R 1-1 5 , 1 9 7 7

The Way To Dusty Death
Wind buffets the dust along, and the thorn-twig hovels of Rupsi sway like drunken crones. In the lone brick hut of the hamlet a little girl sobs loudly, hiding her festering hands behind her back. "She has got the itch on her hands again," her mother tells the health worker, hitching a whimpering tot on her hip; "and the stomachs of all the children are bad again."About 62 per cent of the rural population of Rajasthan state drinks highly polluted, brackish water. Many people in the remaining third walk over 10 kilometres every day to fetch fresh water. And what they fetch in pots laboriously carried over the sandy wasteland is meant for drinking and cooking only. Only a fool wastes water on washing. These are the dry facts of life in the arid areas where sand, dust, whipping winds and scorching sun dictate the fate of human settlements. Romantic visions of nomad life cloak much of the harsh reality of arid zone conditions. Perhaps it takes global deliberations--like the recent UN conference on desertification--to focus attention on what happens where the waters of life and health run dry. The diseases born of contamination "happen" there as do diseases rooted in poor hygiene. The ailments born of arid zone limitations on diet persist. "Desert people are hardy and wiry and strong," the saying goes. It is true of the desert people who survive their environment.
by Razia Ismail
19 MILLION PEOPLE IN INDIA, VICTIMS OF DESERTS' OMINOUS MARCH

Gearing Up
Mayawati is getting ready to upstage Samajwadi Party (SP) in the next general elections ("Mayawati Plans Revival", July 23). She is going to encash the weaknesses displayed by the ruling party in the days to come. If the law and order situation in Uttar Pradesh continues to deteriorate, SP will lose the golden opportunity provided to it on a platter by the people.
ROHIT NIGAM, Sangli

Siege Within
The story has exposed how Manmohan Singh failed to inspire his people, guide them and extract the best out of them ("Men Who Failed Manmohan Singh", July 23). He has avoided taking any strong economic measures as a prime minister. Suffering from numerous handicaps of governance, he is unable to deliver the results he is capable of. However, he is still the best bet for UPA provided he is supported in his efforts by his team.
ROHINI MALEKAR, Pune

Happy Ending
The unlikely mating of a strong patriarchal society (Haryana) to an equally strong matriarchal society (Kerala) is pleasantly ironic to see ("North Meets South for a Happily Ever After", July 23). For an area where panchayats rule supreme with their orthodox ways, it is heartening to see cross-cultural marriages being encouraged. Perhaps the only good thing to come out of the vile practices that have caused such an imbalanced sex ratio in Haryana is this blend of southern and northern familial ties. This is an interesting dichotomy that raises hope for a fully united India someday, unobstructed by strong regional identities.
BHASKAR TANEJA, Delhi

Transparency Must
It is high time that temple committees across the country are made more accountable through legislative amendments of the relevant act ("Temple of Boon", July 23). These committees sit on heavy cash and do not like to be questioned on accountability in the guise of being autonomous trusts, despite allegations of misappropriation of `public funds'. Andhra Pradesh's Endowment Minister C. Ramchandraiah is spot on in trying to rope in CAG to scrutinise the accounts books of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams.
ANJUM M. SAMEL, Mumbai

A person who has the responsibility of looking after 1.2 billion people of India cannot be seen being subjected to arm-twisting and embarrassed by his Cabinet colleagues. Singh comes across as a man who has lost his way. At a time when the economic growth rate shows a precipitate decline, an acute policy paralysis makes matters worse. There is a complete absence of direction. There is indiscipline in the UPA ranks. The allies have been acting in a wayward fash-

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

AUGUST 6, 2012  INDIA TODAY

11

