UP FRONT

MANISHA MALHOTRA

A GAME OF POLITICS
he recent controversy over teaming up tennis icons the problem. The selection committees consist of `yes men' or Leander Paes and Mahesh Bhupathi for the London cronies of the people in power. The federations are also not Olympics is symptomatic of what ails Indian sport. working towards the best interests of players. Most federaWhile the former partners went to town about not setting tions don't even have a logical and transparent system which foot on court together, what surprised a lot of people was leaves the window for last-minute politicking wide open. Is the All India Tennis Association (AITA) openly taking this because they don't know how to come up with a successsides. This is nothing new. Inept handling of ace players is ful system or because they don't want to? The federations really need to realise that they exist to serve the players. prevalent in all sports in the country. The Government is also to blame. It has been trying to While the federation was confident that it would convince both Mahesh and Leander to bury the hatchet once rein in federations and reprimand them while its own again (it has intervened several times in the past), its inten- Sports Authority of India (SAI) is in a shambles, being run by tion was suspect. Was it doing things in the best interest of people who have no idea about sport. SAI has `advisers' with the players, country or itself? Neither player wanted to play very little credibility. It does have foreign experts for almost with the other. So putting in a duo that has been to the last all the priority sports, yet the experts' opinions are never three Olympics without any success and who have openly taken. Instead, it is the `government observer' who has the said they cannot win with each other is not exactly in the say. So we can go to the Olympics and not win a single medal best interests of the country. Of course, AITA couldn't have and still everything would be fine. Then there are the players. The Indian athlete has metabeen questioned excessively because this is the best team on paper, and had they paired up and failed (again), no one morphosed from the `poor soul' to someone who has a voice. The handful of successful athletes are first to say they are in India would have cared about accountability anyway. This should change. The country should come first, all products "in spite of the system" and not because of it. then the system, and players should really not be able to They now use their success as a bargaining chip to coerce both the Government and the dictate their terms and condiSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com federations. Any decent result tions to either. However, there is (even a South Asian Games a huge disconnect between all medal) and the athletes are three in our nation, which could eager to cash in. After the 2010 really be why we fare so poorly Commonwealth Games, athin the medals tally. letes only started practising in The Government of India is March 2011 because they were the biggest funder of sport; it has busy going from felicitation to the highest number of facilities felicitation, sometimes for as and yet, at the end of the day, it little as Rs 5,000. has no say. The federations, who It is not hard to come up with take the "we are autonomous a system; there are specialists bodies" stand while availing of available the world over to help government funds, still call all with this. Until we can come up the shots, and then come the with a system that is best for the players. Does this bode well for country, we will keep dealing sport? Absolutely not. with ineptitudes and get Federations in India have the nowhere. The system has to be benefit of being in a position bigger than any one factor and where they can do as they please be answerable only to the rewithout any accountability. It sults that it achieves. Everyone could be decades without medals in sport must be accountable and still it's status quo. Even Federations in India have the benefit of and until we are bound by nothplayers mistrust the federations, ing but results, we will never which is why they are sometimes being in a position where they can do as not willing to listen to them and at they please without any accountability. It achieve the dreams we all have other times listen only under could be decades without medals and still for sport in our country. duress of disciplinary action. The it's status quo. Players know that in every players know that in every federA former tennis champion, federation the people calling the shots are ation the people calling the shots Manisha Malhotra is CEO of not experts and therein lies the problem. are not experts and therein lies Mittal Champions Trust

T

12

INDIA TODAY  AUGUST 6, 2012

