A RELIEF CAMP AT AMGURI VILLAGE IN CHIRANG

Spe cial Report

ASSAM

TRAPPED IN HELL
Death, disease and fear have become part of life for inmates of Assam relief camps
By Kaushik Deka

W

e will not leave this camp even if the government assures us security. We don't trust this government. It has sided with the Bodos," says Barik Sikdar, 58, a landless farmer from Kalaigaon in Chirang district. Sikdar is one of the 4,893 refugees camping in Amguri High School. He has been surviving on dal and rice for a month. He shares a small room with 15 strangers. Yet he feels safe here. He is too scared to step out. On August 25, five people from the camp were hacked to death at Mongolia Bazar. If the world outside the camp is one of bullets and arrows, life inside the camp is hellish. The open-air kitchen is just a few metres away from the

lavatory. With children moving around, one has to negotiate one's way through human excreta. Most inmates suffer from diarrhoea and high fever. "Doctors visit the camp once a week, but they are not there when we need them," says Rubul Sarkar, 33, who makes a living by selling betel nuts. Twenty-three-year-old Nurunnisa gave birth to her second child nine days ago, at a relief camp in Bhowraguri in Kokrajhar. There was a nurse at the time of childbirth, but since then the mother and the child have got no special care. When asked about vaccination, Nurunnisa gives a blank look. At lunch, she shares a meal of dal and rice with her husband and their three-year-old son. "One person is allotted 1 kg rice for three days. It's too little," says her husband Ismail, 34,

a farmer. Yet, Ismail has no plan to return and claim his land. "We will settle in some other part of Assam but will not live in Bodoland Territorial Area District (BTAD). Life is more important than land," he says. But it's land that has caused over 235,000 people to rot in the 215 relief camps across the districts of Kokrajhar, Chirang, Dhubri and Bongaigaon. The Bodo leadership claims that a majority of Muslims in BTAD are illegal immigrants. On August 27, a team from the Bodoland People's Front (BPF) led by Hagrama Mohilary presented a dossier to Union Home Minister Sushilkumar Shinde claiming that about 78,000 hectares of land was encroached upon. That is the reason why they want to verify the land rights of the people in the relief camps before

36

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

Spe cial Report

ASSAM
AFP

(FROM LEFT) GOGOI, SHINDE AND SONIA GANDHI AT A RELIEF CAMP IN KOKRAJHAR

they are rehabilitated. The state government is pushing for rehabilitation of the displaced on the basis of 2011 electoral rolls. The face-off continues even after a meeting of BPF leaders and a state government team of five Cabinet ministers in Kokrajhar on August 29. "Our leader will now interact with the Muslims to create an environment of peace and harmony. Every Indian Muslim is safe here, but that doesn't mean we will allow infiltrators to settle in BTAD. The Bodoland Territorial Council would now prepare a detailed report of BTAD land-holding records and present it in the next meeting scheduled on September 6. The process of rehabilitation will be based on those records," a top BPF leader told INDIA TODAY. But nobody has an answer to 78-year-old Mansuf Ali's problem. "I was born in Assam but can't prove it because documents of my land have been burnt. My name is in the electoral rolls," says Ali, now living in a camp at Bidyapur High School in Chirang. His house has been gutted. "Finding a place in the electoral rolls is very easy in Assam. How do you know he is

telling you the truth?" says a Bodo leader who does not want to be named. The exodus of North-eastern youngsters from various parts of the country, amid threats of violent retaliation by Muslims, has resulted in a polarisation of the state on communal lines. The 12-hour Assam bandh called by Bajrang Dal on August 27, demanding the arrest of AIUDF chief and Dhubri MP Badruddin Ajmal, was a success. The next day, activists of All Assam Minority Students' Union (AAMSU) went on the rampage to enforce a 12-hour bandh demanding peace and security in BTAD areas. They attacked government officials, ministers and even journalists. The AAMSU leadership expressed regret over the violence during the bandh. They are demanding a full-fledged Army opera-

THE CONGRESS FEARS THE BTAD VIOLENCE WILLAFFECT ITS MUSLIM VOTE BANK IN THE NEXT LOK SABHA ELECTIONS.

tion against armed Bodo groups and removal of all Bodo police and administrative officers from BTAD before the rehabilitation process begins. The Congress high command is annoyed with Assam Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi's failure to control the situation. The party now fears the BTAD violence will affect its Muslim vote bank in the next Lok Sabha polls. A nervous party high command has unofficially deputed Assam Education and Health Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma as the party's chief troubleshooter. But even Sarma will not be able to make 10-year-old Saiful Ali forget the night of August 27, when a bullet whizzed past his heap of books in the one-room hut his father Shah Jahan owns at Pakhoritol village in Kokrajhar. "I was finishing my homework and Ammi was pestering me to have dinner. Suddenly something hit my books and burnt them. My mother pulled me and we ran to the field. Why do they want to kill us? Will you take me out of this place?" asks the Class V topper of Jyotipara High School in Fakiragram. Gogoi is unlikely to provide an answer. I

38

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

