UP FRONT

SWAPAN DASGUPTA

REVENGE OFTHE LITTLE MEDIA
or the past two decades, a breed of self-confident and rusal of tweets will reveal that the social media is prone to successful Indians have nurtured the belief that sus- believing that MSM is riddled with bias, obfuscation and coltained economic growth, middle class prosperity, avail- lateral agendas and is not the last word. It has been argued that the Twitter community in India ability of technology and global exposure would also rub off on its flat-footed bureaucracy. Although there were few ex- has been captured by a clutch of right-wing, Hindu nationalpectations of efficiency, there was hope that the huge gap ists. The claim may be overstated but there is little doubt that between the assertive and brash New India and the indo- Narendra Modi--the ubiquitous NAMO--has emerged as the favourite politician of the twitterati. Some of this is undoubtlent and inept babudom would be narrowed. Smart governance was never a realisable dream. edly due to Modi's charisma and his image of a decisive, noModest hopes centred on the demise of stupid governance. nonsense leader. But a large part also owes to the belief that It has turned out to be a futile wait. In the past fortnight, MSM has been unfairly demonising Modi. The Twitter narrain a bid to crack down on a rumour industry that was tive has consequently emerged as the alternative to the domblamed for the exodus of North-eastern people from inant Left-liberal discourse on public life in India. Liberal India is well represented in the MSM. Its search Bengaluru, Pune and Hyderabad, the Government emulated Inspector Clouseau with rare perfection. However, un- for alternative platforms is less compelling. Yet, social media activists aren't revolutionaries; they like the exasperating French policeman who invariably blundered his way to success, the efforts of the mighty home can best be described as an emerging counter-establishministry and its cyber sleuths proved horribly counter-pro- ment hellbent on flaying a cosy and compromised political ductive. The Government of India emerged from the exer- and intellectual establishment. Finally, Twitter messaging has tended to be blunt, much cise looking inept, illiberal and totally ridiculous. At the heart of this colossal misadventure was babu- to the irritation of those who insist that English is a language dom's incomprehension of the dynamics of the social media. of understatement. This has less to do with the lack of Having long been accustomed to an organised media (both sophistication of the activists than the 140-letter ceiling that print and electronic) that believed it has a stake in gover- the platform has imposed on messages. Brevity has nance and, consequently, is both restrained and malleable, contributed to sharp, in-your-face messaging that liberals it has been confronted with a new breed of activists who are with access to the MSM find disturbing, even hateful, and the voiceless find appealing. naturally irreverent, even reckless. To a Government that operates on the principle of conAvailable statistics suggest that a mere 13 million Indians, accounting for not more than 1 per cent of the trol and regulation, the anarchic, free market of opinions and news is both unsettling and subversive. population, have Twitter accounts. A The fact that Sonia Gandhi and her more disaggregated analysis would SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com son can be mercilessly attacked and probably reveal that the most active of lampooned, and the Prime Minister the twitterati is below 40 years of age, mocked, is seen by the officially empoweither graduates or pursuing higher ered as reprehensible and akin to treaeducation and, most important, reason. Over-zealous ministers and officials sonably versed in English. In political have long been trying to force a `regulaterms, they would be regarded as tory regime' (a euphemism for control) inconsequential and even a part of the on the Internet and particularly the non-voting classes. social media. The comic, post-Assam This statistical insignificance, howriots crackdown on Internet sites and ever, masked a more important phethe social media, in the guise of preservnomenon. First, by virtue of their ing peace and enhancing national secueducation and geographical spread rity, was part of this muscle-flexing. across India (and, indeed, the diasIt is reassuring that the exercise was pora), Twitter and, to a lesser extent, transparently clumsy. The last thing Facebook, has become an alternative India needs is efficient censorship channel of opinion-making and news aimed at stifling the angry voices of dissemination. It has become virtually To a Government that operates those who feel disenfranchised from impossible to suppress news. on the principle of control and the big media. Secondly, its occupation of an alterregulation, the anarchic, free native space owed considerably to a rismarket of opinions and news is ing dissatisfaction with what is called Swapan Dasgupta is a Delhi-based both unsettling and subversive. MSM (mainstream media). A casual pepolitical commentator

F

12

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

