Mail

UPA Loses NDA
A U G U S T 2 7, 2 0 1 2

If General Elections were to be held now, a BJP-led NDA would be ahead of the Congress-led alliance.

A R C H I T,

Bangalore

Great Political Chaos
Corruption, inflation and UPA's dismal performance on economic reforms has led to a drastic fall in the popularity of the governing alliance ("NDA Strides Past UPA", August 27). At the moment, there is no viable alternative to it. Though BJP may gain from the antiincumbency factor, it can't form a government on its own. Narendra Modi may be the party's best prime ministerial candidate but he does not enjoy nationwide support. Allies of Congress and BJP will consolidate their gains from the chaotic scenario. For now, uncertainty looms large in the country.
V.K. TANGRI, Dehradun
UPA is indeed trailing behind NDA by a significant margin but the point to note is that "others" are doing better than either of them. This

PARVEEN NEGI

Road After Victory
With Yogeshwar Dutt ("Haryana's Medal Factory", August 27) returning home with an Olympic bronze medal, wrestling in Haryana is thriving as monetary rewards from the state government flow in. The Chief Minister has also gone ahead and presented cash rewards to the other medal winners even though their connection with Haryana is remote. We can only hope that it is a pleasant change for future sportsmen.
D.K. SHARMA, Sonepat

amorphous mass may score higher on all parameters, but it offers no credible third choice. None of the leaders of these parties figures as an acceptable prime minister, even assuming the parties could agree on accepting any one of them as such. It's a classic picture of political chaos.
BISHAN SAHAI, Patna

Bahalgarh village has a lot to celebrate and rightly so. Sushil Kumar and Yogeshwar Dutt have put India at the forefront when it comes to the sport of wrestling. They have become inspirations for the citizens of the country who are rooting for success in Rio 2016.
ANJANA SUKHEJA, Guwahati

The utter failure of UPA 2 can be ascribed to: 1. Manmohan Singh, who, as Prime Minister, could not understand, perform or exercise his powers, responsibilities and duties towards the people. 2. Congress party, which could not understand the magnitude of the impact of the massive corruption on the psyche of the people. It started protecting the perpetrators instead of punishing them. INDU SHANKAR, Varanasi

FOR SUBSCRIPTION ASSISTANCE, CONTACT: Customer Care, India Today Group, A-61, Sector-57, Noida (Uttar Pradesh)-201301. Phones: 2479900 from Noida, 95120-2479900 from Delhi and Faridabad, and 0120-2479900 from Rest of India. Toll Free No.: 1800 1800 100. Fax: 0120-4078080. E-mail: wecare@intoday.com

08

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

``

``

The Congress' inability to move beyond the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty has led to a formation of a coterie around the central leadership, which has led to opacity in its functioning.

Mail

35
YEARS AGO IN INDIA TO DAY
O CT O B E R 1 -1 5 , 1 9 7 7

Shattered Visions
Recent statements by External Affairs Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee on Tibet have caused considerable consternation among the over 100,000 Tibetan refugees in India. On two separate occasions--in the Lok Sabha on June 30 and at Calcutta on August 17--Vajpayee had said that India considers Tibet a part of China and that Tibetan refugees in India would not be allowed to indulge in any political activity. Jigme Tulku, chairman of the Commission of Tibetan People's Deputies, the apex political body of Tibetans and their parliament, in an appeal to government leaders, summoned the reaction of the Tibetan refugees to Vajpayee's statements. "In fact and law, Tibetans were and are the rightful owners of Tibet," Tulku said in his appeal, adding: "We will categorically oppose and reject any negotiation India might reach with China over our beloved motherland." The Tibetans had great hopes of the Janata Party championing their cause. Assurances given by Janata leaders to seven Tibetan youths who went on a fast unto death in New Delhi in March to focus world attention on the non-implementation of three UN resolutions on Tibet raised these hopes. The youths were persuaded to break their fast and a cable was sent to the UN.
TIBETANS IN DHARAMSHALA

INDIA TODAY photographer Mandar Deodhar's picture of a man trying to save his shop from a raging fire at a Mumbai market in November 2011 won the prestigious `Picture of the Year Award' at a press photo contest organised by the Media Foundation of India. There were 6,500 entries from 200 photojournalists.

Rumour Has It
Doubtlessly a sinister conspiracy was hatched by the interested parties ("Rumour is Villain in Bangalore", August 27) to create an unprecedented state of terror among North-east people across the country by floating baseless rumours and morphed images through SMS and social media. Our cyber intelligence agencies should have taken timely action to stop the circulation of inflammatory texts.
P.K. SRIVASTAVA, Delhi

Magnet", August 27) due to his crores of followers in India and abroad. BJP wants to leverage his antiCongress stance to its political advantage. Congress will be further isolated and its prospects in next elections will be bleak as a result.
P.S. SINGH, Ludhiana

General Elections.
ANJUM. M. SAMEL, Mumbai

Great Heights
Landing of spacecraft Curiosity on Mars ("Morning After in Mars", August 27) is a commendable achievement of NASA scientists. It will open a new chapter on the possibility of life beyond Earth. Indian scientists working at NASA should also be given credit for the feat. India is also in the process sending Chandrayaan-2 to the moon, which will be a big achievement for our scientists. US and India should join hands on future space missions.
J.S. NARAYAN, Chennai

Baba's New Role
Baba Ramdev has become a force to reckon with ("Ramdev Becomes

Both Anna Hazare and Baba Ramdev had started with corruption and black money as a social movement, without getting into dirty politics. The nation had galvanised with great hope. Today, the major issues of corruption and Lokpal bill seem to be in words only; the main focus appears to be the 2014

Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries before sending money, incurring expenses or entering into commitments in relation to any advertisement appearing in this publication. The India Today Group does not vouch for any claims made by the advertisers of products and services. The printer, publisher, editor-in-chief and the editor of the India Today Group publications shall not be held liable for any consequences in the event of such claims not being honoured by the advertisers.

E-MAILYOUR LETTERS TO: letters.editor@intoday.com FAX THEM TO: 011-23316180 OR LOG ON TO: www.indiatoday.in

10

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 10, 2012

