SIMPLY DELHI

Buzz

IN THE CITY
RESTAURANT

Turkish delight
Masha, a charming little place with basic wooden interiors bathed in dim light is a good value restaurant for Turkish and Mediterranean food. The mezze platter served with hummus and baba ghanoush dips makes for a tasty starter. The kebabs are succulent and delicious, particularly the chicken tavak shish kebab, which consists of tender meat marinated with Turkish spices and fresh herbs. When here, try their manakish, famously known as Turkish pizza, with a crunchy thin crust topped with cheese and spice mixture called za'atar. Overlooking the pristine Hauz Khas Lake, Masha's balcony is a preferred choice for those looking for a relaxed meal. Enjoy the beautiful view as you indulge your sweet tooth with traditional Turkish desserts. The legendary baklava; a puff pastry made with minced dry fruit, drenched in sugar and honey syrup is a great way to end your meal. Average meal for two Rs 1,500 (without alcohol) Where 9A, Hauz Khas Village I by Shilpa Mehta Tel 26521401

Global palate
To its busy culinary scene, the Garden of 5 Senses has another entrant--Harem Meeza. A space that has been made popular by party goers since the past one year has revamped their restaurant to suit regular diners as well. The cuisine is inspired by explorer Ibn Batuta's journeys through North Africa, Middle East and India. For starters, some of the highly recommended picks are the Moroccan harira (soup) or the mojito fish tikka. The main course takes a tad too long to come to the table, but some of the dishes are worth the wait. A must-try is the Tajine with cous cous--a Moroccan dish with semolina served with vegetables or meat cooked in herbs and spices. End your meal on a sweet note with the all-time favourite Mediterranean desserts kunafa or baklava. Average meal for two Rs 2,000 plus taxes At 13-17, Garden of Five Senses, Saiyad Ul Ajaib Tel 8130422666
I by

Rewati Rau

s-12

SIMPLY DELHI N SEPTEMBER 2012

SIMPLY DELHI
SALON

Buzz

Cool snip!
Bored of the same old, boring hairstyle and wish to spruce up your hair? Think no further and head to B:blunt Mini's recently opened outlet at Basant Lok. Brainchild of brother-sister duo Adhuna Bhabani Akhtar and Osh Bhabani, B:blunt is best known for creating Aamir Khan's spikes and goatee in Dil Chahta Hai. Their ongoing television show Be Blunt which is aired on TLC, has piqued viewers' interest with their crazy, out-of-the box hairdo makeovers. Along with funky haircuts, this salon also offers a number of hair rituals and treatments, which focus not just on beauty but also nourishment of the hair. Barely a month old, people have been walking in and out of the salon at all hours. The Salon Director will guide you with the kind of cut, colour or treatment that would suit your hair best, after he has analysed your hair. Take our advice--when at B:blunt, close your eyes and let them do what they wish, as the

CHANDRADEEP KUMAR/www.indiatodayimages.com

end result will never disappoint you. Other services available include pedicures, manicures, facials and more. Cost Haircuts start at Rs 550 onwards At B:blunt Mini, 6 Basant Lok, Vasant Vihar I by Ekta Marwaha Tel 46031333

EVENTS

Arty galore
September 27 to 30 Visit the 4-day-long United Art Fair at Pragati Maidan. Over 500 established artists from around the country will exhibit their work of art--paintings, sculpture, photographs, video, digital art and more. The fair also provides a platform for budding artists to display their work. At Hall No. 12 and 12A, Pragati Maidan, ITPO Tel 9891306373

Crafts corner
September 16 to 21 The Dastkaari Haat Samiti presents Akshara, an exhibition that will focus on the art of calligraphy. The aim of the exhibit is to provide craftsmen with a new range of designs that incorporate the ancient with the contemporary. At Visual Arts Gallery, Indian Habitat Centre Tel 26852373

s-14

SIMPLY DELHI N SEPTEMBER 2012

