NET FLUX
viral video

by LAKSHMI KUMARASWAMI

app alert
735,770 views 7 million views
The dancing twins Koala bear picked up by Australian canoe team

Top of the Lot
Read faster. Organise your life, or your music. This week's apps show you how. Lift creates a list of good habits you want to develop and then creates a check-in system to help you pursue them. ReadQuick is designed for speed-readers. It gathers articles of your choice and the app then flashes one word at a time. Shuffler informs you of the latest music online by gathering content from a variety of music sites.

300,000 views
Videos of 11-month-old twins dancing in their high chairs, a Koala bear getting a ride with an Australian canoe team and a baby huskie howling had netizens saying `aww' .
3-and-a-halfweek-old huskie howling

* Views from when videos were uploaded

topical trends

Net point

Winning Formula
These headlines topped the Twitterverse on September 3: Tweeters reacted after a newspaper article said the Government ignored indiscriminate export of mozanite, the raw material from which thorium (a clean nuclear fuel) is extracted, causing a loss of approximately Rs 48 lakh crore. Uncomfortable questions were put forth via the trending topic,`Why do people think it's ok to' . Questions ranged from why people spit on the streets to why girls wear too much makeup. Cricketer Virat Kohli was lauded for his unbeaten half century against New Zealand in the Airtel series. Tweets questioning Sachin Tendulkar's career also poured in when his wicket was taken after a measly 27.
#Thorium scam
676, 197

Connect Offline
Treetle, a social network launched in April 2012, helps you connect with people offline.The brainchild of Bangalore-based Pankaj Dugar, the website helps users develop their interests by connecting with people who share similar interests in their city or neighbourhood. Treetle.com has been launched in 3,400 Indian cities.

what's trending

Chair Champ
Actor-director Clint Eastwood's speech at the Republican National Convention on August 30 EASTWOOD in Florida sparked a worldwide phenomenon.The 82-year-old spent 10 minutes lambasting a chair that supposedly seated an `invisible'US President Barack Obama. Dubbing his stunt `Eastwooding', people tweeted pictures of themselves posing with empty chairs. But perhaps the best reaction to Eastwood's speech came from Obama himself--he tweeted a picture of him seated in a chair with the caption `This seat's taken'.

star of the week

MODI

Fleeting Fandom

#Why do people think it's ok to
492,762

#UPA
465,933

#Tendulkar
103,400

#Kohli
37,731

*Figures denote number of followers

web tips Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi became the Relationship etiquette first Indian politician to chat in on social network: a group on Google Hangout. Don't stalk your However, the accolades for significant other his net savviness came on Facebook and crashing when he blamed Twitter, try meetGujarat's malnutrition on ing them instead. figure conscious women in a Ask him/her about Wall Street Journal article. weirdonet changing your relaOne of his detractors even tionship status; wrote him a song in the tune The first Internet Cat Video Film respect their deciof Led Zeppelin's Stairway to Festival was held on August 30 in sion if they choose Heaven-- "There's a girl Minneapolis where attendees watched to keep it private. drink to told, who was 79 finalist featuring feline videos. Wait for an introyour milk or it'll get Angry Birds creator Rovio Entertainment duction before cold, but she's has turned Freddie Mercury, the late singer bombarding hell bent on from Queen, into an honorary character in his/her friends Malnutrition." honour of his 66th birth anniversary. and family with friend requests.

