UP FRONT

ASHIMA GOYAL

ROOM FOR RECOVERY
anufacturing growth is still barely positive but it has when manufacturing growth has collapsed to 0.2 per cent? The answer is demand is in excess only for certain pulled out of the free fall of the past year. Since downward cycles can become cumulative the halt is commodities where rigidities prevent an expansion in a positive. Fixed investment is hardly growing but its supply, while capital outflow-driven rupee depreciation level is still reasonable--underlying demand for housing keeps the cost of imports high. Inelastic demand for oil, in the absence of local price pass through, and for gold, given may be sustaining construction. But the manufacturing slowdown has now lasted five the absence of other inflation hedges, explains the CAD--it is quarters; even in 2008 the slowdown was only for three not due to generalised excess demand. The analysis also has clear implications for policy. Since quarters. Then, coordinated and aggressive monetary and fiscal stimulus pulled growth up. Interest rates could be cut export, investment and consumption demand have all because wholesale prices crashed with global oil prices. fallen there is excess capacity in manufacturing. But Subsidies and transfers pumped up consumption. Today oil shortages continue elsewhere, notably in infrastructure. prices are firm and fiscal deficits high--there seems to be The Government must clearly identify bottlenecks and no space for either a fiscal or monetary stimulus, while the kickstart stalled investment there. A focused resolve can push through select decisions independent of politics, and political logjam vitiates space for reforms. But this is at the aggregate level. A finer reading of the would be rewarded in the elections. Most of investment is economy reveals many feasible policies. These follow from now private. This tends to aggravate cycles since animal the causes of higher inflation since 2007. Research at IGIDR spirits sink as easily as they rise. Countercyclical measures shows there were multiple cost shocks, starting with the in- become necessary. As shortages are alleviated costs will ternational food price shocks, the outflows and rupee depre- fall for a wider range of firms. ciation associated with the global financial crises and then With some action from the Government, the RBI can supwith the Euro debt crisis, global liquidity driving up oil prices port credit expansion and gradually reduce interest rates. despite lower net demand, and the failure of the monsoon The kind of sharp rate cuts that worked in 2008 are not possible since sticky inflation has reduced the rate of growth of in 2009--the only period global shocks had moderated. Government deficits were geared towards helping the bank deposits below that of bank credit. Financial savings consumption of the aam admi. A major share of the stimu- have fallen as savers get very low real rates. However, some recovery in the monsoon and signs of lus therefore created demand for diversified types of food which dominate the average consumption basket. But slowing wage growth mean the RBI needs to worry less about focusing inflation expectations. Low restrictions in agricultural marketSAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com growth will contribute to anchoring ing and food retail, in an attempt to inflation expectations as will some preserve existing jobs at the cost of supply response facilitated by the new ones, prevented an adequate Government. Policy should be set in supply response. Government fooda forward-looking manner based on grain stocks were ineffectively windows of opportunity appearing used, but anyway cannot restrain at the margin. The key issue is not price rise in other non-cereal items. that inflation is still above comfort Rising food inflation, aspirations, levels, but that inflation is falling and and schemes such as MGNREGA trigthe fall is likely to continue, making gered large rises in average wages, gradual easing possible. which in turn pushed up prices. The top 50 cash-rich firms are Since wages overcorrected, the rise content with high interest rates on is slowing currently. Moreover, retheir cash balances; smaller insearch shows that since there was debted firms are in trouble. As some rise in productivity, the wage falling interest rates revive conrise in itself was not sufficient to sumer durables demand, compensustain rising costs--it was the other supply shocks that did that. We are told there is excess demand and sating for lower export demand, firms will turn again towards proThis analysis solves a puzzle: We the economy is overheating because are told there is excess demand and ducing, investing and creating jobs the economy is overheating because inflation, the fiscal and current account for a growing workforce. deficit are high. But how can there be inflation, the fiscal and current excess demand when manufacturing account deficit (CAD) are high. But Ashima Goyal is professor of economics growth has collapsed to 0.2 per cent? how can there be excess demand at IGIDR, Mumbai

M

10

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 17, 2012

