Nation

UTTAR PRADESH

A HOUSE FOR SONIA
State government delays land clearance for Gandhi bungalow in Rae Bareli
ight years after she became an MP from Rae Bareli, Sonia Gandhi has finally built a house there, albeit it is still awaiting land clearance from the state government. The white bungalow, spread over 3.1625 hectares, was completed in March 2011 by the Rajiv Gandhi Charitable Trust. Construction began in 2008 when the trust acquired a 3.795 hectare plot from farmers of village Bhuemau, 12 km from Rae Bareli. A 12-ft high boundary wall surrounds the bungalow. There are four VIP suites in the main building. In addition, there is an outhouse with a large hall and dormitory for security personnel. Sonia and Priyanka are reported to stay here whenever they visit Rae Bareli. Says Pradeep Shukla, caretaker, "The bungalow is a very high security zone. No one is allowed to enter without the permission of members of the Gandhi family." The high-profile property has already had its share of controversy. On February 7, 2009, the Rae Bareli Development Authority (RDA) issued a notice to the trust, alleging that it had begun construction without getting RDA to okay the building map as per regulations. Moreover, the land use of the

E

plot was yet to be changed from agricultural to residential. Five days later, on February 12, 2009, the trust submitted a map of the proposed building to RDA for approval. It also applied for a change in the land use, and paid Rs 1,701,053 as the mutation fee on September 2009 to RDA. However, three years later, RDA is yet to change the land use. A senior RDA official said that the file containing the request for the necessary change was sent to the state government for clearance immediately, in September
YASHWANT NEGI/www.indiatodayimages.com

SONIA GANDHI

THE NEW GANDHI BUNGALOW AT BHUEMAU VILLAGE NEAR RAE BARELI

MANEESH AHNIHOTRI/www.indiatodayimages.com

IN THE PAST, THE GANDHIS WOULD STAY IN GOVERNMENT GUEST HOUSES WHEN THEY VISITED RAE BARELI.

2009. Local Congress leaders blame both the previous Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) government and the current Samajwadi Party (SP) government in Uttar Pradesh for the delay in the routine clearance. Rae Bareli's Assistant Town Planner V.P. Singh told INDIA TODAY that "if someone goes to court and complains about the house being built on agricultural property, then they (the Gandhi family) will have a problem". A local Congress leader disagrees: "As far as the Gandhis are concerned, all formalities have now been met. The minute the irregularity was pointed out they applied for the necessary permission." Ironically, privacy and security were the main reasons why Sonia wanted the bungalow built. In the past, whenever a member of the Gandhi family visited Rae Bareli, he or she would stay at the local ITI guest house or the NTPC guest house in the town. Since the Election Commission does not allow candidates to utilise government property during the campaign phase, the Gandhis usually stopped over at the Munshiganj Guest House during polls. Although this is private property, being 40 km from Rae Bareli made it an inconvenient proposition. by Ashish Misra

