STARS IN YOUNG INDIA'S EYES
25 SPEAKERS. 1,500 YOUNG MINDS. THE THIRD INDIA TODAY YOUTH SUMMIT WAS A CONCERT OF MUSIC AND LYRICS AS WELL AS ICONS, IDEAS AND IMAGINATION.
Photographs byT NARAYAN, REUBEN SINGH, VIKRAM SHARMA, RAJWANT RAWAT, PARVEEN NEGI, YASBANT NEGI, CHANDRADEEP KUMAR AND RAMESH SHARMA/ www.indiatodayimages.com

AKHILESH YADAV IS MOBBED BY YOUNG FANS

Akhilesh Yadav
Chief Minister, Uttar Pradesh

``
82

The youth may be innovative, we may bring new ideas, but we can't discredit experience of the older generation. If innovation and experience go hand in hand, we will surely find a way."



By Damayanti Datta

oo, woo, woo." At 9.30 a.m. on Friday, September 7, Delhi rockers, Philosophy of Life, let out that Tarzan-like wail. The sea of bright young faces at Siri Fort Auditorium took it exactly as it was meant to be taken: A call to rock-start the day. As drums rolled and strobe lights flashed, young adults put their hands together--to clap, tweet, text and take photographs of each other on their mobile phones. They had bunked college lectures or work to connect at the India Today Mind Rocks Youth Summit 2012. They sang along as the rockers belted out their collective aspiration, Wanna touch that sky.

W

It was a concert, not just of music and lyrics but of icons, ideas and imagination. "We hope to engage with you in every which way," INDIA TODAY Editor-in-Chief Aroon Purie promised in his opening speech. In a medley of wide-ranging sessions sprinkled with music, youth icons, artists and thinkers spoke with an eye towards sparking new dialogues across disciplines. If some discussed how they made it, others talked about commitment in the time of casual love or how young people could plug into the Indian economy. From Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav to Bollywood A-lister and soon-to-be global popstar Priyanka Chopra; cricketing legends Kapil Dev and Mohammad Azharuddin, and the young Under-19 World Cup cricket champion

INDIA TODAY GROUP CHIEF SYNERGY OFFICER KALLI PURIE WITH ACTOR PRIYANKA CHOPRA

Aroon Purie
Editor-in-Chief, India Today

Unmukt Chand, to the reigning queen of Indian entertainment Ekta Kapoor; social activist Arvind Kejriwal to MP Sandeep Dixit; top boss of a global IT services company, Vineet Nayar, to the founder of India's largest job portal, Sanjeev Bikhchandani; from Olympic medal winners to hot young stars, singers and standup comics--they all came to Mind Rocks. And if anyone needed a primer on how to have fun together in public, this was the place to be. With broad smiles and sunny faces, GenNext stood outside the venue in queues that extended for miles, freezing traffic. They caused mini-stampedes every time their favourite personalities left the stage, jostling to

``

We need young blood to rule us. Our PM is 80 and is not in very good health, and the average age of the Cabinet is 65 while the median age of our country is 25."


``

Priyanka Chopra
Actor

If I take off my heels, I'll be the same gawky teen again. It's okay to be flawed. Just work on your flaws to improve yourself."

be photographed next to them. They cheered, laughed and shrieked, ducked through the arc of bouncers' arms, angled for autographs, threw love and kisses. What started as a simple concept, a platform for 18-35-year-olds, had turned into an essential cultural event in two years, accommodating 1,781 youngsters this year as against 700 last year, with 25 speakers compared to 12 in 2011. The Facebook Generation has grown up, as politicians learnt at their cost. "Come and join politics," was all Akhilesh Yadav could tell his digital-age voters when faced with an avalanche of sharp questions, ranging from his government's failure to fulfil its promises, to dynastic politics practised by his party and the presence of 12 ministers with a criminal background in his government. "It has only been six months since we were voted to power. We will take measures to control law and order and improve the power situation," Yadav said.


83

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

NEW

NEW

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

Anu Malik
Music director

Masaba Gupta
Fashion designer

Imtiaz Ali
Film director and writer

Ayushmann Khurrana
Actor

Sanjeev Bikhchandani
Founder & chairman, Naukri.com

Ali Zafar
"People treat me very well in India. It excites me to think I am part of this India-Pakistan connect."

" If you don't tell the truth (like I do on Indian Idol), you're going to ruin a life."

"You have to learn how to take your chances like you take your vitamins."

"Life gives you opportunities "I was never a struggler. I have to learn in ways you don't no sob story, no rag-to-riches expect.Take advantage of it." story to share with you."

"Don't become a prisoner of visiting cards and EMIs. Be really good at something you love."

HITWICKET
Unmukt Chand wasn't quite prepared for the masterclass from Kapil paaji as they waited for their session to begin."Stay away from the arc lights. Practice is paramount. Balla aur bat ko bistar mein le ke soya karon (Sleep with the bat and ball beside you)," India's 1983 World Cup winning captain told the skipper of India's under-19 World Cup champions.

When asked who the best chief minister is-- Narendra Modi, Nitish Kumar or Sheila Dikshit--he quipped, "Why should I give this honour to someone else?" Activist Arvind Kejriwal, who launched his own political party recently, and Congress MP Sandeep Dikshit fared no better. Kejriwal had to remind his audience that those who were calling him greedy for power and pelf now were the ones who had once asked him to join politics. Asked to defend politicians, "the system" as well as family raj in Indian politics, Dikshit withheld comments, as he was part of the system. Every icon has a story. And compelling stories of exceptional lives held the audience in rapt admiration. "Fashion was my last option," said designer Masaba Gupta, 22. The daughter of actor Neena Gupta and cricketing star Viv Richards admitted trying out and failing at a host of careers before finding her true calling, almost accidentally. A point reiterated by film director Imtiaz Ali. "It's the accidents of your life that are more influential than the decision you take." For actor Ayushmann Khurrana, five key words picked up from his father, "passion, effort, excellence, success and fame", allowed him to transform himself from a nobody to somebody. Pakistani superstar Ali Zafar said, "I have always prioritised fulfilling my dreams over making money." On ties between India and Pakistan, he said, "A peaceful path forward can only be walked if we can all balance the weight of our past while looking straight into

what we have ahead of us. Forgiveness and understanding will lead us ahead together." The speakers got probing questions that flummoxed them. Music director Anu Malik was asked why he appeared far kinder and livelier on stage than he usually did as a judge on reality TV contest Indian Idol. "On the show I am strict, but I also sing and applaud when they perform well," Malik defended himself. Zafar was asked how much his good looks contributed

to his career success. "As much as the microphone contributed to the advancement of your question," he fielded. Too much too soon was the definitive story of the biggest television household name of them all: Ekta Kapoor, the trendsetter for the hugely popular saas-bahu sagas. "I was a typical, fat star-kid, spending all day in front of the television, till my dad gave me an ultimatum: Get a job or get married," she said. Marriage being a "scary proposition", she started making TV

shows at 19. But with success came other challenges and soon the world knew her as a tyrannical tycoon, known to throw mobile phones at colleagues. "I did indeed break an editing table once. I had been working continuously for 48 hours and at 4 a.m. I lost it," she confessed. The idea of success took on multiple meanings as Bollywood superstars narrated their journey. From humble beginnings as a geeky teenager to winning the Miss World 2000 crown, actor Priyanka Chopra credited her achievements to her will to win over self-doubt: "I knew that if I could learn how to survive in an American high school, if I could learn to walk on the ramps in high heels to represent my country, I could learn how to act." Ajay Devgn, one of Bollywood's most versatile actors, called himself "a reluctant newcomer" when he debuted on silver screen at 22. "I was never a conventionally goodlooking actor and I
(FROM LEFT) YOGESHWAR DUTT, GAGAN NARANG, MARY KOM, SUSHIL KUMAR AND VIJAY KUMAR

84

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012


Ekta Kapoor

Pakistani actor & singer

``

TV & film producer

It's like what comes first, the chicken or the egg.Till youngsters don't watch TV, there won't be entertainment for them on TV. And till we don't make entertainment for them, youngsters won't watch television."



BANDBAAJA
The `Be a Rockstar contest' saw more than 300 entries. Songwriter Pragnya Wakhlu, and bands Bull Engine and Philosophy of Life were selected for auditions based on the votes they received online. Philosophy of Life (below) won the auditions for their lyrical quality and self-composed Leap of Faith. Formed just six months ago, the band has been making waves in the underground Delhi music circuit.

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

85

FASHBASH
The flavour of the day was Masaba Gupta."Fashion was the last option," the designer said, but speakers at the Youth Summit believed otherwise. Actor Priyanka Chopra wore a pink dress, boxer Mary Kom was draped in a red, white and green sari, while India Today Group Chief Synergy Officer Kalli Purie was seen in a black and gold dress. All from Gupta's Sorbet collection.

KOEL PURIE RINCHET (LEFT) DARES ACTOR AJAY DEVGN TO BARE HIS TATTOO

MANOJ GAUR OF JAYPEE GROUP

had no method." Was it destiny then, that determined his stardom? "Seventy per cent was hard work," he said. It's not just about chasing success, but also about love and sex, discovery and experiment. Nurtured on global satellite TV and Internet access, India's GenNext is at the forefront of a new sexual revolution: Casual love and instant sex. Their mating rituals became a talking point. Ekta Kapoor draws ideas from the youngsters working with her: "Promiscuity is no longer a taboo. I see the changes all around me because I work with a very young team." Actors Sonam Kapoor, Huma Qureshi and stand-up comedian Vir Das argued that it was foolish to sit and wait for The One. "Go ahead, enjoy life, kiss all the frogs," Qureshi told the audience. The struggle, defeat, victory and tenacity of the Olympic spirit provided some of the best stories of the day. "Four years of training boils down to two hours of performance in the Olympics and the crucial 10 minutes in the finals," said shooter Gagan Narang, who won a bronze. Boxer Mary Kom narrated the three beliefs that defined her career: That boxing was not just a man's game, that a woman could carry on with it after marriage, and that motherhood did not curb one's desire to be a champion. While wrestlers Sushil Kumar and

Ajay Devgn

``

Actor

Destiny can only show you the path, but you are the one who has to walk on it to get to where you want."



Vir Das
Stand-up comedian

Sonam Kapoor Huma Qureshi
Actor Actor

"I've been happier since "My dad and mom still "Go out there, live your call each other `baby', life, have fun, meet the I started this job than I've ever been in my life." which is really gross." boys, kiss all the frogs."

Yogeshwar Dutt spoke on how their failures had led them to personal fulfilment, shooter Vijay Kumar credited his silver medal to support and training from the Army. There was also team spirit at work. A palpable sense of excitement awaited Unmukt Chand, the bright young spark in Indian cricket, who has had more media coverage than any cricketer his age since Sachin Tendulkar. In a multi-generational exposition of cricket with legends like Kapil Dev and Mohammad Azharuddin, Chand shared the strategy that won India the under19 World Cup: "We went to a wildlife sanctuary and were taught self-belief, controlled aggression, and good communication between teammates." Chand also spoke about his decision to contest Delhi University's decision not to let him take his exams. He raised a popular point with the audience: "Universities should encourage people to study." On a day that was filled with sports stars and Bollywood celebri-



Arvind Kejriwal
Social activist

"After winning, a candidate from our party will not get a bungalow, a VIP car, security guard, or MP/MLA funds."

(TOP) INDIAN OCEAN PERFORMS AT THE FINALE CONCERT; (ABOVE, FROM LEFT) KAPIL DEV, MOHAMMAD AZHARUDDIN AND UNMUKT CHAND

Vineet Nayar
Vice-Chairman & CEO, HCL Technologies

``

The difference between a dreamer and an achiever is that an achiever knows where the starting point is, to make a difference."

ties, straight-talking businessmen nearly stole the show. Vineet Nayar, vice-chairman and CEO of HCL Technologies, gave tips on the qualities needed to be successful: "Find what your burning desire is and you will forget to even eat." What does it take to become a CEO? "Ask yourself what's different about me and what price am I willing to pay, what risks am I willing to take, to get there," he said. Sanjeev Bikhchandani, founder and vice-chairman of job portal Naukri.com, added his own set of advice: "Look for meaning, not money; dream big, but it's all right to start small; act if you want achievement and selfesteem; give it to people if you want to be a leader." As the day drew to a close, sitar strains fused with guitar chords as rock band Indian Ocean appeared on stage. A seamless blend of music and ideas. "Until next time,

Sandeep Dikshit
Lok Sabha MP

"Democracy can't be reduced to elections. We need protesters as much as vote-gatherers."

hold on to the best part of you," Kalli Purie, group chief synergy officer of India Today Group, signed off. "Go with stars in your eyes, music in your ears, fresh thinking in your head and a bounce in your step because you're going to be the future." The audience roared, clapped and waved phosphorescent joss sticks in the air, until the music took over once again.
with Bureau reports

For full coverage of the summit, visit: www.indiatodaymindrocks.com

