Signature
R O U G H

KAVEREE BAMZAI

C U T

SLOGANS FOR 2014 S
ince everyone is talking about General Elections, and no one except Mulayam Singh Yadav, who has got his swearing in dhoti starched, and Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, who has a lot of spare time in Chanchalguda prison, have started work on their manifestos, here are some helpful tips for politicians looking for ideas: After the enormous success of Garibi Hatao and Aam Aadmi, the Congress slogan for 2014 should be Back to the Basics. Its concern about basic reading, writing and arithmetic skills of its citizens is commendable, and I think it's on to something big. After all, which other government will keep important matters of state aside to concentrate on what its citizens are reading (no cartoons please, they are offensive, especially if drawn by a certain bearded young man from Kanpur)? Not just that, its interest in the writing skills of even its temporary residents is praiseworthy. Krista Mahr of Time and Simon Denyer of Washington Post have recently witnessed the generous scrutiny and loving care lavished on them for calling the Prime Minister an underachiever and tragic. Its worry about the arithmetic skills of senior officers is even more commendable. In the words of the great modern day Chanakya, Digvijaya Singh, who has spent so much time and care on the education of Rahul Gandhi, his Chandragupta Maurya, Comptroller and Auditor General Vinod Rai is talking through his hat. I presume that is not advisable headgear for good mathematicians. For BJP, whose national executive meet at Surajkund, Haryana, begins at the end of the month, I have another suggestion. India Shining didn't work, as we all know. What

about India Darkening. It covers both the power crisis and Coalgate. It gives its leaders something to discuss in TV studios, a forum the party clearly prefers to Parliament. It can be translated in as many languages as it has claimants to prime ministership. In Gujarat, Narendra Modi can choose a carefully airbrushed photograph of himself, glowing with the goodness of power yoga and corporate endorsements, to show voters the contrast. In Madhya Pradesh, its Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan can mention it every time he gives an interview enumerating his achievements, which last I checked, was every waking minute. As for the regional parties, much like the Samajwadi Party, they don't need manifestos. Their leaders are their message. And they deploy them well. Mayawati statues are too large to be removed, and when they fall, there are enough spares handy, so the state of Uttar Pradesh doesn't need reminding that it should vote for her. J. Jayalalithaa's presence is mandatory on every poster ever printed during her regime in Tamil Nadu. Nitish Kumar gets a free mention every time Modi's name comes up, so Bihar funds can be directed towards much needed development. Naveen Patnaik has ensured that he never steps out of the state for longer than a bathroom break so Odisha can't miss him. As for Bengal, well indeed it thinks today what the world thinks tomorrow. Mamata Banerjee, daradi didi and mateer maa, has chosen the music her citizens will listen to (Rabindra Sangeet, even at traffic lights), the art they will appreciate (preferably by her) and the colours they will be exposed to (various shades of blue). How kind.  the country due to botched sterilisation operations in 2012. Also, 2,609 cases of failed operations have been recorded so far. BANNED Manufacture, sale, display, transportation and storage of gutka and related products, by the Delhi government.

SAURABH SINGH / www.indiatodayimages.com

THE CONGRESS SLOGAN FOR 2014 SHOULD BE BACK TO THE BASICS. ITS CONCERN FOR THE READING, WRITING AND ARITHMETIC SKILLS OF ITS CITIZENS IS COMMENDABLE.

S I G N P O STS
PROMOTED Olympic medal winner M.C. Mary Kom, to the rank of superintendent of police (SP) in Manipur. The Prime Minister also announced a cash prize of Rs 22
MARY KOM

lakh each for her and Yogeshwar Dutt. LAUNCHED 100th successful mission by ISRO, after carrying a French satellite. The satellite is the heaviest to be launched by India for an international client. DEAD 56 people across

DELIVERED The first of 27 Boeing 787 Dreamliners, ordered by Air India (AI). They are now the fifth airline in the world to have a Dreamliner. AI says these aircraft are 20% more fuel efficient.

16

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

