Ci nema

TORONTO FILM FEST
and credits Nair, though he joked, "Sometimes I tend to overthink things. Mira gave me a thappad (slap) for that." The Reluctant Fundamentalist and Midnight's Children, both helmed by Indian-born filmmakers--New Yorkbased Nair and Toronto-based Mehta --are the bookends to a banner year for Indian filmmakers at TIFF. Both are adapted from well-known books-- Mehta's from Rushdie's classic, Nair's from Mohsin Hamid's bestseller. Ironically, both films had trouble shooting in locations. Midnight's Children, based largely in India, was filmed in Sri Lanka, while The Reluctant Fundamentalist's scenes set in Pakistan had to be shot mostly in India. Nair's film opens spectacularly, with a qawwali recital intercut with the kidnapping of an American in Lahore. Like Midnight's Children, this too is a film replete with references that Western audiences may have to work to understand. Like Mehta, Nair too refuses to pander. "I'm not the kind of person who'll bend backwards so that you understand the dot on the f...ing forehead, sorry," she explains. That unapologetic attitude is also the calling card of a new genre of Indian films, says Cameron Bailey, artistic director of TIFF. He explains his choice of Mumbai as the source for the festival's City to City segment this year. "I compare it to what happened in the 1960s. Hollywood needed change. And then you had films like Bonnie and Clyde and The Graduate," says Bailey. "They were young, more edgy. We're seeing the same things with the new generation of Indian filmmakers." "People look at us as Indian, not Bollywood," agrees director Anurag Kashyap, at TIFF with Gangs of Wasseypur. TIFF has not ignored Bollywood though, with a gala opening for Sridevi's comeback film English Vinglish, directed by Gauri Shinde. Also at TIFF are Girish Kasaravalli's award-winning Kurmavatara, and Ritwik Ghatak's restored classic Meghe Dhaka Tara. Fans cheer when the hero finds his way home at the end of Midnight's Children. India isn't technically "home" for the film, but it's clearly where its heart is. 

star directors sparkle in toronto
Two iconic books. Two iconic directors. New Indian cinema. It's India calling at North America's premier film festival.
By Indira Kannan

DEEPA MEHTA, 62 Director of Midnight's Children
Biggest scoop Salman Rushdie charged $1 (Rs 55) for film rights to his book. Favourite exercise "Turning pages of a book," according to her daughter. Regular routine "Went to the gym every day before shoot (reluctantly!)." Animals farm Goats, cats, snakes, geese, lizards, water buffalo, elephants, monkeys, hens,rabbits and insects feature in the film. Ayatollah redux Iran briefly demanded Sri Lanka shut down the shoot, as it's based on Rushdie's book.All stock and equipment were moved into Canada's High Commission until the Lankan president intervened to allow it to resume. English language. For me, that, and the storyline, which is a quest for home, for identity, for family--to capture it all in a microcosm was the biggest challenge." The film, which needed 64 locations, has an ensemble cast including Rahul Bose, Rajat Kapoor, Seema Biswas, Shabana Azmi, Shriya Saran, Anupam Kher, Siddharth, child actor Darsheel Safary and the British-born, US-based Satya Bhabha, who plays the adult Saleem Sinai, the hero. Rushdie, who declined a cameo, makes his presence felt throughout as the narrator. Up the street from the premiere of Midnight's Children, Mira Nair, another Indian-born director, was talking about her equally-anticipated film, The Reluctant Fundamentalist. It has Kate Hudson, Liev Schreiber and Kiefer Sutherland, with Pakistani-British actor Riz Ahmed as Changez Khan, the protagonist. Nair admits the film was tough to finance, perhaps due to its plot describing the evolution of Changez, from a Pakistani student at Princeton, to a hotshot New York consultant, to a firebrand fundamentalist in Lahore. Ahmed has won praise for his portrayal,

he red carpet outside Toronto's Roy Thomson Hall had already played host to Hollywood stars Emma Watson in an Erdem mini, Jada Pinkett Smith in a backless Tom Ford, Kate Hudson in a high-slit Alexander McQueen and Kristen Stewart in a sheer, floral Zuhair Murad. On September 9, the clothes on the red carpet were a little different--a pink lehenga-choli by Manish Malhotra, an emerald green sari with a ruffled blouse, a blood red sari, and a part-dhoti part-sherwani outfit. It was the gala opening of Midnight's Children, one of the year's most anticipated films that had come to Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) for a "world premiere" after a "sneak preview" at the Telluride film festival in the US a few days earlier. It has been sold in over 40 countries and will hit theatres on November 2, but director Deepa Mehta, who adapted Salman Rushdie's novel, was wondering whether it would get the same reception in India, the country whose birth was what the story was all about. "I don't know if it's ever going to be released in India," she told INDIA TODAY. Didn't she think it ought to be released in India? "I also think there should be a full moon every day." Of course she was keen to bring it to India, but "not by cutting out anything", she said, without specifying what she expected to be cut. One of those possibilities was a few feet away, dressed in a peach sari, explaining how she was cast as former prime minister Indira Gandhi. The idea had come to Mehta in a dream, said Indian-American actress Sarita Choud-

T

hury, whose scenes are shown in a sunless fog, symbolising the Emergency. Rushdie, who also wrote the screenplay, said it would be "very, very disappointing" if the film didn't make it to India, but Mrs Gandhi's reaction to the book--she had sued for defamation over one sentence; the case settled out of court--was not a factor. The bigger challenge, he said, was to revisit the sprawling epic after three decades and find the simplest narrative line in it. Mehta added, "It's a book that changed the way Indians thought of and used the

MIRA NAIR, 54 Director of The Reluctant Fundamentalist
Pat from the author "Woohoo that's awesome. I'm so thrilled!"; "MH MN" (Author Mohsin Hamid) Favourite scene Changez returns to his New York flat on Eid and talks to his mother. She says there's no power at their Lahore home. Hearing this, he puts off the lamp in his flat. Auteur's choice Never cast lipless people; likes full-bodied actors; is fascinated with hands; music is very important. Personal routine An hour of Iyengar yoga every morning before shooting. All-time favourite The Battle of Algiers by Gillo Pontecorvo.

NAIR

MEHTA
Photographs by GETTY IMAGES

90

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

91

