APPEAL

ASSAM RELIEFFUND

CARE TODAY

A N I N D I A T O D A Y G R O U P I N I T I AT I V E

CARE TODAY appeals to citizens for contributions

WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT A RELIEF CAMP IN KOKRAJHAR
UB PHOTO

Na tion KARNATAKA

GARBAGE PILES UP IN BANGALORE
SANDESH RAVIKUMAR

Garden CityTurns Garbage Dump
Trash raises stink of nexus between politicians, real estate interests and big business
By Sowmya Aji

he IT hub has been in crisis mode for over three weeks, as all three major landfills, that for years took in Bangalore's trash of 5,000 million tonnes a day, suddenly refused to do so, allegedly due to political instigation. Since then, every street corner in the state capital is piled high with garbage, while the commercial area of Chikpet, the oldest part of the city that generates 50 million tonnes a day alone, is left gasping. The stink is so bad that Governor H.R. Bhardwaj said: "Give me a shovel and 20 men. I'll clean the city.'' Responding to a Public Interest Litigation on the issue, Karnataka High Court Chief Justice Vikramajit Sen threatened to suspend or dismiss the concerned officials in the civic authority, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP). But locals from seven villages around the three privately managed

T

landfills at Mavallipura, Mandur, and Terra Firma on Doddaballapur Road, are up in arms. The villagers contend that the landfills are not following scientific waste disposal methods, as per the BBMP'S own solid waste management rules. Mahadevappa, an agitating representative of the villagers, said, "Why should we allow our land and water to be contaminated by Bangalore's untreated garbage? Why should our health matter less than

"Give me a shovel and 20 men. I will go and clean the city myself."

H.R. BHARDWAJ, Karnataka governor

that of the city?'' The agitation, however, has clear political and real estate orchestration from within the ruling BJP itself. Sources said the newfound popularity of Deputy Chief Minister R. Ashoka, who is also Bangalore's district incharge minister, has angered fellow BJP MLAs from the suburbs. "Ashoka has become very powerful and is stifling the growth of other BJP MLAs. So they are instigating villagers in their areas to cause trouble for him in Bangalore,'' says a BJP worker who refused to be named. The money angle given to explain the sudden closure of landfills is that MLAs are said to be helping real estate developers grab the land in return for funds. This is crucial, as the state Assembly polls are eight months away. Sources say these developers have acquired land around all three landfills. "If the landfills are closed permanently, the developers and their political masters stand to gain in

crores,'' a source says. On August 28, BBMP Commissioner M. K. Shankarlinge Gowda was unceremoniously replaced for alleged mismanagement of the garbage crisis. The incumbent, Rajneesh Goel, a PhD in public health management, told INDIA TODAY: "I've 30 days to figure out how to dispose of the city's garbage. I've no choice but to find a way.'' Goel is spoilt for choice. Investors are beating a path to the BBMP offices armed with Swiss, Chinese, German, Japanese and Israeli technologies to dispose of the city's waste. They are willing to invest between Rs 220 crore and Rs 1,500 crore to set up plants, in return for a commitment from BBMP that garbage will be supplied in specified quantities to them. They seek to generate power, biodiesel and bricks from this, which in turn is estimated to generate profits of more than Rs 100 crore a year. Proposed investor Kasi Girish Rao said: "Garbage conversion into power supply is set to be a multi-billiondollar industry soon.'' With so much money-talk in the air amid all the stink, the political class smells a great opportunity to raise funds. 

are Today appeals to peace-loving individuals and corporate houses to reach out to people affected by the violence in Assam and contribute actively to Assam Relief Fund. Due to the ongoing violence many innocent people are still living in relief camps under difficult conditions. According to the latest reports, 96 people are dead and around 250,000 people are still living in 219 camps. People living in relief camps as well as those who have opted to return to their communities need our support.

C

IMPACT OF VIOLENCE  96 people lost lives  Over 400,000 people have been displaced and are living in fear  219 relief camps still in operation  Displaced children need special care and assistance

All contributions above Rs 5,000 will be acknowledged by mentioning the names of the contributors in INDIATODAY.All donations qualify for income tax exemptions as per the provisions under section 80G of the Income Tax Act. As of September 11, 2012, we have received Rs 191,708 and we wish to acknowledge the following contributions of Rs 5,000 and above:
T. S. Bagga Regnant Energy Solutions Mohd. Ismail Ansari HI-TECH Marketing Centre for Self Excellence D. K. Seth Kanhaiya Lal Rs 7,500 Rs 11,000 Rs 5,100 Rs 15,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 7,501 Rs 6,666 Bajaj Capital Insurance Broking Ltd Thiruvavaduthurai Adeenam L. Lalitha Alok Aggarwal Anil Kumar Jain Sandeep Kumar Rajesh Chowdary Rs 10,000 Rs 25,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 15,000 Rs 5,000 Rs 10,000 Rs 11,000

Please draw cheques or demand drafts in favour of CARE TODAY A/c Assam Relief Fund and send it to:

MAKE A DIFFERENCE
CARE TODAY FUND

INDIA TODAY MEDIAPLEX FC-8, SECTOR 16-A, FILM CITY, NOIDA-201301 [UP]
We do not accept cash or money orders. For details please contact: C. Balaji Singh at balaji.singh@intoday.com or call 011-23315801-04 / 0120-4807100

76

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

SEPTEMBER 24, 2012  INDIA TODAY

77

