LANGUAGE OF LAUGHTER
By Sunanda K. Datta-Ray

The Delectable Pitfalls of English Vinglish
A partially-understood foreign language is perfect recipe for uproarious situations
am asked whether English has changed the way we laugh. My answer is a qualified yes. It depends on the particular milieu one has in mind. The robust humour of those who live their lives in Hindi, Punjabi, Bengali or any other Indian language remains uncontaminated. Those few who are entirely at home in English are often also masters of their mother tongue and retain a parallel frame of reference and dual code of humour. There's also the vast avalanche of young people pouring out of thousands of so-called English-medium schools all over the country who flourish robustly in a twilight world where speech is peppered with English words but English is not spoken in a form that a native speaker would recognise. Try telling them about Michael Heseltine, the British

i

CALCUTTA DANDY IN BLACK LEATHER PUMPS, SITTING ON A VICTORIAN ARMCHAIR AND PLAYING A SITAR, KALIGHAT, 1845

politician who fell out with Margaret Thatcher and retired to the country, where he entertained his neighbours in batches to small housewarming parties. When someone who hadn't yet been invited asked someone who had what Heseltine's furniture was like, the answer was a contemptuous "Bought!" No demolition could be more devastating in English society where only the johnny-comelately needs to buy furniture. But I can imagine the awed dripping-with-envy response of my third category of Indians, "He must be very rich!" The first category doesn't need English to be snobbish or bitchy like the best repartee anywhere. A man at a Bengali cultural event asked me what I did. When I in turn put the same question to him, his throwaway reply was, "Unemployed. For five generations." Similarly, when a Delhiwallah asked the veteran Pratap Chandra Chunder, an old-style grandee who held the education portfolio in Morarji Desai's Cabinet, whether the ancestral house in which he lived in Kolkata still looked as if it needed a coat of paint, the answer was a gentle "Come back in 200 years and it will still look the same!" Native humour isn't always apolitical. Everyone laughed uproariously at the explanation Prafulla Sen, West Bengal's former Congress chief minister, gave for his presence at the funeral of the arch Marxist Promode Dasgupta. "I always attend any function involving a fellow Vaidya," he said, referring to their shared caste. The no doubt apocryphal tale demanded no cultural contortions. Neither did Mamata Banerjee's unintended bon mot when a TV anchor called Pranab Mukherjee `son of Bengal'. "Son of Bengal?" she retorted sceptically, "Son of the World!" Her tone made it clear no compliment was intended. While Sen and Didi are firmly ensconced in Bengali, Sarojini Lady Pamela Mountbatten Naidu could thought the late V.K. Krishna Menon was "in manners laugh at Mahatma far more English than Gandhi whom she any Englishman". I would described as Mickey place the co-founder of Mouse. Now, it would London's Penguin and be considered Pelican books in the second category of Indians. I am heresy. sure his Malayalam humour was

LANGUAGE OF LAUGHTER
impeccable but his dry wit was English. Menon wrote somewhere that England had to be a very developed country since everyone spoke English. Asked whether India would prefer to be ruled by the British or the Nazis, he replied one might as well ask a fish if it preferred to be fried in butter or margarine. His United Nations colleagues mocked the acerbic English-Malayali's habit of fainting while making lengthy speeches. They said the quickest way of waking him up was to wave a microphone before his mouth instead of holding a bottle of smelling salts under his nose. His first words on regaining consciousness were, "Where is the AP reporter?" There's no corroboration for these stories. Nor is there any corroboration for the rooted belief that Lenin predicted the road to world revolution lay from Peking to Paris via Calcutta. But say that to a Bengali intellectual (are there any who aren't?) and risk uproar. Say it's nonsense to saddle Lenin with such a claim and risk assault. The aggrieved party in the second instance doesn't have to be Bengali. It's enough to be a resident of Kolkata as an Englishwoman who used to live in the city found when she returned after many years and took a taxi to the Tollygunge Club. The driver demanded a fifty-rupee surcharge because, he said, Tolly was outside city limits. The outraged memsahib, who knew the route well, retorted, "Nonsense! Mumbaikar or Delhiwallah murmurs, "O dear, I shouldn't It's nothing of the kind." "Nonsense bonsense nai bolo. have used that word. Now I've given offence!" Certain kinds of English humour--the comedian British Raj khatam ho gya!" the driver snarled back. The memsahib didn't realise he found the word `nonsense' just Norman Wisdom for instance, or that incomparable AngloAmerican pair Laurel and Hardy--don't need language to as offensive as her refusal to be fleeced. Nonsense is a perfectly ordinary noun that has become be appreciated. Charlie Chaplin is universally understood. infamous as the proverbial red rag to the Bengali bull. But Incomprehension sets in when words relate to local values. let it be said loud and clear, it's a deadly pejorative only Most Indian listeners found the BBC's highly popular 1950s among those who do not speak English, i.e., it has been Goon Show silly. Peter Sellers, one of the players, later assimilated as a term of insult and abuse in Kolkata's became a hit with Indian audiences for the wrong reasons. colloquial Hindi and Bengali, not English, speech. The It became fashionable party-speak for smart Indians to imitate Sellers without realising they were making fun Bengalis and expatriates with whom that memsahib of themselves. We fall into that trap all the time. mixed didn't invest `nonsense' with any special Now, media babus talk derisively of `babus' meaning. But misunderstanding can arise in Lord and `babudom' because the English gave inter-city exchanges. Mumbai understands Curzon said those words a derisive meaning. It's just money and Delhi knows rank; neither has a after seeing some as well those Indians never heard the racist clue about Kolkata's class. soldiers bathing that jokes that Sellers' Goon Show colleague, "I believe Bengalis don't like the word he never realised the India-born Spike Milligan, spouted, other`nonsense'?" a visitor from Mumbai or wise they would parrot them too. Delhi might ask. "They get angry when it's lower classes had Dependence on a partially-understood used!" The English-speaking Bengali to such white foreign language makes thinking derivative whom the question is addressed replies in bodies. and encourages ridiculous imitations. The Duke genuine surprise, "What nonsense!" and the

30

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

LANGUAGE OF LAUGHTER
of Bedford, who called Britain a Snobocracy and not a democracy, wrote, "Living in an English way is more important in India today than it was in the time of the British Raj." But it's a diluted and distorted `English way' that takes toll of spontaneity. The sophisticated 1960s stage comedy Beyond the Fringe would probably offend Indian sensibilities. I am thinking of one episode where an officer and a tommy crawl through the slush of the Somme front in World War One. As guns explode around them, the officer says in an exaggerated hoity-toity accent words to the effect, "We'll never see England again. The Jerries are going to get us. But I want you to know in these last minutes of our lives that it's really been a pleasure to meet someone of your class!" With Andy Capp, the archetypal working class man in a cloth cap in Daily Mirror cartoons and Alf Garnett, the poor man's Rudyard Kipling, riding high in TV sitcoms, class is (or used to be) a staple of English humour. Lord Curzon (`My name is George Nathaniel Curzon,/ I am a most superior person./ My cheeks are pink,/ my hair is sleek,/ I dine at Blenheim twice a week') played into it by famously saying after seeing some soldiers bathing that he had never realised the lower classes had such white bodies. India's political egalitarianism has blunted the capacity to enjoy class (or caste) jokes. Krishna Menon wore dhoti, kurta, angavastram and slippers and remained English. Today's businessmen, bureaucrats and even politicians wear natty suits and designer ties but are a 100 per cent Hindustani. Wrapped IN THE 1950S, IT BECAME FASHIONABLE PARTY-SPEAK FOR in her heavy silk sarees, Sarojini Naidu could chuckle about SMART INDIANS TO IMITATE PETER SELLERS WITHOUT the cost of keeping Gandhi--her Mickey Mouse--in poverty. REALISING THEYWERE MAKING FUN OF THEMSELVES Few prominent women today would have the savoir-faire to deliver such a remark despite immaculate grooming and every morning, boomed out, "Colonel Sah'b, Datta-Ray Sah'b pisab karne jaane mangta hai!" elegant Western dresses. I should have known better than to indulge in that But Indians who made English their own had no problem. Whether or not Gandhi said it--and the comment's authen- particular euphemism because of its troubled history. My ticity has been denied--with his puckish sense of fun, he could father used to talk of a fellow student in England in the easily have said "I think it would be a good idea" when asked 1920s whom a kindly English couple invited to lunch every what he thought of European civilisation. There was also Sunday. The boy enjoyed the lunches but wondered why his that cartoon mocking Deshapriya Jatindra Mohan Sengupta hosts asked him each time if he wished to wash his hands. who was in private life a highly Anglicised barrister "Do they think my hands are dirty?" he asked an older and whose English wife was probably more Bengali than student touchily. "And they don't even eat with their hands!" him--she even presided over an Indian National Congress All became clear when the veteran explained the phrase's session. The cartoon showed Sengupta in full evening dress meaning. No sooner was the question popped the following Sunday than the young Indian rapped out brightly, "No swilling whisky while his bearer held out the khadi thanks, I washed my hands against the gatepost dhoti-kurta ensemble that was obligatory for before coming in!" He couldn't understand Congressmen in those days. The caption read, Now, why his brave display of English idiom was met `Bearer, meeting ka kapra lao!' with deafening silence. Bedford's comment about English media babus It's the linguistic divide. The British lifestyles came alive in parody at a Delhi talk derisively of dinner party when I used the English TV serial, The Kumars at No. 42, proves `babus' because the euphemism about washing my hands to Indians can be hilarious once they have English gave the go to the toilet. My host, a Punjabi colonel, bridged that gulf. That is, if you find that word a derisive at once summoned two bearers to the class of NRIs amusing. meaning. verandah with basin, jug of water, towel and soap. It was even more embarrassing when an Sunanda K. Datta-Ray, a former editor of English guest with whom the colonel used to ride The Statesman, is a writer and columnist

32

INDIA TODAY  SEPTEMBER 24, 2012

