UP FRONT

PAUL ZACHARIA

COMMUNALISM AND THE GOOD LIFE
ommunal politics in Kerala is hardly news. What Christians and Muslims. The CPI(M) has a more fascinating is perhaps news is the variations it exhibits from story. It is the single largest Hindu party of Kerala, with the time to time. Nobody calls it communal here. It is Ezhavas--classified as OBC--having an upper hand. Ezhavas also happen to be the single largest Hindu group of Kerala at just called politics. Of the three chief communities--Hindus (56.2 per cent), 22.91 per cent of the Hindu population, with Nairs at a mere Muslims (24.7 per cent) and Christians (19 per cent)--Hindus 12.88 per cent and the Brahmins, 1.59 per cent. This is one and Christians have been in politics much before of the further reasons why the BJP is finding it hard to make Independence, generally under the Congress banner. The that big thrust. The slot has been taken. And this is the reaMuslim League entered the big picture only in 1971, when son why Vellappally Natesan, chief of the SNDP (Sree Narayana it got a berth in the Congress-CPI-led United Front. It has Dharma Paripalana Sangham--official body of the Ezhava community) finds it harder to get Ezhavas to vote according stayed put in the Congress stable. The Kerala Congress (KC) started out as a Christian-Nair to his diktat. He compensates by running the multimillion SNDP split-away from the Congress. (Nairs are upper-caste as a family concern and enjoying the media iconography his, Hindus, though the Brahmins disagree.) Then it went into it must be admitted, excellent bluster produces. such a splitting spree, especially between the Christians, NSS (Nair Service Society), the official Nair body is that K.M. Mani, the supremo of the main Christian faction, another toothless tiger, not a family concern but, like the made the famous statement: The KC grows when it splits and League, group-owned, presently headed by G. Sukumaran splits when it grows. The KC factions are nothing but family- Nair, whose bluster is pathetic. Politicians pretend to owned political private limited companies. The Muslim take the NSS seriously and hand out some goodies but League also is a similar company, but not single family- the matter ends there. The NSS cannot dictate votes. It owned. It has the head of the Panakkad Thangal family as just makes the claim, like the bishops do, to keep the show a titular chief, but essentially it is a group business. going. As for the Natesan-trumpeted alliance between the The whole thing is, it hardly needs to be said, business. SNDP and the NSS, the less said the better. The caste gulf The communal card is like an ATM card. Put it into the elec- between Nairs and Ezhavas is so immensely real that even tion machine and--bingo!--out comes power and money. a child knows the very notion is stillborn. The Church claims to be in Then you pocket the card and SAURABH SINGH/www.indiatodayimages.com control of the 19 per cent start making adjustments and unChristians. The bishops certainly derstandings so that your path is are in control of the wealthy instismooth. The CPI(M), the CPI, the Congress, all play it beneath the tutions and real estate and spirisecular label. That is where the tual matters of the flock. But their BJP fails. If you do not play the writ does not run in the polling communal card under a secular booth. Even old ladies vote any cloak, the Malayali does not apwhich way they want. Like the preciate it. He likes to be seen as SNDP and the NSS, the bishops too secular--call it a fig leaf! BJP is furare playthings in the hands of ther afflicted by the fact that its politicians but the politicians potential votaries, the 56.2 per shrewdly make it look otherwise. Communalism in Kerala, in cent Hindus of Kerala, are engeneral, is not of the violent kind, trapped by the Congress-led UDF but cunning and exploitative. It is and CPI(M)-led LDF. Because that is about sharing the spoils between where the fruits, nuts and honey the communities and castes are. A bald plate of saffron is not with the politician as master of interesting enough. The Muslim ceremonies. Malayalis love their League has a reasonably secured materialism too much to encourMuslim vote bank because as a age real violence. Even ultra long-standing UDF partner, it has a The CPI(M), the CPI, the Congress, all play goodies galore. There are of Islamists are floundering because it beneath the secular label. That is course thousands of Muslims in the average Muslim is discovering where the BJP fails. If you do not play the the merits of La Dolce Vita. the Congress as well as CPI(M) too. At the end of the day, the communal card under a secular cloak, the Malayali does not appreciate it. He likes Congress is nothing but a gatherPaul Zacharia is a Malayalam writer to be seen as secular--call it a fig leaf! ing of upwardly mobile Hindus, and political essayist

C

12

INDIA TODAY N SEPTEMBER 3, 2012

NEW

